Super-Resolution Optical Flow
Simon Baker and Takeo Kanade
CMU-RI-TR-99-36
Abstract
Existing approaches to super-resolution are not applicable to videos of faces because faces are non-planar, non-rigid, non-lambertian, and are subject to self occlusion. We present super-resolution optical ow as a solution to these problems. Super-resolution optical ow takes as input a conventional video stream, and simultaneously computes both optical ow and a super-resolution version of the entire video. In this paper we describe an initial implementation of super-resolution optical ow, present detailed experimental results, and describe the relationship between super-resolution optical ow and pyramid-based image representations such as the Laplacian pyramid.
Keywords: Super-Resolution, Optical Flow, Video Enhancement, Face Recognition.

1 Introduction
Suppose you can detect and track a human face in a video. Something you might like to do next is produce a single image to summarize the sequence. This image might be used to index the sequence, or instead might be passed as the input to a recognition system. What are the properties that one would want of such an image?
Probably the image should be suited for recognition." Such an image might be the one in which the face is the most frontal, or has the most neutral" or relaxed" expression. Another important property is the image resolution. Generally a higher resolution image would be preferable to a lower resolution one. How do we obtain an image of the face with the highest possible resolution?
Recently there has been considerable interest in the problem of extracting high resolution images from a lower resolution video. This process is usually referred to as superresolution because the output images have higher resolution than any of the images used to create them. Can we extend any of these super-resolution techniques to maximize the resolution of our face images?
1.1 Background: Super-Resolution
As discussed in Chiang and Boult, 1996 , there are four major steps to super-resolution. See also Figure 1:
Registration: For each pixel in the high resolution image that we wish to construct, we
need to know the corresponding point sub-pixel location in all of the images in the video sequence. Almost always it is assumed that this registration is known a priori. Estimating this motion eld is relatively easy if the world is rigid and planar. Then
1

(2) Warp

(2) Warp

Warped Images

10
(1) Register

0011
(3) Fuse

10100110
(1) Register

Original Images

(4) Deblur

Super-Resolution Images

Figure 1: The four steps of super-resolution: 1 the input images are registered to nd corre-
sponding pixels, 2 the original images are warped into the coordinate frame of one image, 3 the warped images are fused to form a super-resolution image, and 4 the super-resolution image is deblurred optional.

we can use standard techniques from parametric motion estimation such as Bergen et al., 1992 or Szeliski and Shum, 1997 .
Warping: As soon as we know the mapping from pixels in the high resolution image to
points in the lower resolution images, we can warp Wolberg, 1992 all of the lower resolution images into the coordinate frame of the high resolution image. Performing this warp involves interpolating the lower resolution images, a task that is normally performed using one of the standard algorithms, such as nearest-neighbor, bilinear, or cubic B-spline Schultz and Stevenson, 1996 . Recently, Chiang and Boult 1996 demonstrated the considerable e ect that the choice of interpolation scheme has on the performance of super-resolution.
Fusion: The warped low resolution images can be regarded as multiple estimates of an
underlying high resolution image. Most super-resolution research has focused on how to fuse" these estimates. The simplest approach is to average the estimates, taking either the mean, the median, or a robust mean Chiang and Boult, 1996 . Numerous more sophisticated approaches have also been proposed. See Dellaert et al., 1998 , Elad and Feuer, 1998 , Hardie et al., 1997 , Patti et al., 1997 , Chiang and Boult,

2

1997 , Schultz and Stevenson, 1996 , Bascle et al., 1996 , Irani and Peleg, 1993 , and the references enclosed therein.
Deblurring: Several super-resolution algorithms have included an optional post-processing
step to deblur the super-resolution image. See, for example, Ur and Gross, 1992 and Chiang and Boult, 1996 . Standard deconvolution algorithms, such as the ones described in Pratt, 1991 , can be used for this task.
Finally note that it is possible to combine the registration and fusion steps, estimating both the registration and the super-resolution images at the same time. One such approach is contained in Hardie et al., 1997 .
,
1.2 Di culties Caused by Faces
There are several reasons why existing super-resolution algorithms are not applicable to video sequences of faces:
Non-Planarity: Most existing algorithms assume that image registration can be performed
using simple parametric transformations, such as translations, a ne warps, or projective warps. These transformations correspond to the implicit assumption that the world is planar. Faces are not planar and so a more general approach is needed.
Non-Rigidity: Besides being non-planar, faces are also non-rigid; amongst other things
they deform in complicated ways as facial expression changes. Again most existing approaches to super-resolution cannot cope with non-rigid scenes. Some approaches can deal with independently moving objects, however each object is assumed to be rigid Schultz and Stevenson, 1996 .
3

Visibility and Occlusion: Another di culty with faces is that they lead to occlusions. As
the head rotates, various parts of the face will no longer be visible because they are occluded by the rest of the head. In particular, the nose often occludes large parts of the the face in pro le views. Existing approaches do not take into account possible occlusions of parts of the scene.
Illumination and Re ectance Variation: Since faces are somewhat specular objects,
highlights on the forehead, the cheeks, and the nose will move as the head rotates. Not only does this e ect make registration more di cult, but it also introduces outliers into the fusion process. There has been some work on robustifying super-resolution algorithms to varying illumination conditions, however these approaches have used edge based techniques that are not appropriate for faces Chiang and Boult, 1997 .
One partial solution to these di culties is the reconstruction of a 3D model of the face. Related approaches have been used for other 3D surfaces Cheeseman et al., 1994 Shekarforoush et al., 1996 . Image registration can then be performed by mapping via the 3D face model. It may also be possible to reason about visibility, and to compensate for illumination variation and specular re ection. The non-rigidity of the face is still problematic however.
1.3 Super-Resolution Optical Flow
One way of alleviating the problem of non-rigidity is to allow the image registration to be an arbitrary ow eld. Then as is illustrated in Figure 2, the goal of super-resolution is the simultaneous estimation of both optical ow and the super-resolution video. In this paper, we attempt exactly this for videos of faces. Reasoning about visibility and illumination variation is not as easy as it would be with an explicit 3D model, however robust estimation techniques can be used to address these problems.
4

Original Image Sequence

Input

Super-Resolution Optical Flow

Output

Super-Resolution Image Sequence
+ Optical Flow

Figure 2: The goal of super-resolution optical ow is to take a conventional video sequence and
compute both optical ow and a higher resolution version of the video simultaneously.

Naturally the idea of allowing the registration to be an arbitrary ow eld is not entirely new. Elad touched upon the idea in his thesis Elad, 1996 , however he did not attempt simultaneous recovery of super-resolution and optical ow as we do. He simply used previously computed optical ow as an a priori registration. On the other hand, Hardie et al. 1997 considered the simultaneous estimation of a parametric registration and super-resolution. However, they did not attempt recovery of optical ow.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe our super-resolution optical ow algorithm. In Section 3 we present experimental results obtained using this algorithm. Afterwards we conclude with a summary, suggestions for future work, and a discussion of the relationship between super-resolution optical ow and pyramid image representations such as Burt and Adelson, 1983 .

2 Implementation
Direct approaches to super-resolution, such as Chiang and Boult, 1996 , perform reasonably well and yet are far easier to implement and run much more e ciently than other methods. Our algorithm which is similar to Chiang and Boult, 1996 and Ur and Gross, 1992 but attempts to recover a full optical ow is illustrated in Figure 3.
5

(1) Interpolate

(1) Interpolate (2a) Flow

(3) Deblur (2a) Flow

Original Images
(1) Interpolate
Super-Resolution Images

(2b) Warp

(2c) Robust Mean

(2b) Warp

Figure 3: Our super resolution optical ow algorithm. First the input sequence is interpolated.
Then for each image in turn, optical ow, warping, and averaging are iterated until the superresolution image converges. Finally all of the images are deblurred.

A Direct Super-Resolution Optical Flow Algorithm

1. Interpolate every image in the input sequence using bilinear interpolation to twice the input resolution.
2. For each image in the sequence in turn, starting with the third one and continuing until the third from last, iterate the following 3 steps until the super-resolution image converges or for a xed number of iterations:
a Compute the optical ow from this image to the 2 previous ones, and to the 2 following ones. We used a hierarchical version of the Lucas-Kanade algorithm Lucas and Kanade, 1981 . Any other optical ow algorithm could be used.
b Using the optical ow, warp the previous 2 images forward, and the following 2 images backward, into the coordinate frame of this image.
c Re-estimate this super-resolution image using a robust mean of this image and the 4 warped ones.

3. Deblur every super-resolution image using a Wiener deconvolution lter Pratt, 1991 .

6

Figure 4: One of the images used in our experiments. This image is of size 768  512 pixels and is
one of 40 taken simultaneously using a multi-baseline stereo camera. We down-sampled all of the
images 4 times to a size of 192  128 before using them. Although we used the rst 20 images,
each super-resolution image in Figure 5 is computed using only 5 consecutive images.
3 Experimental Results
In Figure 5 we display some of the results obtained by applying our algorithm to an image
sequence containing 20 images, each of size 192  128 pixels. A higher resolution version
i.e. before we down-sampled it of one of the images in the sequence is displayed in Figure 4. Although the sequence contains 20 images, each super-resolution image is actually computed using just 5 consecutive images from the sequence. Note that, compared to the experiments presented in other papers, 5 is a relatively small number of input images to use.
In the left column of Figure 5, we display 50  50 pixel cropped regions from the input sequence. In the center column, we display 100  100 images created by bilinearly
interpolating the images in the left column. In the right column, we display the output of
our algorithm, 100  100 super-resolution images of the regions shown in the left column.
Several points should be noted about these results:
As would be expected, the super-resolution images are clearer and contain far more detail than the other images. For example, the texture of the hair is only visible in the super-resolution images. Also, it is hard to tell that the person in Figures 5d and e
7

a b c
d e f
g h i
j k l
Figure 5: Super-resolution images of 4 of the people in Figure 4. In the left column we display 50  50 pixel cropped regions from the input sequence. In the center column, we display 100  100
pixel images created by bilinearly interpolating the images in the left column. In the right column,
we display 100  100 pixel super-resolution images, each estimated using only 5 images. 8

is wearing glasses, but in Figures 5f the shadow under the rim is clearly visible on the left side of the face. A nal example are the shadows under the eyelids in Figure 5l, which are not clear at all in Figures 5j and k. A number of artifacts can be seen around the edges of the faces in the super-resolution images. These are caused by the fact that the optical ow algorithm which we used performs quite poorly at motion discontinuities such as those caused by depth discontinuities in the scene.
Some more results obtained using our algorithm are shown in Figure 6. The rst row of the gure shows 3 images from a video of someone entering a room, looking around and leaving. The results of applying a face detector Rowley et al., 1998 to these images are overlaid on the images. The second row shows the faces cropped from the video, and the third row shows the results of resolution enhancement. Note how the facial features, such as the eye pupils and the lobe of the ear, are much clearer. Also note how the eye pupils are recovered, even though they are moving independently of the rest of the face. With other super-resolution algorithms, the pupils would be blurred since independently moving components are not modeled.
4 Conclusion
4.1 Summary
We have proposed super-resolution optical ow as way of enhancing the resolution of video sequences of objects that are neither planar nor rigid. We have described an initial implementation and presented some experimental results. Theoretically, super-resolution optical ow can be used to enhance the resolution of any video sequence with no other input, however, in practice, good performance relies upon robust optical ow.
9

Input:
Cropped:
Enhanced:
Figure 6: More results of applying our super resolution optical ow algorithm. A human face is
detected in a surveillance video using a face detector Rowley et al., 1998 . The cropped images of the face are enhanced using our algorithm. Note how the facial features are much clearer in the enhanced sequence. In particular, the pupils of the eyes, which move independent of the rest of the head, are well recovered.
4.2 Future Work and Applications
In Hardie et al., 1997 an algorithm is proposed to perform registration and fusion at the same time. Within a maximum a posteriori MAP framework, super-resolution is posed as a global optimization over both the super-resolution image and the registration parameters. The optimization is performed by iterating over the two sets of parameters; ie. rst register, then fuse, and nally iterate. The MAP framework in Hardie et al., 1997 can easily be
10

extended to handle optical ow. Once it is complete, we hope to use super-resolution optical ow to measure the
performance of optical ow algorithms. We plan to take a large number of video sequences, down-sample them, and then apply super-resolution optical ow. The degree to which the original videos are reconstructed can be used as a measure of performance.
4.3 Relationship with Image Pyramids
Finally, we note the relationship between super-resolution optical ow and pyramid-based image representations such as the Laplacian pyramid Burt and Adelson, 1983 . Many implementations of optical ow including the one we used are based on such pyramids. In this setting, super-resolution optical ow can be thought of as adding a layer to the pyramid above the resolution of the original image; ie. at the bottom of the pyramid.
References
Bascle et al., 1996 B. Bascle, A. Blake, and A. Zisserman. Motion deblurring and superresolution from an image sequence. In Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 573 581, Cambridge, England, April 1996.
Bergen et al., 1992 J.R. Bergen, P. Anandan, K.J. Hanna, and R. Hingorani. Hierarchical model-based motion estimation. In Proceedings of the Second European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 237 252, Santa Margherita Liguere, Italy, May 1992.
Burt and Adelson, 1983 P.J. Burt and E.H. Adelson. The Laplacian pyramid as a compact image code. IEEE Transactions on Communiations, 314:532 540, April 1983.
11

Cheeseman et al., 1994 P. Cheeseman, B. Kanefsky, R. Kraft, J. Stutz, and R. Hanson. Super-resolved surface reconstruction from multiple images. Technical Report FIA-94-12, NASA Ames Research Center, Mo et Field, CA, December 1994.
Chiang and Boult, 1996 M.-C. Chiang and T.E. Boult. E cient image warping and superresolution. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 56 61, December 1996.
Chiang and Boult, 1997 M.-C. Chiang and T.E. Boult. Local blur estimation and superresolution. In Proceedings of the 1997 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 821 826, San Juan, Puerto Rico, June 1997.
Dellaert et al., 1998 F. Dellaert, S. Thrun, and C. Thorpe. Jacobian images of superresolved texture maps for model-based motion estimation and tracking. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Applications of Computer Vision, October 1998.
Elad and Feuer, 1998 M. Elad and A. Feuer. Super-resolution restoration of an image sequence - adaptive ltering approach. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 1998. Accepted for Publication.
Elad, 1996 M. Elad. Super-Resolution Reconstruction of Image Sequences - Adaptive Filtering Approach. PhD thesis, The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 1996.
Hardie et al., 1997 R.C. Hardie, K.J. Barnard, and E.E. Armstrong. Joint MAP registration and high-resolution image estimation using a sequence of undersampled images. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 612:1621 1633, December 1997.
Irani and Peleg, 1993 M. Irani and S. Peleg. Motion analysis for image enhancement: Resolution, occulsion, and transparency. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation, 44:324 335, December 1993.
12

Lucas and Kanade, 1981 B. Lucas and T. Kanade. An iterative image registration technique with an application to stereo vision. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Arti cial Intelligence, pages 674 679, Vancouver, British Columbia, 1981.
Patti et al., 1997 A. Patti, M. Sezan, and A. Tekalp. Superresolution video reconstruction with arbitrary sampling latices and nonzero aperture time. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 68:1064 1076, 1997.
Pratt, 1991 W.K. Pratt. Digital Image Processing. Wiley-Interscience, 1991. Rowley et al., 1998 H.A. Rowley, S. Baluja, and T. Kanade. Neural network-based face
detection. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 201:23 38, January 1998. Schultz and Stevenson, 1996 R. Schultz and R. Stevenson. Extraction of high-resolution frames from video sequences. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 56:996 1011, June 1996. Shekarforoush et al., 1996 H. Shekarforoush, M. Berthod, J. Zerubia, and M. Werman. Sub-pixel bayesian estimation of albedo and height. International Journal of Computer Vision, 193:289 300, 1996. Szeliski and Shum, 1997 R. Szeliski and H.-Y. Shum. Creating full view panoramic image mosaics and texture-mapped models. In Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference Series SIGGRAPH '97, pages 251 258, Los Angeles, CA, August 1997. Ur and Gross, 1992 H. Ur and D. Gross. Improved resolution from subpixel shifted pictures. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 542:181 186, March 1992. Wolberg, 1992 G. Wolberg. Digital Image Warping. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1992.
13

