Canadian Mineralogist Yol.24, pp. 79-90(1986)

A NEW PARAGENESIS AND NEW LOCALITIES FOR WITHERITE
STEVEN C. CHAMBERLAIN ANDWILLIAM P. DOSSERT Institutefor SensoryResearchS, yracuseUniversity,SyracuseN, ew York 13210,U.S.A.
DONALD I. SIEGEL Departrnenot f Geology,SyracuseUniversity,SyracuseN, ew York 13210,U.S.A.

ABSTRACT

ration dela barytine, maislesdonn6esg6ologiquesexcluent

la possibilit6deI'alt6ration normaledela barytine par solu-

Witherite BaCO3 occurs in the mineralized septarian tions hydrothermalescarbonatdes.La composition desiso-

frac'turesof concretionsin the ChittenangoMember of the topesstablesdu carbone,dansla with6rite desconcr6tions,

Marcellus Formation of the Middle Devonian Hamiltou est notablement plus riche en isotope lourd 13C

Croup at three occurrencesin OnondagaCounty, New ( + 2.1l%0< 6r3C< + 14.77o/oPoDB) quedansla with6rite

York. The minerals occurring in the septarian fractures, de26 autreslocalitds(-29.4lyoo< 613C< + l. 1670P0DB).

in order of formation, are, pyrite I and calcite I Cesrdsultatsportent e croire que la withrite d'Onondaga

[(Ca6.e6Mg6.o2.FdfcoOll, calciteII [(Cae.e6Mg6.e2Fe6.6s)'est form6e par r6duction du sulfate et fermentation du CO3J and barite, pyrite II, ferroan dolomite mdthanepar bactdriesdans des eaux souterrainesanoxi-

[Ca(Mg0.57Fq.a3XCOl)zalnd calcite III, quartz, calcite IV ques.Ce seraitli, i la fois, un nouveautype de gisement

[(Ca6.e3Mgs.s1Fee.or)COst:r1o,ntianite,witherite, calcite pour la withdrite et un nouveau mcanismepour sa for-

V. Both the calcitematrix [(Can.eMgb.e2Fq.sl)CO3o]f the mation a partir de la barytine.

concretions and the mineralization in the septarian frac-

tures contain abundanthydrocarbon. Like other witherite,

(Traduit par la R6daction)

this witherite formed from the alteration of barite. The geo-

logical setting, however, precludesthe normal alteration Mots-clds: with6rite, barytine, carbonates,r6duction des

of barite by hydrothermal solutionsrich in carbonate.The

sulfates, fermentation du m6thane, isotopes stables,

compositionof the stableisotopesof carbon,in witherite

New-York.

from the septarianconcretions,is significantly enrichedin theheavyisotopel3C(+2.11700<613.C< +14.77y@PDB)

comparedto wilherite from 26 other worldwide localities

(-29.41o/oso 6l3Cs +l.l6o/ffi PDB). Thesedata suggest that this witherite formed asthe result of sulfate reduction

INrnooucrroN

and methanefermentation by bacteria in anoxic ground-

waters.This representsboth a newmode of occurrencefor Although the orthorhombic barium carbonate

witherite and a new mechanism for its formation from witherite is the second most cornmon barium

barite.

mineral, it is not of widespreadoccurrence(Palache

Keywords: witherite, barite, carbonates,sulfate reduction, methanefermentation,stableisotopes,New York.

et al. l95l,Der;r et al. 1962).Witherite usuallyoccurs asa product of late-stagealteration of barite in lowtemperaturehydrothermal veins(e.g., Hancox 1934, Sidorenko1947,Welleret al. 1952).Inthis paragen-

esis,the witherite forms from the action of carbo-

SoMMAIRE

nated waters on pre-existingbarite asthe solubility of witherite decreasesand the solubility of barite

La with6rite se trouve dans les fractures septariennes mindralis6esde concrdtionsdu membreChittenango de la

increaseswith increasingtemperature(tlolland 1967, Lyd.onet al. 1979).Recently,one of us discovered

formation Marcellus du groupe Hamilton @6vonien ll1occurrenceof witherite in fracture fillings in sep-

moyen).Trois gitesont 6t6trouvesdansle comt6d'Onon- tarian concretionsln Devonianshalesnpar Syracuse,

daga,6tat deNew-York, auxEtats-Unis. lss min&aur qui New York @ossertet al. 1984).Subsequentlyw, e cristallisent dans ces fractures sont les suivants (dans havediscoveredseveralother occurrencesin the sarne VcC[l[('(CCio.CtOeraaTda(roa[r9Ml(.enC.sg$teeasMIMandt.5g.epgr7ebdtoMF.tal-eeee0gr1u(ey2emFr.Ft.eeiaeen:sft2)eore.(iFo.xrC,6mqr)o))p.dCCa6ly)etlOOzie)srocsC]ict:3tnat]ocOerl,)l,oanc:3ncliqctI]rteuI,ip6i,ta_IeetyIinIorlIaiitdnItt(,eesCom,,ql_cwiouInoaimat6nohrser.iraetttzierl6t,iiustcMcedadaae,&tlldiccc.oei0aFitnte2lecedcIaFiezVtl1I-es.q?gtpapaioseaansnoryraaelpoggmargeeenbinvcdnleiaaeogsglssuieeesissfoi,tlnotyaliornndgtgwdehy.seiTttochhhfrseeieebtrshpeicetetdeaoa.,rcHroboicaceonuncrnreeurfeqwrraranueneccindtdteecuesreordseesxcip-f,yrfftrigiehelblereisenenteghmnnssettia,tnflaornebotcerhlmaaewe-lfracturesseptariennescontient deshydrocarburesenabon- isotopecompositionsof this witherite and that from

dance.Ici commeaillzurs, la withdrite s'estformepar alt6- many other localities.

79

80 THE CANADIAN MINERALOGIST

METHoDS
The identity of eachwitheritespecimenwasver! fied by testingfor effervescencein dilute HCl, by flametestingfor the presenceof barium, andby standard X-ray-diffraction methodsusinga GeneralElectric X-ray diffractometer and CuKa radiation. Samplesof witherite werepowdered,then half the sample wastestedasaboveand half wasusedfor determination of stable-isotopecompositions.The stableisotopecompositionsfor both carbon and oxygen in witheriteweremadeby massspectrometryby the Global GeochemistryCorporationandarereported relativeto the PDB standard.The identification of othercarbonatespecieswasmadeby a combination of chemical analysisand X-ray diffraction. For chemicalanalysis,samplesof carbonateminerals weredissolvedin dilutenitric acid. The supernatant liquid was then analyzedfor calcium,magnesium, iron, barium and strontium by direct-cunentplasmaemissionspectroscopyusinga BeckmanSpectrospan V spectrometer.Standards were prepared with matchedmatrices,andlithium wasaddedto enhance sensitivity.
Rrsurrs
Location and geologicsl setting of the new occarrences
Witherite occurs in septarian fracture-fillings in a horizon of largeseptarianconcretionsin the Middle DevonianHamilton Group. This sequencewas depositedaspart of the clasticwedgeof the Devo-

nian Catskill deltaiccomplex(Brett & Baird 1985). The concretionsconstitutea band in the black shales of the ChittenangoMember of the MarcellusFormation, located about 30 m above the boundary betweenthe MarcellusFormation andthe Onondaga limestone.Threeexposuresof this band of concretions that contain witherite are shownin Figure .. OccurrenceI is a small shalepit intermittently operated by the Town of Pompeyjust south of Route 173and eastof GatesRoad, eastof the village of Jamesville(JamesvilleQuadrangle,New York OnondagaCounty, USGS7.5-minute topographic series)O. ccurrence2 is alongthe westsideof Cedarvale Road 1.75km south of CardsCorners,where the West Branch of OnondagaCreekcutsthrough OnondagaHill (MarcellusQuadrangle,New York - OnondagaCounty,USGS7.5-minutetopographic series).Occurrence3 is southeastof the village of Marcellus,in a small roadcut on the north sideof PleasantValleyRoad, 1.3km eastof its intersection with Route 175(MarcellusQuadrangle,New York - OnondagaCounty,USGS7.5-minutetopographic series).At occurrencesI and 3, only one layer of largeconcretionsis exposed.At occurrence2, several layersof concretionsareexposed,but only onelayer is septarian.Hand specimensof septarianfracturefillings from these three occurrencesare virtually indistinguishableA. lthough the qualitativedescription appliesto all three occurrencest,he quantitative data presentedherepertainto specimensfrom occurrencel.
Description of septarian concretions
The mineralizedseptarianconcretionsform a sin-

Moscov & Ludlowille Formations Skaneateles& Formatlons OnondagaLirnestone & Oriskeng Sandstone
Helderberg Group
CobleskilLl imesione, BertieGroup, CemfllusShrle
Sgracuse Formation
Vernon Shale
Hc. l. Threenew occurrencesof witheritein the MarcellusFormation near SyracuseN, ew York. The relationshipof the occurrencesto the local stratigraphyis shown. Detaileddescriptionsof the locationsare in the text. (Adapted from the FingerLakesSheetof the GeologicMap of New York, publishedby The Universityof the Stateof New York,1961).

WIT}IERITE: NEW PARAGENESIS AND NEW LOCALITIES

FIc.2. Septarianconcretionscontaining witherite.in the ChittenangoMember of the Marcellus Formation. A. Exposure of the ChittenangoMemberin tle shalepit at occurrence1.A singleintermittent layerof concretionsis shownbetween the arrows.B. Concretionin situ at occurrence2. Note the bendingof the shalelaminationaroundthe concretion. C. One of many concretionsexposedand discardedduring quarryingoperationsat occurrencel. Note the visible external fractures that give groundwater accessto the interior. D. Concretion partly broken away to revealinternal septarianfractures,E. Mineralizationofseptarian fractures,b barite, d ferroan dolomite,cI-II calciteI and calcite II, f late fractures running along edgesof mineralized septarian fractures.

gle intermittent layer in the bedding of the enclosing shales(Frg. 2A). The lamination of the shale bendsaround the body of the concretion (Fig. 2B)
consistentwith formation of the concretions early in the burial sequenceb, efore compactionof the
enclosingsediments@ix & Mullins 1985).The concretions havea circular profile in the bedding plane and an elliptical profile nonnal to fl1slsdding plane (Figs. 28, C), and range in size from 50 cm in
diameter and 30 cm thick to I m in diameter and 50

cm thick. The boundary betweenthe concretionand
the enclos-ingshaleis smooth and distinct. All of the concretionsin this horizon havewell-developedseptarian fractures (Figs. 2D, E) that do not extendto the surface of the concretion@igs. 28, C). The interior of the concretionsis presentlyaccessibleto
groundwaters,but through latefractures@ig.2C). Normally the interior is dry when opened,but after
a brief shower,it is wet. Also, breakingintact con-
cretionsrevealsinternal fracturestlat cut acrossthe

82 THE CANADIAN MINERALOGIST

septarian structure, along which oxidation and bonate (calcite) in the matrix is (Cas.e7Mg6.ot weathering(e.g., surficial alteration of ferroan dolo- Fep.s1)CO3.

mite to goethite) have occurred.

CalciteI. The wallsof most septarianfracturesare lined with fine black rhombohedral crystals of cal-

Description of minerol species

cite. The composition of this calcite is (Cao.e6Mge.o2F%.oJCTOhel. crystalsare too small

The septarian fractures u.. *ioelalized from the edgesin a sequencethat is remarkablyuniform from concretionto concretion. The major featuresof this mineralization are shown in Figure 3.
Motrix. The walls of the septarian fractures are composedof the samematerial asthe body of the

and rough to measurewith certainty,but the primary form appearsto bethe steeprhombohedron {404U.
Ptrite I. Microscopic crystals of pyrite are
observedto be variouslyon, within, or underneath calcite I, dependingupon which fractures are examined. The crystalsaredominatedby the cube{001}

concretion.The matrix is a fine-grainedcalcitecontaining disseminatedparticles and larger globular
massesof hydrocarbon. The compositionof the car-

modifiedby the octahedron{l1l}. Calcite II. A secondphaseof more coarselycrys-
tallized calcite coversthe flust. This calcite is dark brown next to calcite I, and grades through

tan to white toward the centre of the fracture.

The overall composition of this calcite is

(Caa.e6Mge.e2Fe6.oJCaOndr, the primqly crystal-

latefrEcturo

forniis the trigonal scalenohedron{2131}. Barite. Coarse laths of white to colorless barite

form latticeworksthat spanthe fractures.Many crystals show microscopic phantoms of particles of hydrocarbon, indicating successivephasesof barfte

formation.

Pyrite II. The surfaces of barite crystals are

sEptarlanfracturo

sparselycoatedwith a secondgenerationof pyrite that began to crystallize just before the barite

finished. The morphology of these crystals is

unusual.Theyweremeasuredby R. PeterRichards

to determinethe forms present.T*o distinct habits

are found. One is equant (Ftg. A) and showsrela-

tively equaldevelopmentof the octahedron{ I I I }, the trisoctahedra{144} and {188}, the trapezohedron {113} and the diploid {l l0 7}, with lesser developmentof somewhat curved faces of the

barltscrustalcavltU wltherits

dodecahedron{0ll}. Note that the indicesof the diploid are approximate.The other habit is flattened normal to the three-foldaxis[111](Fig. 48) and is dominatedby the trisoctahedron{1,14}with lesser developmentof the trisoctahedron{188} and the

trapezohedron{ll3}. calclto lV Dolomite and Colcite 1//. Most of the remaining
spacein the septarianfractures is filled with reddish

bErlto brown carbonate.Chemicalanalysis,thin sections,

strontlanlto quErtz

and X-ray diffraction indicate that this is a mixture of calcite and a member of the dolomite group. The bulk composition of the mixture is (Caa.rt Mgs.2aFe6.16)CAOs3s.umingthat the calciteis pure

fgrron dolomlts & c a l c l t El l l

CaCO3givesa composition for the dolomite-group speciesof Ca(Mgs.rrFfo.aJ(CO:)2w, hich is a ferroan

dolomite. Occasionally,cavitiesin the massivedolo-

mite are lined with characteristiccurved crystalsof

Frc.3. Diagram illustrating the mineralizationof septarian fractures.Late fracturesconnectthemineralizedseptarian fractures in the centre Oottom) vrith the outside of the concretion(top). Seetext for details.

dolomite of basicrhombohedralform {1011}. Calcite III occurs as small grains that can only be observedin thin section.
Quartz. Transparent, colorlesscrystalsof quartz occur on dolomite crystals or on barite crystals in

WITHERITE: NEW PARAGENESISAND NEW LOCALITIES

83

Ftc.4. Drawingsof the two major habits of pyrite II. A. Equant habit viewedalong a two-fold axis. The octahedron o{ I I I }, two trisoctahedrap{1441 and i{ 188}, diploid A{I l0 7} (approximatelgand trapezohedronn{ I 13} show relativelyequaldevelopment.The dodecihection7{01l}-shows'lessdevelopment.B. Flattenedhabit vidwedalong a thee-fold axis.The risoctahedronp{ 144}dominates.The trisoctahedronri'{tta} and the trapezohedronn{ I 13} are smaller.Note that the designationsf'and E are temporaryand are not intendedas permanentdesignationsfor the forms {188} and {1 l0 7}, respectively.

cavitiesthat werenot filled with dolomite. Somecrys- by opaquewhite witherite, and a central zone of

talsshowhydrocarboninclusions.Crystalsarepris- unaltered,white to translucentbarite (Fig. 5). The

matic with {1010} and are terminatedby rhombo- witherite occursas pseudomorphsafter barite, as

hedra{10T1}and {01T1}.Someterminationsshow botryoidal coatiqgson dolomite, quartz and calcite

nearly equal developmentof the rhombohedra; IV in open cavities or on the walls of barite-

othersare dominatedby one or the other.

dissolution cavities, and asindividual twinned crys-

CalciteIV. Transparent, colorles$crystalsof cal- tals or groups of twinned crystalsof hexagonalout-

citeoccuron dolomiteor quartz crystals.The com- line (Fie. 6).

position of this calcite is (Caa.rrMg6.e,Feo.or)COr. Colcite Z. Rarely, minute isolated brown crystals

The primary crystal'form is the rhombohedron of calcitearefound on the walls of barite-dissolution

{l0ll}, which is modified by other forms in com- cavitiesor on witherite. The primary form appears

plex ways.

to be the steeprhombohedron{4041].

Strontianite" Strontianite occurs as sprays of

Goethite. Goethite has formed as a superficial

minute white to colorlessacicular crystalson calcite alterationproduct of pyrite II in voidsbetweenbarite

IV or directly on barite in cavities not filled with crystalsnot filled by ferroan dolomite, of both pyrite

dolomite. The crystalsare curvedand striatedand I and II on the walls of barite-dissolutioncavities,

appear to have the same morphology as those and of ferroan dolomite along surfaces of recent

describedby Speer(1976).

fractures.

Barite-dissolution cavities. In all concretions

examined,a peripheralzoneof the septarianfrac- Paragenesis

turesexhibits selectivedissolution of the barite crys-

tals (Fig. 5). The walls of thesecavitiesareunaltered We havedivided the parageneticsequenceinto six

and arecomposedprincipally of matrix, calciteI and stagesbased largely on the sequenceof carbonate

II, dolomite, and pyrite I and II. In different con- minerals formed. This sequenceis derived from

cretions and in different fractures within a concre- exhaustiveindependentexaminationby two of us of

tion, the relationshipsbetweenthe wall mineralsand 4l specimensfrom 18 different concretions.Our

the barite may be different.

resultsare summarizedin Figure 7.

Witherite. Witherite occurs as an alteration StageI. Formation and Fracturing of the Concre-

product ofbarite. Broken concretionsusuallyexhibit don. The initial stepin the formation of the mineral

a peripheral zone of barite-dissolution cavities, an assemblagewas the precipitation and subsequent

intermediatezonewherethe barite hasbeenreplaced fracturing of the body of the concretion.

84 THE CANADIAN MINERALOGIST

Frc.5. Arrangementof unalteredbarite, witherite, and barite-dissolutioncavitiesin septarianconcretions.The arrows lie alongaline from the centre(ower left) toward the outside(upperright) of eachconcretion.A. Toward the centre is a zone of unalteredbarite crystalsO) adjaient to a zone wherethe barite has beenreplaced.bywitherite (w). B. A smallzoneof witherite (w) toward the centreof the concretionis adjacentto a well-developedexternalzone of barite-dissolutioncavities(xc). The length of the bar in A represents9 mm in A and 16 mm in B'

StageII. Formation of Calcite and Bafite. Nl'but a few septarian fractures are lined with a thin layer of calcite I. Those that are not may representa

dolomite.The dolomite containsminor amountsof calciteIII, which precipitatedconcurrently.Quartz generallyformed after the dolomite, but in several

secondstageof fracturing. Pyrite I formed during instancesquartz precededthe completionof dolothis stage,apparently concurrentlywith calcite I, mite deposition.This suggesttshat quartzand dolo-

sinceit sometimesis under, sometimeswithin and mite formed in rapid successionor, in somecases, often on top of calciteI. CalciteI containssignifi- at the sametime. Quartz crystalscommonly contain cant hydrocarbonasinclusions.CalciteII canalways significantamountsof hydrocarboninclusions,and

be distinguishedfrom calciteI by its different color dolomite crystalsthat formed in remaining open

and crystalform. In all cases,calciteII formed on spacesweregenerallycoatedwith films of hydrocar-

top of calciteI exceptin thosefractureswherecal- bon beforethe staft of StageIV. Rarely, fractures

cite I is missing and the walls are lined with calcite containan openlatticeworkof baritelathsthat was

II directly. In the majority of cases,barite formed neverfilled with ferroan dolomite. Transparentcrys-

next after calciteII; however,a significantpercen- talsof calciteIV formed on top of dolomitecrystals

tageof the concretionsexaminedshowbarite form- in voidsin the massivedolomite and on barite crys-

ing beforecalciteII, and severalshowbarite form- tals where no dolomite filled the spacesbetween

ing beforecalciteI. Thse relationshipsaremostclear them.

where barite-dissolution cavities are observed. StageIV. Formqtion of Strontianite. Strontianite

Wheneverbarite formed in the sequencep, yrite II crystalsoccurwith, and occasionallycoat, calciteIV

beganto form just beforebarite depositionstopped in voids betweenbarite crystalsthat werenot filled

and continued briefly thereafter. The rear surfaces with dolomite. Strontianitecrystalsare,howwer, not

of crystalsof pyrite II embeddedin the walls of found with calcite IV in cavitieswithin the massive

barite-dissolutioncavitiesconsistentlyshow a cen- ferroan dolomite. The differential occurrenceof tral spine that representsoutward growh of the strontianite suggeststhat it formed from ground-

pyrite from an original siteof nucleationin compe- waterslong after the completionof StageIII, when tition with the forrnation of the final layersof barite. the concretionshad developedcrackspenetrating The diversity in the time of formation of barite rela- from the outsideespeciallyalong mineralizedsep-

tive to calcite I and calcite II suggeststhat all three tarian fractures.This occurredbefore any dissolu-

formed in rapid sequenceand that variationsin local tion of the barite becauseno strontianitehasbeen

conditionsmay havevariedthe sequenceof deposi- found formed on the walls of barite-dissolution

tion from concretionto concretion.

cavities.

Stage III. Formation of Ferroan Dolomite and Stage V. Dissolution of Barite and Formation of

Quartz. After the depositionof barite, most of the l(itherite. At sometime after the crystallization of remaining spacewas filled with tan to red ferroan strontianite,largeamountsof bariteweredissolved

WITHERITEI NEW PARAGENESIS AND NEW LOCALITIES

85

Flc.6. Photomicrographsof witherite from Jamesville,NY. A. Part of fracture-fillingmineralizationthat hasbroken along the outer wall of the septarian fracture. Numerous barite-dissolution cavities are visible. Severalare partly filled with aggregatesof tabular witherite crystals. B. Interface betweenbarite (b) and witherite (w). The barite at upper right is unaltered. Witherite formed at the expenseof barite is ar lower left. The barite along the interface beganto dissolve along cleavageplanes. C. Interface betweenwitherite and barite-dissolution cavities. The lower portion of tlte frame showswitherite fiUingbarite-dissolutioncavitic. The upperportion showsemptybaritedissolution cavities. Flat-sided remnantsof calcite II (cII) are separatedby the concretion matrix coveredby icattered tiny crystals of pyrite I' D. Botryoidal witherite with quartz (q) and calcite Iv (cIV). Note the flakes of hydrocarbon (arrow) embeddedin the witherite; thesewereoriginally crystallographicallyoriented in barite crystals.E. Rosetti:of twinned witherite crystals.F. Singletwinned witherite crystal.The lengthof the bar in F represents0.9 mm in A, 0.8 mm in B, I mm in C, I mm in D, 0.2 mm in E. and 0,1 mm in F.

away. As noted above (Fie. 5), the dissolution proceededalong the septarianfractures from the peripheryof the concretiontoward the centre.In most cases,an obvious peripheralzone of empty
cavities and a central region of pristine barite are separatedby a band of witherite pseudomorphsafter barite occupyingthe dissolutioncavities.The circum-
stancesof the dissolutionof the barite seemrather

specific,sinceno obvious alterationsin eventhe surface luster of any of the adjacent minerals can be seenin the walls of the dissolutioncavities.Witherite formed as pseudomorphsafter barite, as isolated massesin barite-dissolutioncavities,and ascoatings and crystals on top of calcite IV, dolomite, and quartz in vugs in the massivedolomite. In places wherestrontianite crystalsformed directly on barite,

86
x

Stage I

THE CANADIAN MINERALOGIST

Stage II

Stage
trI

Stage
ry

Stage
v

Stage VI

bcite calcito dolomite goethite natrix pynb quartz stroilianite witherite

+ rflr iflF
rfr -{-

+

Frc. ?. Sequenceof formation of minerals filling septarian fractures at Jamesville,NIY. StageI: concretion formation and fricturing; stageII: calcite and barite formation; stageIII: ferroan dolomite and quartz formation; stageIV : strontianite formation; stage V : barite dissolution and witherite formation; stage VI : late mineralization and weatlering.

thesestrontianite spraysand fragmentsof hydrocar- witherite in septarian concretions in the Marcellus

bon (Fig. 6D) originally embeddedin the barite are shaleof centralNew York formed asa directaltera-

occasionallyfound completelyor partly embedded tion productof barite(Baldasar&i Speer1979).The

in massesof witherite, wherethey havefallen when geologicalsetting of these occurrences,however,

their barite matrix disappeared.

precludesthe alteration of barite by low-temperature

Stage VI. Late Mineralization and Weathering. hydrothermal solutions rich in carbonatesincethere

Subsequentto the dissolution of barite and forma- is no hydrothermal mineralization of fracturesin the

tion of witherite, minor amountsof calciteV formed enclosingshaleand no local or regionalsourcefor

on top of witherite and on the walls of barite- suchsolutions.Furthermore, the marked differences

dissolution cavities.Oxidative weatheringof ferrous in stable-carbon-isotopecomposition betweenthe

minerals (pyrite I, II, ferroan dolomite) has septarian witherite and that from a wide range of

proceededalong recentfracturesthrough the con- other occurrencessuggeststhat a different mechan-

cretions,depositingthin layersof goethite.

ism must be involved.'

Stable-isotopecomposition af witherite

We proposethat this witherite was formed asthe result of bacterial activity, which producedboth sul-

We have determined the ratios of the stable iso- fate reduction and methanefermentation (e.9., Fen-

topes of carbon and oxygen in witherite from five septarianconcretionsfrom occurrenceI nearJamesville, New York, and from 26 other occurrencesof witherite. The resultsare presentedin Table I and
shown graphically in Figure 8.

chel & Blackburn 1979,Stumm & Morgan 1981, Berner 1981,Stetter& Gaag1983)in anoxic solutions that penetratedthe concretionsin the geologically rcentpast.The following observationsulreconsistent with this proposal. The relatively great

Witherite specimensfrom all other localities have enrichment in heavy carbon in the Jamesville

values of 6t3c (PDB) in the range -29.41%0< witherite requires a fractionation mechanismsuch

Dr3C< + l.L6%o. The witherite specimensfrom a$ methane fermentation (Oana & Deevey 1960,

septarianconcretionsnear Jamesvillehavevaluesof Irwin el al. 1977,Kelts& McKenzie1980,Pisciotto

613c in the range +2.llyoos613c< +14.77o/oo, & Mahoneyl98l). Abundant hydrocarbonis avail-

which arecompletelyoutsidethe rangeof valuesof ablefor this purpose,both in the matrix of the con-

witherite from all other occurrences.The range of cretions and in the mineralization of the fractures,

valuesof 6t8O(PDB) for septarianwitherite speci- including hydrocarbon embeddedin the barite itself.

mens, -15.427* s 61803 -13,780/oois, completely The bacterialconversionof barite to witherite has

within the range,-17.870lo<o6180<-9.15%0,for beenobservedin the laboratory @6mer & Schwartz

specimensfrom other occurrences.

1965).The fact that the barite dissolution proceeded

from the outsideof the concretionstoward the centre

DISCUSSIoN

suggeststhe action of external solutions entering

through late fractures. We have observedthat tlte

Like witherite from numerous other localities, concritions arepresentlyopento externalsolutions

WITHERITE: NEW PARAGENESIS AND NEW LOCALITIES

TABLE I. STABI.E ISOTOPE COMPOSMON OF WTTTERIIE

Laality

613c 61Eo

Jmvi&,t{Y
JwileNY
Jametle l.IY
J!@vneNY
Jwillel.IY
Js@vllleNY
Js@vlls,NY
Sp@li Dolhs (ffoEqrud), Stoveha, Cahoslovakia Hasei Mtne, Hiuhu, AfftB PtefoOF, Jape Fallowneld Miue, HerhaE, NotthuBbqhdq C@at Brttdn Ss. 34, f29N, R17q Mdea USA Alsb Mu, Cuobri!, crut Bdtdn
Nqbsg, Styda, Autig
J@x Prop., Mfle 497, Alska Hvy., Ca&d6 Dlg" Bttt'sh qobnbia, Aogls*e Mm, Chql'y, r ,hhe, c@tBritsh lhtrhae, GrcarBtitdn
Sldlbach Mi!e, ldlstrle'y, Slropsbne, ces! Britai! Nodhunbqlq4 Cnst Brltdn SeUlhS$@s Mile Herhaa, NctlFnbsfao4 clat Bdtatd Arrhy8n, Kdatsch4im, I(a*m, RSFS& USSR U8h8w Mq Coliqy, Dah8o, Ccat Brttrit 12 kB E NE of Amwhed kke, Hs Mtor" yukoa Ta- Cesdq Mahoftitrg Mhe Cave h Rsk, Hardh Couty,Illlmq USA PribEE, Boh@ia C@hoslovalia c'E ntla Noth Shosln& Selwy! Mh&, yukm Tq, C@rd8 Dutlch-Fcistltz, Styrls, Auds
Peggau,Styda Autiq
El P6AL Mqtpce Coulty, CalifgEir, I,SA P@!pi!e Min, cillis TcD., Thud,6 Bay DbL,.olrsio, C@qda Tm Dpctr, Selrytr Mbs" Yuta! T6, Cesda Plg@ R@st Mhg M@tgo@ry Couaty, A*mas, USA Vmfoc&,head Mine! Dosfti$hirc, cFstBdrai! BwtrMh, O'CrIWTrp" ThrndcBay Drt Outsiq Ooada

Cesdr

Se!do{4 sPrsi@s3 Sepd@$2 Sepd@Ss
Splat@$r S?tEte$I5 Sspel@914 HS119630 H{1196?2, P H#n13 P H*76r51 Nf34999 Hr119614 P P cc6650 cf5955 Hsl'xn HS88l93 G&4435 c 2fi HS93990 G fi4469 S{B10rg P s f157135 GS168r ccaf49 c{6,265 H$88195 N*3E587

44Jl -14.80 +l2.Lo -14.41 +10.14 -13.78 +9 -14J6 +5'62 -13.91 +4:16 -15.42 +2ll -14.86 +1.16 -10.70 +0.10 -11.03
-0.61 -13.12 -2.Ot -12.U
-294 -13.m
-4.0r -12.9 -8.13 -15.43 -8.19 -17.C7
4.n, -16J0 -8.45 -16.sr
-8f'7 -r2.% -961 -1430 -rcn -1618 -10.37 -14.30 -11.12 -9.15 -tL06' -10.13 -14 -r6J5 -14.65 -13.2, -15.m .14.75
-15.02 -15.65
-1552 -13.15
-16.18 -t3.4 -1667 -11.lo -19.05 -10,32 -A24 -10.89 -29.4r -13.62

carbu md oxygo stable isolope @mlnsitiom for withsites from JalGviue, l.Iy ed oths Gmws worldwide. The valuq of 6ric md 6ruo rc rcladve to the pDB smdard" sore cod6: c - chanbqlain Collection; G - Co[ection oFthe Geological Swey of Cmad4 Onawa, Ontado, Cmada; II - CoUctionof Ilalvard univssity Mineralogical Muleun, cambridge, MA; N - conedion of the NationalMuseum of Natmt Eistory, ottaw4 ontario, canada; P - collection of rhe puis school of Mines, paris, Fme; s - collctim of the Smithmian Institutio!, Wsbingto& D. C.

87

suchasrain water. Furthermore, we suggesthat the sulfide produced by sulfate reduction and the methaneproducedby fermentationwers both free to escapeasdissolvedgasesin solution through these lpte fractures, sinceno sulfideswereprecipitated on the walls of the barite-dissolutioncavities.
We haveattemptedto reconstructthe geological processesinvolved in the sequenceof mineralization of theseconcretions.The detailedresultsof measurementsof the stable-isotoperatios of the various species of minerals and their interpretation are beyondthe scopeof this paperand arereportedelsewhere (Siegelet al. 1986).Only a summary can be given-hereT. he concretionsformed at shallowdepths during burial and diagenesisofthe surroundingshale (Dix & Mullins 1985).The calcirebody of rhe concretionshasa carbon-isotoperatio near zero, which is typical of marinelimestones(e.g., Hudson 1977) rather than a "light" carbon ratio typical of concretionsformed during sulfatereduction (e.g., Hudson 1978)or a "heavy" carbonratio typical of concretionsformed duiing methanefermentation (e.g., Frjtz et al. 1971,Curtis e/ al. 1972).The pattern of carbon-isotoperatiosin the sequenceof carbonates from calcite I to calcite IV suggeststhat calcite I

formed during sulfate reduction (6t3C: -14,8%0)
and that subsequenct arbonatemineralsformed during progressivefermentation of methane.Dolomite (6t3C: -69%i probably marks the end of sulfate reduction @aker& Kastner l98l). Mineralogicaland isotopic data both suggesthat calciteIV wasthe last speciesto form during burial and diagenesisI.t has a heavycarbon-isotoperatio (dl3C: + 12.6o/nt)pical of carbonatesformed during methanefermentation. The strontianite and witherite also hav.ea heavycarbon-isotoperatio, but both the mineralogical evidenceand the oxygen-isotoperatios suggest that they formed well after diagenesisand separately from eachother. The valuesof the oxygen-isotope ratio 6180for calcite IV, strontianile, and witherite are -5.4, -11.2 and -14.5o/oor,espectively:These resultssrlggestiat threeseparateperiodsof methane fermentationare recordedby the sequenceof mineralization. We havehypothesized(siegel e/ a/. 1986) that the strontianitewasdepositedby the upward displacementof strontium-rich brines from the underlying Salina Formation by the advancing edge of Pleistoceneglaciation and that the barite was dissolved and the witherite depositedas anoxic meltwaters were deeply driven under heavy glacial
loading.

88 THE CANADIAN MINERALOGIST

a ()_s
't
'i -10
b -15

r Jamesville'NY o elsewherc

EE

EEE E

.

= rt r r

g -20
.io -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0
otuc lron; of Co3inwitherite
Frc.8. dl3Cand 6180for witherite from Jamesville,NY, and other localitiesworldwide. The carbon isotopes are significantly heavier for the Jamesvillewitherite than for other localities.

The alteration of barite to witherite by bacterial rences.The associatedmineralsinclude other car-

actioncould be a relativelywidespreadmechanism. bonates and sulfates such as azurite, malachite,

Gilkesonet al. (1981)speculatedthat in the anaero- barite, celestite, langite, devilline, brochantite,

bic zonesof the Cambrian-Ordovicianaquifer sys- liroconite and chalcanthite,some of which have tem in northeasternIllinois, whereconcentrationsof formed by the alteration of tetrahedriteand chal-

barium in groundwaterare elevatedand sulfatecon- coplrite (Hintze 1930).This locality may meritfur-

centrationsareseverelyreducedby bacterialsulfate ther study to determine the paragenesisof its

reduction, secondarywitherite could be precipitated, witherite.

but their study did not demonstratethe occurrence A numberof specimensin our databasearesam-

of such witherite. Our isotope determinationson plesfrom exactly.thesamespecimensused.byBal-

witherite from a wide range of localitiesfailed to dasari & Speer (1979) for chemical analysesof

uncover any other exampleswith carbon a-valuesas witheriteby microprobe.We havenot observedany

hearryasthosefor witherite from septarianconcre- striking correlations;however,othersmay wish to

tions.

scrutinizethe two setsof data. Our resultssupport

The other localitiesare, however,of severaltypes. the suggestionthat witherite can form from barite

The Porcupinemine (fraill 1970)and Jorexproperty underconditionsof sulfatereductionandmethano(Woodcock& Smitheringale1957)in Canada,Peg- genesisin anoxicgtoundwaters.Witherite formed in

gauandDeutsch-Freistritzin Austria, Pribram and this way might occurin geologicalsettingswhereit

Spania Dolina in Czechoslovakia(Hintze 1930)' is not normally expectedand' thereby,could easily

Mahonningmine (Grawe& Nackowski 1949,Jolly be overlooked.In fact, we have alreadyfound an

& Heyl 1964)in lllinois, the PigeonRoostmine (Scul unrecognizedspecimenof witherite in the Oren Root

1958)in Arkansas,and the various occurrencesin Collection at Hamilton College,from a fourth local-

GreatBritain (Camrtherset al, 1916,Loch 1946)are ity in central New York.

all low-temperature,hydrothermal veins.The occur- . Our resultsmay suggesat newlook at the forma-

rencenearEl Portal, California is a replacemenot f a bed of limestoneby barium-rich solutions from an

tion of strontianitefrom celestiteor cerussitefrom anglesiteM. echanismssimilarto what wehavepro-

underlyingbody of granite.Fitch (1931)believedthat posedfor witherite may operatein someenviron-

the witherite is a primary replacementof calciteand mentsand lead to similar fractionation of the car-

that barite in the deposit is derived from the bon isotopesin thesecarbonates.

witherite. The occurrencein Montana consistsof

pods of massivewitherite emplacedin solution cavi-

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

ties in a dolostone(Fuller 192). The occurrences

from the Yukon Territoriesare stratiform deposits The co-operationof manypeoplewasessentiatlo

of barite, sphaleriteand galenabelievedto be the the completion of this study. We thank George

resultsof direct precipitation from hydrothermaldis- Robinson, National Museums of Canada; Gary

charge(Lydon et al. L979).Unfortunately, none of Ansell and Richard Herd, Geological Survey of

these localities have unique isotopic ratios that Canada;William Metropolis and Carl Francis,Har-

separatethem from the overall grouping. Witherite vard University; PeteDunn and John White, Smith-

from SpaniaDolina, Czechoslovakiah, asthe heav- sonian Institution; Joseph Peters and George

iestvaluefor dr3C(+ l.16yooo) f all the other occur- Harlow, American Museum of Natural History;

WITHERITE: NEW PARAGENESIS AND NEW LOCALITIES

89

PierreGuillemin, EcoledesMinesde Paris; Roberr Fnrrz, P., Bwoe, P.L., For-rNsssBF, .E. & KnausB,

King, National Museumof Wales;and David Bier-

H. R. (197l): Isotopic composition of diageneticside-

brauer, Wausau,WI, for making specimensavail-

rites from Cretaceoussedimentsin western Canada.

able.We thank R. PeterRichardsfor measuringand

J. Sed. Petrology 41,282-288.

drawing the crystalsof pyrite II. We thank Paul

Mankiewiczfor makingthe stable-isotopemeasurements.We thank GeorgeDix for helpful discussions. We thank J. Alex Speerand an anonymousreferee

FulLsn, M.B. (1924):An occurrenceof witherite in the Altyn fims5lqae at Many Glacier, MottarLa. Amer.
Mineral. 9, 154,

for their helpful suggestions.This study wasfunded in part by a grant from the SyracuseUniversity

Gnrssol,l, R.H., Prnnv, E.C., Jn. & Canrwnrcsr, K. (1981):Isotopic and geologicstudiesto identify the

SenateResearchFund.

sources of sulfate in groundwater containing high

barium concentrations. Illinois Dep. Energy Nat,

Resources, Final Rep. Proj. A-100-il1.

REFERENcES

Gnewr, O.R. & Necrowsrr, M.P. (1949): Strontianite

Barnn,P.A. & KasnqBnM, . (1981)C: onstraintson the formation of sedimentarydolomite.Science213, 21+2t6.

and witherite associated with southern Illinois fluorite. Science110, 331.
HeNcox, E.G. (1934): Witherite and barytes. Mining

Baroasau,A. & Sprrn,J.A. (1979)W: itheritecomposition, physicalproperties,and gert*is. Amer. Mineral. 64,742-747.

Mag, 51,76-79.
Hrxrzr, C. (1930):Handbuch der Minerologie (Vol. I, Part 3). Walter De Gruyter & Co., Berlin.

BrnNsnR, .A. (1981)A: newgeochemicaclassification of sedimentaryenvironmentsJ. . Sed.Petrology51, 359-365.

Honaro, H.D. (1967):Ganguemineralsin hydrothermal deposits. /r Geochemistry of Hydrothermal Ore

Deposits(H.L. Barnes,ed.). Holt, Rinehart&Win-

Bnarr, C.E. & Barno,G.C. (1985):Carbonate-shales ston, New York.

cyclesin the Middle Devonianof New York: an evaluationof modelsfor theoriginof limestoneisn terrigenousshelfsequencesG. eology13, 324-327.

Huosor.r,J.D. (1977): Stable isotopes and limestone
lithification. Quart. J. Geol. Soc. London 133, 637-660.

CennurssnsR, .G., Easrwooo,T., WrnoN, G.V., Pococr, R.W. & Wnev, D.A. (1916):Special reportson the mineralresourceosf GreatBritain. II. Barf'tesand witherite. Mem. Geol.Surv. Great

(1978): Concretions, isotopes, and the diagenetic history of the Oxford Clay (Jurassic) of central
England. Sedimentology 25, 339-370.

Britain.

Inwrr, H., Cunrrs, C. & Cornrraar.r,M(.1977): Isotopic

Cunrn, C.D., Prrnowsrr, C. & Osnrpr, G. (1972): Stablecarbonisotoperatioswithin carbonateconcretions:a clue to placeand time of formation. Nature235,98-100.

evidencefor source of diagenetic carbonates formed during burial of organic-rich sediments.NatureXi9, 209-213.
Jor.rv, J.L. & HsyL, A.V. (1964):Mineral paragenesis

DrEn,W.A., HowrBR, .A. & Zussr"raJN.,(1962)R: ockFormingMinerals.5. Non-silicatesJ.. Wiley& Sons, New York.

and zoning in the central Kentucky mineral district. Econ. Geol. 59, 596-624.

Kelrs, K.R. & McKnNap, J.A. (1980): Formation of

Drx, G.R. & Muu.ws, H.T. (1985):Early diagenesis deepseadolomite in anoxic diatomaceousearth. IzL

andsequentiasltratigraphicdevelopmenotf calcite Geol. Congress 26th (Paris) 1, 24 (abstr.).

concretionsfrom the Middle DevonianHamilton

Group,centralNewYork State.Geol. Soc.Amer. Locs, C.W. (1946): Forgotten mines in Lancashire.

Abstr. Programs17, 564.

Mining Mag. 74, 290-297.

Dosssnr,W.P. Ctravaenr-arrS, .C. & SrBcnr-D. .I. Lvoor, J.W., Lercesrpn, R.D. & KanxxarNnN, P.

(1984):A newoccrrrenceof witheritenearSyracuse, (1979):Geneticcontrols ofSelwyn Basin stratiform

New York. Rocksand Minerals59,224.

barite,/sphalerite/ EaIenadeposits: an investigation

of the dominant barium mineralogy of the Tea

FBNcneLT,. & Blacrsumq,T.H. (1979);Bacteriqand

deposit, Yukon. Geol. Sum. Can. Paper 19-lB,

Mineral Cycling.AcademicPress,Ncw York.

223-229.

FtrcH, A.A. (1931): Barite and witherite from near El Portal, Mariposa County, California. Amer. Mineral. 76, 461-468.

OaNe, S. & Drnvey, E.S. (1960): Carbon-I3 in lake waters,and its possiblebearing on paleolimnology.
Amer. J. Scj. 258A. 253-272.

90 rHE CANADIAN MINERALOGIST

PeI,acre, C., Brnuar, H. & Fnorvorr,C. (1951): Dana'sSysternof Mineraloglt2 (7th edition). J. Wiley & Sons,New York.
Prscrorro, K.A. & MaHoNEy,J.J. (1981):Isotopic survey of diagenetic carbonates, deep sea drilling project leg 63. Initial Rep. Deep ka Drilling Project 63, 595-609.
ROtr.tBnR, . & Scrrwanrz, W. (1965): Geomikrobi ologische Untersuchungen. V. Verwertung von Sulfatmineralien und Schwermetall-Toleranz bein Desulfurizierern . Z. AAC. Mikrobiologie 5, 122-135.
Scutl, B.J. (1958):Origin and occurrenceofbarite in Arkansas. Arkansas Geol. and Cons. Comm. Inf. Circ. 18.
SrnonsNro,A.V. (1947): The genesisof witherites of the western Kopet-Dag. Dokl. Acad. Sci. URSS, Earth Sci. Secf. 55, 149-151.
Srncnr, D.I., CnaMssRLeN,S.C. & Dossnnr, W.P. (1986): The isotopic and chemical evolution of mineralization in septarian concretions, Marcellus Shale, New York: Multiple episodesof methane fermentation? Geol. Soc.Amer. Bull. (in press).

Sprsn,J.A. (19?6):Pennsylvaniaminerals:II. Strontiaaite.Mineral. Rec.1,69-71.
Srerrrn, K.O. & Geec, G. (1983): Reduction of molecular sulphur by methanogenicbacteia. Nature 305.309-311.
Sruuu, W. & MoncaN, J.J. (1981): Aquatic Chemis' try (2nd edition): Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Tnarrl, R.J. (1970): A catalog of Canadian minerals. Geol. Surv. Can. Pap.6945.
WEr-mn,J.M., GnocaN,R.M. & Trerrc, F.R. (1952): Geology of the fluorite depositsof lllinois. Illinois StateGeol. Sum.Bull.76.
Wooococr, J.R. & SMIrHsntNceLBW, .V. (1957): Fluorite-witherite deposit at Lower Liard Crossing, British Columbia. In The Geology of Canadian Industrial Mineral Deposits. Commonwealth Min' ing and Metallurgical Congress, 6th (Vancouver)' 24A-24',7.
Received July, 20 1985, revised manuscript accepted September 18, 1985.

