Relationship between Beta-adrenergic
Binding in Lymphocyte and Severity
of Disease in ~sthma*
Stuari M. Bmoks, M.D., F.C.C.P.;O0 KatMeen McGowun, B.S.;t and Pamela Akenrru, B.S.$
A proposed theory for the development of bmmhial asthma suggests the presence of partial or complete blockage of the beta-adrenergic nervous s y ~ t e m . lE~v~idence to support this hypothesis stems from observations that individuals with bronchial astbma have increased sensitivity to beta-adrenergic blocking agents, as well as specific pharmacologic, physiologic and biochemical alteration~.~T-h~e present investigation was designed to assess lymphocyte beta-adrenergic receptors in asthma employing binding studies using labeled dihydroalprenolol (DHA).a-11 In addition, the effects of hydrocortisone on DHA binding was also investigated.

Individuals studied were ten d subjects (seven
women and three men) with a mean age of 32 years, and 11
stable asthmatic patients (nine! women and two men), with a mean age of 39 years. Particular attention was paid to medication taken. I . general, patients did not receive or rarely used beta-adrenergic ago* either admhbtered orally or as aerosol, but took theophylline preparations for relief of symptoms. Four asthmatic subjects required 5 to 10 mg of
p&m daily for control of disease. Studies of DHA
binding involved a modification of the method reported by
Williamset al.10

In asthmatic subjects, specific DHA binding appeared saturable. For all incubation concentrations of DHA, the specific binding was lower in the asthmatic group when compared to the controls.
*Figure 1 demonstrates spec& DHA binding at 12
n M concentration. The mean standard error for the control group was 391 -C 40 fM/mg protein and 263 +
35 fM/mg protein for the asthmatic subjects (P <
0.05).
Figure 2 shows specific DHA binding at 11 n M plotted against a measurement of severity of asthma,
FEV,/FVC% and an explanation for variations in spe-
ci6c binding among asthmatic subjects. Those asthmatic subjects with the more severe airway obstruction had
lower DHA binding to lymphocyte membrane protein
(r=0.93, P < 0.01).

'From the Department of Environmental Health and Ket-

tering Laboratory, University of cinchmati Cobge d

Medicine Cincinnati.

'Ibis work was supported b fonds from Grant No. ES
da00159 from tim center for study of ~rmrpn~ovimn-
ment, U.S.Public Health Service. 'Associats Professorof Medicine andEnvironmental Health.

==*rint tequerts: Dr.stuBdroenokts, Ketiedng -,

3223

%n Auenus, Cincinnati 45267

232 2 l ~ AtSPEW LUNG COWEREWCE

\
I
\
CONTROLS ASTHMATKS
pc 0.05 12 nM DIHYDROALPRENOLOL
FIGURE1. Results of DHA biading studies at 12 nM showing mean 2 SEM values. Asthmatic subjects show lower specific DHA binding to lymphocyte membrane protein than control sronp (P<O.W.
Lymphocytes from normal subjects were divided into two equal aliquots and incubated for 16 hours in phosphate-buffered saline solution with added glucose; 10
n M of hydrocortisone was added to the incubation mix-
ture of one of the aliquots, but not the other. Following incubation, lymphocyte membrane preparations were obtained and binding studies were performed.
Figure 3 shows the results of four studies and demonstrates that specific alprenolol binding is significantly greater in lymphocyte membrane protein preincubated with hydrocortisone. The mean value of specific bound alprenolol for hydrocortisone-incubated lymphocytes was approximately four times greater, ie 491 fM/mg protein compared to 116 fM/mg protein in the aliquots
not incubated with hydrocortisone (P < 0.05).
The results of the present investigation support the preliminary reports of Kariman and Lefkowitzd who also demonstrated statistically significant lower lymphocyte DHA binding in asthmatic subjects as compared to controls subjects.
The variation in specific DHA binding noted among asthmatic individuals in this investigation and the study by Kariman and Lefkowitz can be explained by difFerences in disease severity among patients. Those with the most severe disease (as measured by FEV,/FVCS)
CHEST, 75: 2, FEBRUARY, 1979 SUPPLEMENT

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ on 05/31/2015

FEV 1.0/ FVC"/o

RCUR2E. A highly significant positive d t i o n is shown between specific DHA binding to lymphocytemembrane and FEVI/FVC%;r=0.93, P<O.Ol. Shaded area represents normal values & 2 SEM.

showed lower DHA biding. This relationship could not be explained by severe asthmatic subjects receiving higher dosages of beta-adrenergic agonist drugs since

3 H DHA specific
looolbi nding

10nM H C
With o without a

P eO.05 Rcum 3. Labeled DHA binding studies to lymphocyte mem-
brane protein at 13 nM DHA amcedration. Lymphacytes were preincubabed with (closed circles) or without (open circles) 10nM hychmtisone for 1416 boars prior to binding assays.
CHEST, 75: 2, FEBRUARY, 1979 SUPPLEMENT

theophylline preparations were the predominant therapeutic agentsused and administration of beta-adrenergic agonists was limited. This is important since there have been in vftro and in vioo studies which have reported receptor inactivation and/or beta-adrenergic unresponsiveness following the use of beta-adrenergicagonists.
The relationship between lower DHA binding and greater severity of diseasenoted in the present investigation supports findings of Parker and Smith.ll These investigators reported that there was less increased intracellular cyclic AMP in lymphocytes in response to is* proterenol incubation, in those asthmatic subjects with the more severe and chronic disease.
While the mechanism of action of glucocorticoids in bronchial asthma has long been a subject of controversy, glucocorticoids have been demonstrated to restore or increase responsiveness of tissues and/or cells to catecholamines. The data from the present investigation suggest that this phenomenon may be the result of hydmcorthne causing an increase in the numbers or restoring "sensitivity" to beta-adrenergic receptors available for drug action.
The mechanism to explain differences in DHA bind-
ing among asthmatic subjects could include genetic or acquired defects in receptor protein synthesis, receptor protein degradation or change in pools. The clinical SiMcance of the apparent lymphocyte beta-adrenergic receptor abnormality noted in the present investigation needs further study. In patients with bronchial asthma it may reflect a general beta-adrenergic receptor defect. Whether change in receptor activity is dynamic in any individual patient, changing as disease severity varies, needs to be documented. Results from the present investigation suggest that this theory must be given serious consideration.
1 Szentivanyi A: The beta-adrenergic theory of the atopic abnormality in bronchial asthma. J Allergy 42:203-231, 1968
2 Reed CE: Beta-adrenergic blockade, bronchial asthma and atopy. J Allergy 42:238-242,1968
3 Middleton E Jr, Finke SR: Metabolic response to epinephrine in bronchial asthma. J Allergy 42:288-299,1968
4 Reed CE, Cohen M, Enta T: Reduced effect of epinephrimoncirculating~hilsinasthmaanda)aer beta-adrenergic blockade or BordeteIla pertassis vaccine. J Allergy 46:90-102,1970
5 Townley RC,Daley D, Selenke W: The effect of agents used in the treatment of bronchial asthma on carbohydrate metabolisn and histamine sensitivity after betaadrenergicblockade. J Allergy 45:71-86,1970
6 Kariman K, Lefkowitz RJ: Decreased beta-adrenergic receptor binding in lymphocytes from patients with bronchial asthma. Clin Res 25:503A, 1977
7 Alexander RW, Williams LT, Lefkowitz RJ:Identification
of cardiac B-adrenergic receptors by (-1 [=HIalpre-
nolol binding. Prac Nat Acad Sci 72:1564-1568,1975 8 Mukherjee C, Caron MG, Coverstone J, et al: IdenMca-
tion of adenylate cyclase coupled B-adrenergic receptors in from erythrocybes with ( -) - [SH] alprenolol. J Biol Chem 250:4869-4876,1975
IMMUM0U)GV OF THE LUNG 233

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ on 05/31/2015

9 Haber E, Wrenn S: Problems in identification of betaadrenergicreceptor. Physiol Rev 56:317438,1976
10 Williams LT, Snyderman R, Lefkowitz RJ:Identification of B-adrenergic receptor in human lymphoqks by (-) [SH] alprenolol binding. J Clin Invest 57:149-155, 1976
11 Parker CW, Smith JW:Alterations in cyclic AMP me+ tabolism in human bronchial asthma. L Leukocyte responsiveness to B-adrenergic agents. J Clin Invest 52:48-
59,1973
Dr. Turner-Warwick:Did you differentiate your asthmatics in terms of severity of their disease, and did you find any differences between groups in their response to isoproterenolbeyond an hour's time? Dr. Brooks: That is a good question. We did differentiate
asthmatics in terms of disease severity. AU our patients
were stable for a period of months. We assessed severity of disease using clinical and physiologic criteria. We did
study one actually ill asthmatic patient. She had de-
creased alprenolol binding which i n d with her clinical improvement during hospitalization. Serial studies on more patients need to be performed in order to determine the duration, magnitude and significance of these changes in alprenololbinding. Dr. Chick: Were any of you. patients recently on beta adrenergic drugs? Dr. Brooks: This is important since the use of beta adrenergic agonist drugs has been shown to depress in vitro beta-receptor binding. We &ed patients who had either never taken beta adrenergic agonist agents or who had not received them for weeks to months prior to study. Dr. Oren: Is there a dose-response relationship in the effect of glucocorticoidon binding, and is it Merent for different patients, dependingon the severity of illness? Dr. Brooks: In oitro studies suggest that this may be true, but this is as yet unstudied.
In virro Studies on the Mechanism
of Respiratory Virus-induced ~sthma*

infection-provoked asthma, the response to IS0 is fur-

ther impaired. A similar, but less severe reduction in

IS0 and HIS response occurred in normal subjects dur-

ing an experimental rhinovirus 16 infection (J Allergy

Clin hmunol, in press).

Impairment in PMN response to the agonists, ISO,

HIS, and PGE,

to lO-(M) develops during in

uitro incubation with several respiratory viruses: rhino-

virus 16, influenza A (England/42/72[H3N2] ), and

two live attenuated influenza vaccines (biva1ent:A

r)l[3N2] and B; WRL-105 type A). Bivalent vaccine af-

fects PMNs from normal (n= 15) and asthmatic (n=29)

donors similarly. Asthmatics with a history of virus-pro-

voked episodes of wheezing with colds did not differ

from other asthmatics. Vaccine did not impair agonist

response on PMNs collected from patients receiving sys-

temic corticosteroids and in uitro cortisol ( 5 01~0-4M)

restored the vaccine-induced impairment in response to

agonists.

Preliminary observations show the change in agonist

response is proportional to the concentrations of the

virus preparation, is retained following virus inactivation

(heat, ultraviolet light), and is restored by washing after

virus incubation.

Dr. Stechschdte: Do you have any evidence that phosphodiesterase activity or that cyclic nucleotide levels are altered by the 30minute incubation? Dr. Busse: The baseline levels of CAMPare not changed. We do not have measurements of phosphodiesterase activity. Dr. Oren: Are these effects you see with viral incubation due to infection or to some other mechanism, perhaps
immunologic? Dr. B w e : In studies in which the viruses have been killed we see the same results as with the live virus. Whether it is same viral product or an effect of the virus particleitself, we do not know. Dr. Chester: Have you had an opportunity to do in dtro studies on leukocytes from non-asthmatic normal subjects during and afterviral infections? Dr. Busse: Yes,and they were similarly affected.

W.Bwse,M.D.; undChadesE. Rssd, M.D., F.C.C.P.

The mechanism of virus-provoked episodes of asthma is not established. One of several plausible hypotheses is an impairment by virus or some product of virusinfected cells of homeostatic mechanisms that maintain normal bronchial caliber. Release of granulocyte (PMN) lysosomal enzyme, beta-glucuronidase, foIlows incubation with complement activated zymosan In asthma,
isoproterenol (ISO) and bistamine (HIS) inhibition of enzyme release is impaired while prostaglandin El (PGE,) response is normal (Am Rev Resp Dis 115:783,
1977; J Clin Invest 59:1080, 19TI). During respiratory
.From the University of Wisconsin,Madison.
234 2ld ASPEN LUN6 COWFERENCE

CHEST, 75: 2, FEBRUARY, 1979 SUPPLEMENT

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ on 05/31/2015

