Ancient Ostrich Eggs: Dating materials by amino acid racemization
Science 1990, 248, 60-64 chemical kinetics · archeology · biochemistry

How many millions of years ago were these sediments deposited? Were the colors in this folio applied when it was printed, or sometime later? Is this a modern hippo bone, or a fossil of some similar, earlier species? Just how old is it? The determination of the age of an artifact or sample is a crucial question in many fields, including geology, paleontology, archaeology, anthropology and history. Context often provides a clue to the age of an object. For example, the style of decoration of a vase or the types of pigments applied to a fresco can be used to narrow the time period in which a particular artifact was produced. How deeply something is buried is yet another source of information about an item's age. Provenance, or the written record of an object's history, is another source from which the age of an object can be determined. These approaches obviously cannot be applied to find an age for every object or specimen. Chronometric methods, such as the familiar 14C dating, can be brought to bear when the relative dates derived from contextual information are inadequate, or when forgery is suspected.
Amino acids are nearly always found in the L-form in natural products, such as proteins. Uncatalyzed epimerization at the chiral carbon is, not surprisingly, an exceedingly slow process. If proteins can be extracted from a biological matrix, such as an ostrich shell, the amount of epimerization can be used to determine the time elapsed since the protein was synthesized. Since the process is far slower than the decay of 14C, longer elapsed times can be measured.

Photo  2003 Blake Newton, University of Kentucky Used with permission.
Unnatural Amino Acids
Thirty years ago, it was assumed that all amino acid residues in naturally occurring polypeptides were in the Lform. We now know there are a few exceptions. For example, some polypeptide antibiotics found in fungi incorporate Damino acids. It is thought that in most cases the peptide is synthesized with all L-amino acids, subsequently individual amino acids undergo enzymatically catalyzed epimerization. Only one such epimerase has been identified to date. The serine epimerase found in the venom of the funnel spider, Agelenopsis aperta, selectively inverts the configuration of Ser-46 of the substrate omega-agatoxin-TK, leaving the other serine residue at position 28 untouched.

© 2004 Michelle M. Francl. May be reproduced for use in an individual classroom. May not be sold or used in other collections without the express permission of the author. These materials were produced as part of "P-Chem with a Purpose," funded by the National Science Foundation, grant DUE-0340873.

Amino Acid Racemization

How old is a whale?
Humans are among the longest-living mammals, with a life-span on the order of 100 years. Human ages can be verified by consulting birth and census records. Whales are also apparently very longlived, but discovering the age of a whale is a somewhat more daunting task and the lifespans of most whale species have not been established. The ages of some whales, such as blue whales and fin whales can be determined by counting the layers of ear wax in their inner ears. These whales appear to live between 80 and 100 years, similar to humans. Bowhead whales, which live north of the Artic circle, are still hunted in limited numbers by the Inuit. Since the early 1980s, several clearly ancient harpoon heads have been found embedded in modern bowheads. The types of points recovered had not been used since the late 19th century, suggesting the whales were more than 100 years old. Inuit oral histories also supported a long life span for these whales, as multiple generations of hunters described encountering the same whale. The degree of racemization of aspartic acid in the lens of the eye has been used to find the ages in 20 different species, including humans. Ages were obtained for 48 different whales, one which had an apparent age of
211 years [Can. J. Zool. 1999,
77, 571­580], making the bowheads the longest living mammals known!

Science 1990, 248, 60-64
Dating Pleistocene Archeological Sites by Protein Diagenesis in Ostrich Eggshell
A.S. Brooks, P.E. Hare, J.E. Kokis, G.H. Miller, R.D. Ernst, F. Wendorf
Questions and Problems
The questions and problems below are based on the paper cited. They are meant to encourage you to read the paper critically, you may need to consult other articles in the literature to answer these question. If you were the editor of the journal, what questions might you have for the authors?
1. The authors use units of ka and Ma. What do they stand for?
2. Draw the structures of L-isoleucine and Dalloisoleucine. Be sure to indicate clearly the stereochemistry. Why is the isomerization reaction so slow?
3. In an early paper describing this method [Science, 1970, 170, 730-732], there is a note that at equilibrium a small excess of D-alloisoleucine is present (at 140oC they report the ratio of alloisoleucine to isoleucine is 1.25), but that for most amino acids the equilibrium constant between the L and D forms is 1. Why should that be? Why do you suppose it is different for isoleucine?
4. The authors assert in their introduction that amino acid racemization dating can be applied to a longer time range than radiocarbon dating. Later on in the discussion they mention that the oldest reliable date obtained from radiocarbon methods is about 30,000 years. Using what you know about first order radioactive decay processes and the known limits of detection for carbon-14, estimate the maximum age range that can be determined by radiocarbon dating. The half-life for 14C is 5730 years, the current technology (accelerator mass spectrometry) can measure a 14C to total carbon ratio of 10-15 atoms. The ratio in living tissue is on the order of 10-12. Are the

2

approximate dates in Figure 4 consistent with your

estimate?

5. On p. 62, the authors say that the rate constant for the

forward

reaction

can

be

expressed

as

ln(k1)

=

C

-

H RT

.

They go on to say that C and R are constants, but can C

and/or R take any value that fits the data in this

expression? They don't say what the units on k1 are. Should they? And what do you think they are? How can

you verify your guess. (You may find it helpful to refer to the paper on the dating of marine sediments.) 6. Using the expression in question 5 and the parameters given in the paper, compute the forward rate constant at 144oC. What is the value of the rate constant for the reverse reaction at this temperature? 7. The authors say that the kinetics are consistent with a first order reversible process

L-isoleucinekk21 D-alloisoleucine
and cite Figure 2 as evidence. The equations that follow can be derived given these kinetics

( )( )I

t

=

Io

 

1

-

k1

k1 + k2

1 - e-(k1 + k2 )t

 

( )( )A t

=

Io

k1

k1 + k2

1 - e-(k1 + k2 )t

where I(t) is the concentration of L-isoleucine as a

function of time and A(t) is the concentration of D-

alloisoleucine as a function of time. Using these

equations, derive an expression for and plot the ratio A/I
(D-alloisoleucine/ L-isoleucine) as a function of time for the reaction at 144oC. Does the graph match what is in
Figure 2? Do the kinetics seem consistent?

8. The authors show an inset in Figure 2 where they plot

log

1+

D L

1

-

0.8

D L

as a function of time and superimpose a line on top of it.

Note that they are inconsistent with their nomenclature

(I presume the ratio D/L is the same as A/I). Why did

they plot this particular function? What is the

significance if this graph is linear? Where did the 0.8

come from? 9. An early version of this method [Bada et al. Science,
1970, 170, 730-732] ignored the reverse reaction in computing the A/I ratio. Derive an expression for the

Amino Acid Racemization
Stratigraphy is the analysis of the layers deposited at an archeological or geological site. Stratified deposits can results from human activity, such as construction, or from natural processes such as wind or flooding. If one or more items in a layer can be dated, remaining items in the strata can be presumed to be of a similar age. The chronology of a site cannot always be established from the stratigraphy, the strata can be disturbed by human activity or other factors.
Diagenesis is geological shorthand for all the changes to a fossil or sediment resulting from chemical, physical and biological process that take place after the initial burial.
Ostrich eggs have been used by humans as containers for more than a million years. They are stronger than you may think. An unbroken shell can support the weight of an adult (ostrich or human). If you want to make scrambled eggs from an ostrich eggs, you may need power tools to cut the egg open. One egg serves 8-10.

3

Amino Acid Racemization
Oure termes so lerned and queynte
Whan we be ther where we shul exercise Oure elvish craft, we seme wondrous wyse, Oure termes be so lerned and so queynte.
Yet wil I telle them, as they come to mynde, Though I can not them set right in their kind; As sal armoniak, verdegres, boras;
Geoffrey Chaucer, "The Canon's Yeoman's Tale" in The Canterbury Tales
Chaucer's junior alchemist tries to impress the other pilgrims on the road with his knowledge of the terms of his "elvish craft", treating fellowtravelers to a free-associating litany of chemical names, herbs and equipment. Some terms remain familiar to modern chemists, who still ply their trade with vials and crucibles and can pull potassium carbonate off their shelves, others have left their traces in the learned terms of today. Traditionally, the earliest known production of what Chaucer calls "sal armoniak", or ammonium chloride, was from the burning of camel dung in the temple of Jupiter Ammon in what is now Libya ­ hence "sal ammoniac" or salt of Ammon. This term is the root for "amine" and eventually "amino acid".
Racemization has an equally arcane etymology, deriving from the Latin for a bunch of grapes, racemus. Racemic acid was first extracted from grapes, hence the name. Pasteur discovered that racemic acid is fact a mixture of stereoisomers of tartaric acid. Racemic mixtures are now any optically inactive mixture of stereoisomers.

A/I ratio as a function of time assuming you can ignore the reverse reaction. A note in the early paper suggests that this approximation is good until the racemization exceeds 15%. Compare your expression with the one you derived in question 8. Do you agree with Bada et al.? How does the approximation change the age range that can be dated using this technique? Could the authors of the paper on ostrich eggs have used the approximate approach and still obtained accurate dates? Support your answer with examples. 10. Why do you think the authors include the data from radiocarbon dated samples on Figure 3. Would it change the activation energy to use only the high temperature data? Are the rate constants estimated using the low temperature archeological samples as accurate as the ones from the pyrolysis experiments reported here? 11. In footnote 40, as well as in the text, the authors note that knowing the temperature history of the sample is critical. They estimate that an error of 1oC in the temperature would lead to an error in the age of about 25%. Confirm this.
Further Reading
· "Chronometric Dating in Archaeology: A Review", H. P. Schwarcz, Accts. Chem. Res. 2002, 35, 637-643. This review has very brief description of the procedure for amino acid racemization dating. An overview of radioisotope dating methods, including trapped charge dating by ESR and thermoluminesence.
· "Marine Sediments: Dating by the Racemization of Amino Acids", J.L. Bada, B.P. Luyendyk and J.B. Maynard, Science, 1970, 170, 730-732. The original paper describing the method.
· "Reliability of Amino Acid Racemization Dating and Paleotemperature Analysis on Bones", M. L. Bender, Nature, 1974, 252, 378-379. "Dr. Bada Replies", J.L. Bada, ibid. 1974, 252, 379-381. An early controversy over the accuracy of the dates obtained from amino acid racemization.
· "Age and growth estimates of bowhead whales (Balaena

4

mysticetus) via aspartic acid racemization", J. C. George, J. Bada, J. Zeh, L. Scott, S.E. Brown, T. O'Hara, R. Suydam, Can. J. Zool. 1999, 77, 571­580; "Amino Acid Racemization", E. Brignole and J. McDowell, Today's Chemist At Work, 2001, 10, 50-58. (An electronic version of the article is available at http://pubs.acs.org/subscribe/journals/tcaw/10/i02/html/02br ignole.html) · See the whole Chaucerian litany in either Middle English or Modern English at http://classiclit.about.com/library/bletexts/gchaucer/bl-gchau-can-can-m.htm. Want the full medieval experience? Images of the full text of two 15th century versions can be found at http://www.bl.uk/treasures/caxton/homepage.html. You can read the Canon's Yeoman's Tale in (almost) it's original form thanks to the British Library.
Acknowledgements
With thanks to Chuck Kristensen of Spider Pharm, Inc., Dr. Blake Newton of the University of Kentucky and Prof. Susan Riechert of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville for their expert advice on Agelenopsis aperta spiders and their venom; to Prof. John Wehmiller of the University of Delaware for advice on an earlier version of this exercise.

Amino Acid Racemization
What can you do with an M.D./Ph.D.? (Bio)chemical kinetics, of course.
Maude Menten (1879-1960) was an early M.D./Ph.D., and one of the first women to become a physician in Canada. She earned her M.D. from the University of Toronto in 1911, and subsequently obtained a Ph.D. in from the University of Chicago in 1916. In 1913, she and Leonor Michaelis (in Berlin) published their paper detailing what we now call Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Menten went on to make significant contributions to biochemistry and medicine in a career that lasted a half century. She published over 70 papers and was an accomplished painter.

5

