NASA CONTRACTOR REPORT 166310

UH-60A Volume

Black Hawk Engineering

II-Background

Report

Simulation.Program:

J.J. Howlett

United Technologies

Sikorsky Aircraft

Stratford,

Connecticut

06602

Prepared for Ames Research
under Contract

Center NAS2-I0626

NASA
N(lhon_-ll A(;ronauhcs and SI.)_Ic:(; Adm_n_,_tr_llson
Ames Research Center MotIull F,old Cahfornta 941135

o

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

k_F FOREWORD

This report is Volume II of two volumes prepared by the Sikorsky Division of

United Technologies Corporation for the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-

tration, 10626.

Ames Research

Center, Moffet Field, California

under Contract NAS2-

This contract, which was to define and validate a mathematical model of the

UH-60A BLACK HAWK helicopter at the Ames Research Center, was funded by the

U.S. Army Research and Technology Laboratories (AVRADCOM), Ames Research Center

and administered by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Ms.

Carolyn

S. LaFollette

was the Contract Administrator

and Mr. Thomas S.

Alderete, Simulation Investigations

Branch, was the Technical Monitor.

The

Sikorsky Division Project Engineer for this contract was Mr. J. Howlett.

Engineering assistance was provided by Mr. W. Gerdes, Mr. D. Ruttledge and Mr.

P. Gold. Simulation software support was provided by Mr. D. Simpson.

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD

1 SUMMARY

2 INTRODUCTION

3 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.10

SIMULATION MODULES DESCRIPTION Main Rotor Module
Fuselage Module Empennage Module Tail Rotor Module
Flight Control Module Engine/Fuel Control Module Landing Interface Module Ground Effects Module Gust Penetration Module" Motion Module

4 SIMULATION TRIMMING CONCEPTS

5 k_7
6

FUTURE SIMULATION MODEL DEVELOPMENT REFERENCES

SER-70602
4 4 28 31 34 40 57 69 80 80 85 90 92 94

k_# iii

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

SER-70602

2.1
3.1.1 3.1.2 3.1.3 3.1.4
3.1.5 3.1.6 3.1.7
3.2.1
3.5.1 3.5.2 3.5.3 3.5.4 3.5.5 3.5.6 3.5.7 3.5.8 3.5.9 3.5.10 3.5.11
3.6.1 3.6.2 3.6.3 3.6.4 3.6.5 3.6.6 3.6.7
3.7.1 3.7.2 3.7.3 3.7.4 3.7.5

LIST OF FIGURES

Gen. Hel Flight Dynamics Simulation Model
Main Rotor Flow Diagram Blade Geometry Definition Body Axes to Shaft Axes Transformation Shaft Axes to Rotating Blade Span Axes
Transformation Definition of Yawed Angle of Attack Lag Damper Kinematic Geometry Definition of Rotor Wake Skew Angle

Fuselage Equation Flow Diagram

Empennage Empennage

Equation Flow Diagram Axes System

Tail Rotor Equation Flow Diagram Tail Rotor Axes System

Flight Controls Block Diagram AFCS Simplified Block Diagram Collective Flight Controls Block Diagram Pitch Flight Controls Block Diagram Roll Flight Controls Block Diagram Yaw Flight Controls Block Diagram Automatic Flight Control Panel Flight Control Mixing Unit Schematic Longitudinal Cyclic Rigging Lateral Cyclic Rigging Tail Rotor Control Rigging

T700 Engine Schematic
Engine Controls Engine/Fuel Control Interface Fuel Control Electric Control

With Unit

the Rotor

Engine/Fuel Control Block Diagram Rotor Degree of Freedom Clutch Model Rotor Clutch Model - Detailed Program

Flow

Diagram

Landing Gear Tire and Strut Representation

Landing Module Axes System

Landing Gear Geometry

Gear/Ground-plane Reinitialization

Interface Geometry of Gear Line Intersection

Point

3
5 8 I0
16 17 23 27
29
32 35
37 38
41 42 44 45 46 47 49 51 53 54 55
59 60 64 65 67 68
70
72 73 75 76 79

iv

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

3.9.1 3.9.2 3.9.3
3.10.1

LIST OF FIGURES (Continued)
Definition of Gust Ring Array Gust Table Loading Restriction Effect of Decreasing "TABINK" on Table
Loading Helicopter Penetration of Gust Front Program Flow for Loading Gust Tables
Body Axes System Definition

SER-70602
82 83 84 86 87 88

V

k_i

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

SER-70602

1.0 SUMMARY

A non-linear mathematical model of the UH-60A BLACK HAWK heli-

copter has been developed under Contract NAS2-I0626.

This

mathematical

model, which is based on the Sikorsky

General

Helicopter

(Gen Hel) Flight Dynamics Simulation, provides the

Army with an engineering simulation for Performance and Handling

Qualities evaluations.

Initially it will be applied in an

analysis mode with eventual application to real time pilot-in-

the-loop simulation.

This mathematical model is a total systems definition of the

BLACK HAWK helicopter represented at a uniform level of sophis-

tication considered necessary for Handling Qualities evalua-

tions. The model is a total force, large angle representation

in six rigid body degrees of freedom.

Rotor blade flapping,

lagging and hub rotational degrees of freedom are also repre-

sented. In addition to the basic helicopter modules, supportive

modules have been defined for the landing interface, power unit,

ground effects and gust penetration.

Information defining the

cockpit environment relevant to pilot-in-the-loop

simulation is

presented.

This same model was activated on Sikorsky's DEC PDP

KLI0 computer to generate check cases for use during the validation of the simulation at NASA.

Volume I of this report defines the mathematical model using a

modular format.

The documentation

of each module is self-con-

tained and includes a description, mathematical definition and

input for the BLACK HAWK. Volume II provides background and

descriptive mathematical

information model.

supportive

to an understanding

of the

b_

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

2.0 INTRODUCTION

This report is Volume II of two volumes, which document the

mathematical model of the UH-60A BLACK HAWK helicopter.

This

work was funded under Contract NAS2-I0626 by the U.S. Army

Research and Technology Laboratories

(AVRADCOM), Ames Research

Center.

The objective of this contract was to provide the Army and NASA

with a well documented,

operational

and verified engineering

simulation of the BLACK HAWK helicopter.

This work, undertaken

by Sikorsky, provides the Army with a Flying Qualities analysis

methodology for the BLACK HAWK helicopter which could eventually

be extended to a real time pilot-in-the-loop

simulation.

The

mathematical

model provided under this contract is a total

system, free flight representation based on the Sikorsky General

Helicopter (Gen Hel) Flight Dynamics Simulation, illustrated on

Figure 2.1. It is defined at a uniform level of sophistication

currently considered appropriate for Handling Qualities evalua-

tions. This model is also considered to give representative

performance trends, but it should not be used to define critical

performance

characteristics.

The modular format presented

facilitates the introduction of additional or more sophisticated

modules.

Presented in this Volume is background information which is not

directly required for the mathematical definition of the BLACK

HAWK simulation model, but is supportive to an understanding of

the model. Each of the modules presented in Volume I will be

discussed.

Where mathematical manipulation has been used which

has obscured the origin of equations, derivation and explanation

will be provided.

Origin of experimental data used as input

will be identified and a discussion of inherent assumptions in

the model will be presented.

This volume contains information

proprietry to Sikorsky Aircraft Division UTC.

It is not the intention in this report to duplicate information

provided in Volume I. However, in some areas for continuity and

completeness,

repetition is unavoidable.

This document should

be treated as supportive to Volume I.

The following sections discuss each of the simulation modules

presented in Volume I. Extensive reference is made to Volume I,

but rather than indicate this in the text, the respective page

numbers in Volume I, correponding

to the discussion being

undertaken, are identified in a right hand margin.

_ UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

ORIGiH_L P_E ___ OF POOR _'

FIGURE 2.1. GEN. ]-[EL.FLIGHT DYNAMIC'S SIMULATION MODEL

SER-70602

-- Vel.,
f AIACccPel.os..

Hi i n Rotor

""- (nglne

j_UJ

f
J
Pilot
JI

l

11 =I Control

J-J-_
I//''

System

Hq
I.-f'1

f Serve _del

H--
!..1'

-'I ""llor. Tall _L-

__ ioSldum IIFuollirecaei|sli V

J u[¢| l|idIltlillUiloi ns

-'lVert.

Tail

r.,.,,,.O logic

_ilill Rotor
-¢
I AFCS Model

__ SellSOl.

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

kJ 3.0 SIMULATION MODULES DESCRIPTION

3.1 MAIN ROTOR MODULE

3.1.1

Overview of the Main Rotor Module

The main rotor mathematical

representation

is complex

lengthy.

Therefore, an overview is presented to aid in

understanding details.

of the overall model prior to discussing

and the the

The main rotor model is based on a blade element analysis in which total rotor forces and moments are developed from a combination of aerodynamic, mass, and inertia loads, acting on each simulated blade. The calculation elements are presented in block diagram form on Figure 3.1.1.

Forces on the blades are derived as a result of total accelera-

tion and velocity components at the blades together with blade

pitch control inputs.

Accelerations

are developed from body

motion, blade motion, rotor shaft speed changes and gravity.

Velocity

components

are made up of body velocities,

blade

motion, rotor speed, self induced downwash and gust velocities.

Before calculations at the rotor blade can proceed it is necess-

ary to implement several axes transformations.

Airframe motion

developed at the center of gravity must be transferred from the

fixed body axes system into a rotating axes frame aligned along

the blade span. Total accelerations

and velocities at the

blade, must be determined in order to develop the inertia and

aerodynamic loads on the blade.

The treatment of the blade segment aerodynamic force calculation

is completely non-linear.

Lift and drag characteristics

are

provided for in the range -180_180.

Simple sweep theory is

used to modify the unyawed blade element lift coefficient.

The

application of sweep theory to the determination of drag is not

well established.

For this model, drag is determined by enter-

ing the drag map data with the actual yawed angle of attack.

The aerodynamic segmented loads, determined above_ are resolved from the local wind axes into blade span axes and summed along each blade to obtain root shears at the hinge. Subsequently these forces are transformed into the rotating shaft axes frame through the flapping and lagging angles. These same loads are used to determine the aerodynamic hinge moments for use in the
flapping and lagging motion equations.

ks, 4

TECHNOLOGIES B U_BN_ITVED

ORIGINAL PAGE !_
OF POOR VL'_',._,_

FIGURE 3.1-I MAIN ROTOR FLOW DIAGRAM

SER-70602

k_# k.i
"A-

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

The blade inplane or lagging motion is restrained by a damper

system. In the case of BLACK HAWK the damper is non-linear and

the kinematics of this system are complicated by geometry.

The

restraining moment provided by the lag damper is obtained by

tracking the damper axial velocity.

This is then used to

determine axial force from a load-velocity

characteristics

map.

The motions in the flapping and lagging degrees of freedom are

determined from the moment balance about the blade hinges. This

balance involves aerodynamic moments, hinge restraint moments,

weight moments and inertia moments.

The latter are explicitly

introduced into the equations of motion.

The three component total shear forces acting at the hinge of

each blade in the rotating shaft axes are determined by summing

aerodynamic

and inertia forces.

Rotor hub moments are deter-

mined from a combination of the shear forces at the hinges and

moments from the blade hinge restraint.

Total rotor loads are

then obtained by summing all blades and resolving them into

fixed shaft axes. An arithmetic manipulation of these equations

is introduced on these final equations which allows the simula-

tion number of blades to be different from the actual number.

This artifice is intended for use in piloted simulation, where

reducing the number of simulated blades can be used to decrease

computer execution time requirements.

The oscillating nature of the rotor forces and moments make it

expedient to filter their outputs under some circumstances.

A

simple first order filter is used. The final rotor forces and

moments are obtained by transforming the filtered shaft axes

forces and moments into body axes with the origin at the center

of gravity.

These are eventually summed with other component

outputs to give the total external forces and moments at the

center of gravity.

It is necessary to make provision in these final rotor outputs for the option of selecting to run with the engine module in or out. If the engine is selected out, perfect rotor speed governing is assumed and the shaft torque reaction on the airframe is assumed equal to rotor required torque. If the engine module is activated then it's output torque is introduced into the airframe.

Finally, the rotor wake skew angle is dependent parameter used to establish wash on the fuselage and tail.

determined. the variation

It is the of rotor

6

UNITED OGIES

SER-70602

3.1.2

A detailed description of each element of the main rotor model

follows.

It should be noted that the sequencing of the program

flow in the main rotor is critical and should follow the equa-

tion flow presented in Volume I.

Detailed Description of the Main Rotor Module

Blade Geometry

#5.1-12

The geometric definition for the rotor blade is shown in Figure

3.1.2. Many different methods can be chosen for selecting the

segment area distribution.

In this BLACK HAWK simulation, an

equal annulii area approach was chosen for a programmed, auto-

mated set-up. This allows the number of segments to be mini-

mized and distributes them towards the higher dynamic pressure

regions outboard on the blade. The programmed set-up can of

course be inhibited, and any desired distribution

input. The

distribution chosen may not be the best at high advance ratios

(outside the currently defined BLACK HAWK flight envelope) where

significant retreating blade stall is encountered.

The equations presented can be derived from observing that the

normalized rotor disk area is equ@l to_ and that the normalized

blade length is equal to (I-_-_).

,Thus the normalized equal

5.1-13

annulus area is equal to, _,__vS______r_a_+_ ) _ kj _umoer ol _egmenns

It should be noted that the equations defined weight the center

of action of segment forces by the annulus area. Actual segment

area is determined geometrically from the segment mean chord and

segment span. The latter being determined by establishing the

distance from the hinge (assumed to have the same center for

flapping annulii.

and lagging)

to the inboard and outboard

edges of the

Effect of Rotor Blade Weight on CG Position

The Gen Hel blade element rotor; treats each blade as having its

own flapping and lagging degree of freedom.

Each blade is a

separate body which imparts loads on the airframe via the hinge

pins and lag dampers.

The model is arranged such that the

helicopter gross weight and center of gravity (CG) are entered

as input for convience.

Therefore it is necessary to calaulate

actual airframe weight and C.G. before proceeding with the

5.1-13

Foot Note:

# These are page numbers the discussion.

in Volume

I relevent

to

_ UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

ORIGINAL PAG_ IS OF POOR QUALITY

FIGURE 3.1.2 BLADE GEOMETRY DEFINITION

SER-70602

Ir

+ !
I 1
_!

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

kJ

calculation.

All forces and moments, and subsequent motion, are

referred to the compensated weight and center of gravity.

Somewhat inconsistently,

but for convenience,

the airframe

inertia input must be less that component due to the blades.

Accelerations and Velocities at the Rotor Hub in Shaft Axes

Determination

of the loading on the rotor blade requires the

development of the total acceleration and velocity components at

the blade resulting from both airframe and blade motion. These

equations are the first part of a systematic transfer of air-

frame motion in the body axes at the center of gravity, to the

rotor blade, The translational

accelerations

at the rotor hub

can be derived using Appendix A of Reference I. The translational velocities are normalized (using traditional helicopter

analysis practice) by rotor tip speed. Gust component terms are

introduced into these equations.

(These terms are a means of

providing gross gust inputs to the rotor when the more complex

gust penetration algorithm is not required).

The Gust Module

Section details the relationship between the various gust

inputs. The motion determined at the hub in body axes is formed into a fixed set of shaft axes through the shaft inclina-

tion angles i^ and i.. The angular accelerations and rates are

simllarly transforme_.

These axes systems are illustrated on

Figure 3.1.3.

Rotor Shaft Speed Degree of Freedom

5.1-14
5.1.16 5.1-17

Historically,

Helicopter Flight Dynamic Simulation Models have

assumed that rotor shaft speed was constant.

This assumption

was made for computing expediency and to a large extent was

justifiable

for the older heavy rotor systems.

However, with

the trend towards lower weight fraction for the rotor system,

and with the current generation of fuel controls, significant

rotor speed excursions are experienced for some maneuvers.

More

subtle effects are also being experienced with coupling in the

basic aircraft modes, as discussed in Reference 2. The BLACK HAWK rotor model presented has been developed to allow rotor

shaft motion.

Computation

freedom released necessitates

with the rotor shaft degree of the introduction of a fuel control

and engine simulation to close, and stabilize, the rotor shaft

speed loop. For this simulation of BLACK HAWK, a linear, time

varying coefficient model has been developed.

This engine and

fuel control model is described in Section 3.6. The actual

calculation of the rotor shaft speed degree of freedom is performed

in the Engine Module. If the rotor speed degree of freedom is

not required it may be selected out. Rotor speed is then fixed at the trim value and engine torque set equal to the rotor torque.

This allows a torque reaction to be generated on the airframe.

5.6-17 5. I.-36

_
,._j

UTENCITHENDOLOGIES

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.1.3 BODY AXES TO SHAFT AXES TRANSFORMATION

XB' YB' ZB XH, YH, ZH XS, YS, ZS

Body Axes System Hub Axes System Shaft Axes System

10

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

Rotor Azimuth Update

5.1-17

Under normal circumstances, the rotor azimuth update is a direct

function of the actual rotor speed and the integration time

interval, or duty cycle (TIME), chosen for computing the simula-

tion model.

"TIME" should therefore be chosen to meet the

frequency response criteria of the simulation investigation

or

as a minimum, PWIMR_)=

40 ° . The latter requirement

is to

preserve numerical §tability.

Unfortunately,

under real time

operating conditions where "TIME" must equal the total execution

time of the simulation, (or computer cycle time in the case of a

time-shared system) some compromise of the frequency response

requirement is necessary.

An appropriate discussion of real

time operation is given in Reference 3. A software switch is

provided for selecting DELPSR independent

of TIME.

If the

simulation

is being run with this logic set, and TIME

(DELPS/JCg57.3) the implication is that the azimuth update is being scaled, and rotor frequency response will be attenuated. However it may be necessary to run in this mode to achieve

real-time operation.

It should be noted in the equations fied in the range -180___ PSIMR_ aligned over the helicopter's tail.

that PSIMR (_MR) is speci180 with zero _imuth being

k_i Blade Flapping and Lagging Rate and Displacement

5.1-18

The integration algorithm used for developing blade motion is

based on a predictive technique which assumes that blade motion

is periodic.

This assumption is exact at steady state. How-

ever, for Handling Qualities investigations,

and even higher

frequency applications the algorithm is acceptable.

It's use in

the latter case should be validated for the specific applica-

tion. Extensive investigation of this algorithm was undertaken

by NASA Langley.

(Roland Bowles).

Unfortunately,

this work has

not been published.

The major attribute of this method is its

stability, and the necessity to carry only the last pass flap-

ping rate and displacement

along during the calculation.

In

addition this method is able to cope with large rotor azimuth

(_) changes between program iterations, a situation encoun-

ter_ in real time pilot-in-the-loop

applications.

i
II

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED
AB__
The derivation of this algorithm is given below.

SER-70602

w'#/T_
W 12

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED
k._j

SER-70602

' - -0

II

The resulting per blade flapping and lagging angles are summarized for output purposes into First Harmonic Fourier coefficients of flapping and lagging. The flapping coefficients define the unwarped rotor tip path plane and correlate with the resultant thrust and hub moments on the rotor.

Main Rotor Airmass Degree of Freedom

Rotor Airmass degree of freedom modeling, at a level of sophis-

tication appropriate to Flight Dynamics Simulations,

is not well

defined and suffers from a lack of test data with which it can

be validated.

The inflow model presented for the BLACK HAWK

simulation

is formulated

from a combination

of established

theory and weak empirical extrapolation.

This model is primar-

ily based on a prescribed downwash distribution

developed as a

function of rotor loading.

Total downwash at any given blade

segment is made up of three elements.

I° A basic momentum component which results from generating aerodynamic rotor thrust.

. A harmonic momentum component which derives from cyclic aerodynamic hub moment on the rotor disk.

5.1-20
5.1-21 5.1-21

13

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

SER-70602

. A harmonic component due to rotor wake blow-back with increasing forward speed.

The basic component, which can be derived by application of

simple momentum theory to the rotor disk, (See Reference 4)

results in a uniform distribution

as a function of the total

rotor aerodynamic thrust loading. The concept of cyclic components of inflow stems from the fact that any rotor which

produces aerodynamic hub moments, should produce harmonic inflow components, as a result of the reaction of the airflow to these

aerodynamic moments.

These components would not exist for a

centrally hinged rotor in a steady state condition, but, would

exist in the steady state for hingeless rotors or rotors with

hinge offset (which can produce aerodynamic

hub moments).

References 5 and 6 provide varying levels of analytical treat-

ment and experimental

data supporting

the introduction

of

harmonic

terms.

Unfortunately,

the experimental

data deals

entirely with hingeless rotors. The transient characteristics

of both the thrust and moment components are represented by a

first order lag having a time constant of approximately

.I sec

at hover and decreasing with increases in total velocity vector.

The provision, within the BLACK HAWK model, for aerodynamic hub

moment components

for downwash,

was considered

important.

However, at this time it is not possible to justify input data.

Therefore, the input to these terms has been specified to zero.

In addition to the "self induced" effects discussed above, the

other element of harmonic inflow is a cosine component due to

wake blow-back (Glauert downwash factors).

The importance of

this term, to the realistic prediction of lateral flapping at

low speed, was shown in Reference 7. As forward speed increas-

es, the wake of the rotor blows back, and in so during, causes a

redistribution rotor disk.

of the induced downwash longitudinally across the Because of the rotor phasing, this effect is

manifest in changes to lateral flapping and lateral control to trim, especially at low speed. The approach presented for the BLACK HAWK model is to redistribute the thrust induced uniform

downwash, as a function of the cosine of blade azimuth position. Many methods are available for determining the harmonic coeffic-

ient. They all retain a uniform distribution at hover and phase

to a trapizoidal

distribution,

(aligned with the velocity

vector) with increasing

forward speed.

Differences

between

approaches relate to the magnitude of the effect. The algorithm

used in Gen. Hel. tends to result, at high forward speed, in a distribution of zero downwash at the front of the rotor disk and

double the uniform value at the rear. Indications are that this

effect should be stronger in the Gen. Hel. model.

5.1-20 5.1-21 5.1-21
5.1-20

q
14

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

The downwash components discussed above are distributed around

the azimuth to obtain the total segmental downwash velocities

(UPDMR I, components

URDMR T) in rotating blade of doQnwash are ignored.

span axes.

Tangential

A final comment is necessary concerning the total uniform (average) inflow equation (A) relative to the total blade

segment interference velocities.

The latter includes com-

ponents of gust velocity derived from the rotor penetrating a gust front. When the gust velocity is distributed to each

segment during this process a component of velocity is intro-

duced which must be compensated for in the average inflow

equation. An artifice has been created whereby an average gust velocity (over all segments), UGAVMIR, is added to the inflow equation to maintain momentum balance in the airmass

degree of freedom. Further explanation Gust Module Section 3.9.

can be found in the

Blade Segment Velocities

All contributions to the total blade segment velocities airframe translational and rotational velocities, rotor shaft speed, rotor blade motion and rotor interference velocities -

have been previously defined. The blade segment total velocity components are developed in three parts. Those independent of blade segment position, those dependent on segment position and interference effects made up of downwash and gust effects. The velocities at the blade segments are obtained by transforming the fixed shaft vectors into the rotating hub axes system, then transferring them to the blade hinge position, transforming them

into blade span axes through the Euler angles,(flapping)

and_

(lagging) and finally transferring them to the segment position

on the blade. These axes transformations

are illustrated on

figure 3.1.4. (UPMR T, UT_T,

The three orthogonal total velocity vectors URMR T) are used to calculate the resultant

velocity (UYAWHRI),_Iocal Mach No. (MACHFIRT) , yawed angle of attack (AFYWMRI) and the flow yaw angle at_the blade segment. The latter varlables are illustrated on figure 3.1.5. It should be noted that the radial component of velocity is omitted in calculating the Mach Number which is used in the aerodynamic map look-up. Reference 8 which describes the use of simple sweep theory, indicates that Mach Number should be based on the unyawed component of flow.

5.1-21 5.1-21 5.1-22
5.1-23

15
\

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.1.4 SHAFT AXES TO ROTATING BLADE SPAN AXES TRANSFORMATION

_Or /T"

O_

Xs, Ys- Zs Shaft Axes System Xsj, Yst , Z_ Roi_ing Shaft Axes System XBS, YBS, ZBS Blade Span Axes System UT, UR. Up Blade Element Velocities Along
XBS, YB_, ZB$ Respectively and_ar_ _ Euler Angles with _ Rotation about Z_ then_ Ratation About XBS.
Y
16

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

OR|GI_A- PAGE OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.1.5 DEFINITION OF YAWED ANGLE OF ATTACK

mmm

immmb-

o

(JR /

_,M,_o,v_',v;,- ·
17

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

Blade Segment Angle of Attack

The blade segment angle of attack is defined along the yawed direction of the local segment velocity vector as shown on

figure 3.1.5. It is made up of geometric blade pitch angle and

local wind angle of attack.

In turn, geometric blade pitch

angle comprises components due to control input, control geome-

tric configuration,

preformed blade twist and elastic deforma-

tion resulting from rotor loading.

The swash plate impressed blade pitch angle depends on the

control input to collective, 8cuff, lateral cyclic, AIS , and

longitudinal cyclic, BI_. These harmonic components are refer-

enced to rotor azimuth _

= 0) over the tail and displaced by

a swashplate rotation angle."_ The swashplate angle is defined as

positive in the normal body axes system sense (ie for BLACK HAWK

that is opposing the direction of rotor motion, but has a

negative input). Swashplate angle is a means of correcting the

phase response of the articulated rotor with offset hinges such

that body axes orthogonality trols.

is retained by the pilot's con-

5.1-25 5.1-24

Blade pitch/flap coupling, _3' and pitch/lag coupling,_ 1 , can result from blade hinge axis angular offset or from the geome-
tric orientation of the control push rods. Although these terms are retained in the model presented (for completeness sake), they are both nominally equal to zero for the BLACK HAWK helicopter.

The blade segment dynamic twist model is a prescribed, empiri-

cal, representation.

This simplified approach has been intro-

duced as an alternative to a more sophisticated

elastic repre-

sentation, to account for the significant torsional deformation

of the BLACK HAWK rotor blade. Without these terms, collective blade pitch and blade loading will not correlate with test data.

Basically, the technique assumes that blade tip dynamic twist is

a function of total blade loading (independent of blade pitching

moment), and that this tip twist can be distributed along the blade span as a function of the first torsional mode deflection.

The blade loading is harmonically

smoothed by using a first

harmonic fourier filter. The gain coefficients of the fourier

equation are empirically derived.

The BLACK HAWK input data

only specifies a value for the steady term, as a function of

forward speed. As with all empirically not be universally applicable.

derived models they may

The final contribution to blade segment pitch angle is that due

to preformed twist. This is prescribed in terms of a map as a

function of blade segment position.

Some caution is necessary

because of the non-linear tip section, where an unrealistic

5.1-24

18

TECHNOLOGIES _ _U_N_ITVED
A_A[F_

ORIGI:%AL PAGE _.S OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

value of twist could be selected based on the automatic segment

set up algorithm.

This will lead to a bias on collective

and distorted blade loading.

pitch

The blade angle of attack equation is complicated by the re-

quirement to resolve blade pitch angle into the segment local

flow direction

as shown in figure 3.1.5.

Computationally,

information must be retained in the equation to define angle of

attack completely. sented below.

(-180°_c_w_

180). The derivation is pre-

F_o/V _,As_ " 3. J.:5"

/-. 7

= _._,_ _. = _._
'/
m

v
19

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

By manipulation

of this equation and noting that the sign of cos

in tan 8y cos _ is always +VE for ±90 ° then

(' <,<--,- <,<-#

i
J

Blade Segment Lift and Drag Coefficients

The treatment of the blade segment aerodynamic force calculation

is completely

non-linear.

Lift and drag characteristics

are

provided function

for the range -180_y_180.

Bivariate maps, as a

of angle of attack and Mach Number are defined in the

range -30_K_30

allowing good definition of blade stall. The

complete coverage of angle of attack allows good definition of

aerodynamic characteristics

on the retreating blade side of the

rotor disc. This is important at high advance ratios.

The

aerodynamic data input to the lift and drag coefficient m_p is for the SC 1095 airfoil and was derived from two-dimensional

wind tunnel tests. (Reference 9). The two-dimensional

nature of

this data requires the development of an artifice to allow it

to be used in a three dimensional environment.

It is generally

accepted that blade segment lift coefficient can be determined

by applying simple sweep theory to the unyawed blade aerodynamic data.

5.1-5!
through 5.1-56

This theory is rigorously applied in the linear lift range where

the entry to the unyawed lift coefficient is transformed by the

cosine of the yaw angle (i.e._<TW_H R =6_ COS_ and the entry

Mach Number is a function of the _wed

component of flow. At

higher angles of attack some liberties are taken where sweep

theory is not valid. These steps are taken to avoid discontin-

uities in blade lift data as the blade proceeds around the

azimuth.

Discontinuities

can result in an unstable flapping and

lagging solution.

The application

of sweep theory to the

v

20

UNITED

GIES

SER-70602

determination

of drag is not well established.

For this model,

drag is determined by entering the drag map data with the actual

yawed angle of attack.

As previously noted a development

of

sweep theory can be found in Reference 8. Sikorsky evaluations

of this theory, as applied to rotors, are documented ence 10.

in Refer-

The logic which controls the transformation

of the calculated

value of yawed angle of attack, for entry into the aerodynamic

map, is developed in the equations.

Three ranges are defined

for angles of attack greater and less than zero. Essentially,

these ranges represent the low angle of attack linear range, a

high angle of attack linear range and a center range determined

by stall angle of attack.

5.1-26

The loss of lift at the tip of the blade is accounted for by

factoring the lift coefficient obtained from the maps. For

BLACK HAWK, it is assumed that the blade span out to 97_ radius

is effective lifting surface.

Segments straddling this point

or beyond are appropriately factored. Drag coefficient passes

unmodified for all segments except for the addition of a delta

profile drag component.

5.1-27

It has been assumed in defining the blade aerodynamics

that

Reynolds Number effects and unsteady flow are of secondary

k_1

, importance and can be ignored.

This may not be justifiable

under all operating conditions.

Blade Aerodynamic Shears

5.1-28

The aerodynamic force coefficients previously determined wind axes system are transformed to blade span axes and sionalized to force units. These forces are then summed

in the dimenacross

blade segment to obtain aerodynamic shear forces at the blade

hinge.

Subsequently,

these forces are resolved into rotating

shaft axes. It should be noted that flapping and lagging blade

angles are Euler angles and order of treatment must be observed.

Blade Aerodynamic Moments About the Hin_

Blade Aerodynamic hinge moments are developed for each segment

from the segment forces and corresponding lift centers and then

summed across the blade segments.

(It is important to note that

flapping motion because of angle definition is taking place in

the YR_

ZRN plane.) The flapping moment is then resolved into

fixed-Nhaft_xes

for use in the determination of the aerodynamic

harmonic moment components, of the inflow model.

21

k_i

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

Blade Lag Damper Kinematics

The blade inplane or lagging motion is restrained by a damper

system.

In the case of BLACK HAWK the attachment points are

such that the damper straddles the hinge, and is mounted out of

the plane of zero flapping.

It is also offset from the blade

pitch axes. The kinematics of the damper are therefore compli-

cated by this geometry, and the damper experiences motion due to

blade pitch and flap, in addition to lag. A generalized representation of this geometry is given on figure 3.1.6. The axial

velocity of the damper is determined by tracking the position of

the blade attachment relative to the fixed point on the rotor hub. From this information, an instantaneous axial displacement

of the damper strut is obtained.

The axial velocity of the

damper is then determined based on the change in displacement

since the last pass. It should be noted that the blade pitch

contribution

to the motion is referenced to the cuff. (i.e.

blade pitch less twist).

The resulting axial velocity of the

damper is used to enter the damper map from which axial damper

force is obtained.

The force-velocity

characteristics

of the damper are complex

and highly non-linear.

For these reasons the damper is repre-

sented empirically.

The damper characteristics

presented, were

determined from BLACK HAWK test data, Reference II. These data

were obtained by stroking a damper at various frequencies and

displacements typically encountered during flight. The results

showed the force-velocity

characteristics

to be somewhat a

function of frequency as might be expected.

It was assumed for

this BLACK HAWK model that the damper could be represented by

the first harmonic frequency.

The implication being, that any

energy generated at other frequencies will be ignored. Support

for this assumption is derived from the fact that the BLACK HAWK

ground resonance mode and rotor torsional mode (both dependent

on the lag damper characteristics) model.

are representative

for this

A simple flapping restraint equation is introduced into the

model for completeness

sake. However, for BLACK HAWK the

flapping restraint from the elastomeric bearing is negligible

and the input coefficients

for this equation are set to zero.

It should be noted that because of the damper geometry a compon-

ent of damper force will be experienced about the flapping

hinge.

5.1-30

22

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

-_
OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.1.6 LAG DAHPER KINEHATIC GEOMETRY

(XYZ)LoHR Lag Damper Axes XLDMR Aligned with the blade span and (Y,Z)LDMR rotated through eLDMR
23

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

Blade Flapping and Lagging Degrees of Freedom.

The individual

rotor blades in the Gen Hel simulation are

treated as separate bodies which are attached to the hub with

hinge pins in the flapping and lagging motion planes.

Each

blade, therefore has its own degrees of freedom, which are

coupled to the airframe.

That is, airframe motion is impressed

on the root end of the blades and in turn blade forces and

moments are transmitted into the airframe.

The rigid blade flapping and lagging motion equations provided

in this model are defined to take place about hinges which are co-located at a point offset from the center of rotation of the

rotor. The contributions the external aerodynamic mass and inertia moments.

to the flapping and lagging motion are and hinge restraint moments and the The inertia and mass moments arise as

a result of airframe motion, blade motion and shaft rotational

motion.

It is important to note that because flapping and

lagging angles are Euler angles, the motion in these two degrees

of freedom is not orthogonal.

Therefore, in the lagging equa-

tion the external forces derived in blade span axes must be

resolved into the intermediate plane of lag motion. This is not

true of the flapping degree of freedom.

I.E. for the lag

equation.

The derivations

of the flapping and lagging equations are

lengthy and are not presented in this report. The final equa-

tions presented (inertia terms) are essentially the same as

those given in Reference 12 and validated in Reference 13. It

should be noted that some small terms have been eliminated.

A

software provision to inhibit the lagging degree of freedom has

been incorporated.

If the lag motion is inhibited then rotor

torque must be transferred 5.1-35 of Volume I.

across the hinge as indicated

on page

Shears at the Hinge

The same inertia forces which create moments about the hinges

in the equations discussed above also result in inertia shear

forces acting on the hinge pins. The derivation of the shear

forces is essentially the same as for the moments.

The total

shear force at the hinge of each blade is obtained by summing

the inertia forces with the aerodynamic forces.

Total Rotor Forces and Moments

The total rotor forces in the fixed shaft axes system obtained by first resolving the three orthogonal components blade root shears into these axes and then summing over

are of

5.1-33

24

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

all the blades. Total rotor huh moments are obtained in a

similar manner.

The pitch and roll hub moments are made up

(mostly) of shears acting on the hinge pins offset from the

center of rotation.

The yawing moment, (the torque connotation

is retained in the equations) is made up mainly of the lag

damper contribution.

5.1-35

An arithmetic manipulation is introduced on the final equations which allows the simulated number of blades to be different from

the actual number. This artifice is intended for use in piloted

simulation where computer execution time must be minimized.

In

applying this artifice, the assumption is that three blades are

sufficient to define the (first harmonic) tip path plane and that based on disk theory the number of blades can be factored to obtain the total rotor loads.

With the lagging degree of freedom operating, the major portion

of rotor torque is developed through the lag dampers.

There-

fore, if the lagging degree of freedom is inhibited, an alterna-

tive equation containing the aerodynamic moment must be intro-

duced as specified in the equations.

5.1-35

Main Rotor Force and Moment Output Filter

The oscillating nature of the rotor forces and moments make it

expedient

to smooth, or average, these outputs under some

k_J

circumstances.

These normal harmonic variations are antagonis-

tic to the helicopter simulation trimming process, both in terms

of seeking a solution, and in terms of the tolerance check for

the trimmed solution.

This is especially true when the simu-

lated helicopter approaches the boundaries of operation, where

the amplitudes of the oscillations become large. Also, in many

situations, computing efficiency can be improved by increasing

"TIME". This will allow a faster valid trim, but some means of

eliminating

the consequence

"noise" must be introduced.

Finally, for the purpose of categorizing and comparing trimmed

helicopter conditions (print-out) consistently,

it is necessary

to suppress the oscillations.

The method used in Gen. Hel. is

to pass the rotor forces and moments through a first order lag

5.1-36

Other more complex techniques can be applied.

The first order

lag is used because of it's simplicity and direct application.

This lag must be removed when the simulation is being executed

in the dynamic (compute) mode. The exception to this rule is in

the unique circumstance

of a marginal real time simulation,

where the number of blades have been artificially

reduced to

minimze computer execution time. Here it may be necessary to

suppress erroneous 'N' per rev. oscillations.

A more detailed discussion of helicopter presented in Section 4. of this report.

simulation

trimming is

25

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

kJ
Final Rotor Force and Moment Outputs.

The final rotor forces and moments are obtained by transforming the filtered shaft axes forces and moments into body axes with

the origin at the center of gravity.

These final main rotor

module outputs are eventually summed with other module component

outputs to give the total external forces and moments at the

center of gravity.

5.1-36

It is necessary to make provision in these final rotor equations for the option of selecting to run with the engine module in or out. If the engine is suppressed, perfect rotor speed governing is assummed and the shaft torque reaction on the airframe is assummed equal to rotor required torque. If the engine module is activated then its output torque is introduced into the airframe.

5.1-36

The motivation the bandwidth

for inhibiting the engine module is to decrease

of the simulation and corresponding

computer

requirements.

With the rotor degree of freedom being computed

there is an impact on simulation numerical stability and rotor

azimuth update increment_M

R. (or "TIME") Therefore, caution

should be exercised in sel_cting to run with or without the

rotor speed degree of freedom.

Careful consideration should be

given to the analysis task being undertaken.

A different heli-

copter simulation response will be experienced, especially in

yaw, with engine in or out, depending on the maneuver.

(Refer-

ence 2) However, this may not be important to the task at hand

and the tradeoff of larger rotor azimuth update magnitudes

(increased "TIME") may be acceptable.

Evidently any maneuver

which tends to drive main rotor torque to a negative value will be erroneous without the engine module, since under these

circumstances, the rotor clutch would have disengaged.

Rotor Wake Skew Angle.

In this simulation the rotor wake skew angle is defined as the

angle that the centerline of the rotor wake makes relative to

the normal to the tip path plane (longitudinally).

This para-

meter is used to establish the variation of rotor wash on the

fuselage and empennage as a function of rotor thrust and forward

speed.

Basically,

rotor wake angle is used to relate the

magnitude of the rotor wash and the geometric proximity of an aircraft component to the centerline of the wake (See Figure

3.1.7) as implemented

in this simulation the rotor wash is

normalized by the downwash at the rotor disk. It is derived

from a Sikorsky Reference 14.

off-line

computer

program

(DWSHT) based on

5.1-37

26

TECHNOLOG|ES
_ U_(N_IT:_E_D .

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.1.7 DEFINITION OF ROTOR WAKE SKEW ANGLE

/
/

_,_ _7"_,_ _v',_"

27

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

SER-70602

kJ
FUSELAGE MODULE

3.2.2

Overview of the Fuselage Module

The fuselage is defined by six component non-linear aerodynamic

characteristics

which have been derived from BLACK HAWK Quarter

Scale Wind Tunnel Tests. These data have been extended to high

angles analytically to cover flight at low speed and hover. The

angles of attack and sideslip, used to enter the aerodynamic

maps, are developed from the free stream plus wash effects from

the main rotor. These rotor interference velocity effects are a

function of rotor thrust and forward speed. Care has been taken

to make the longitudinal

degrees of freedom representative

throughout the forward flight envelope.

The lateral/directional

characteristics

are representative

for all speeds except side

flight close to zero forward speed. It is not considered within

the scope of this model to define the complex aerodynamic

characteristics

at high angle of attack in combination with

large sideslip angles. In any event, in this regime dynamic

pressure is low and flight is dominated by the rotors. Caution

is therefore advised, if this model is used for side flight at

high sideward speed.

Detailed Description of the Fuselage Model

The major elements of the fuselage simulation module are pre-

sented in block diagram form on figure 3.2.]. This module

calculates the aerodynamic forces on the fuselage resulting from

the total velocity vectors at the center of gravity. The model

is essentially

the same as would be used for a fixed-wing

aircraft with the notable exception of the rotor wash. The

formulation of the model assumes that the aerodynamic forces and

moments act at a single point, and are functions of angle of

attack and sideslip angle developed at that point, from the

total body axes components of velocity.

It is also assumed for

computing expediency that velocities acting at the center of

gravity can be used directly, thus angular rates are ignored.

Rotor Wash on the Fuselage.

The effects of rotor wash on the fuselage have been treated in

average terms. No attempt has been made to determine the local

flow under the rotor disk and apply it to an elemental analysis

of the fuselage.

Thus, variations in local velocity have been

ignored and the downwash from the rotor is developed for a

single point and summed with the free stream. This approach

provides the essential effects of more interference velocity

with increased rotor load, and varies as the rotor forward speed

changes. Provision has been made in the model for three compon-

ents of rotor wash on the fuselage. For the BLACK HAWK, input

5.2-5

28

_ UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

ORIGINAL _'/%G__._ OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.2.1 FUSELAGE EQUATION FLOW DIAGRA_I

r.,-_ Q,p wTb

.A

- "7-

J,wv, D ,,_x,f.5

!

I "v4"°_
I

II If'_/'a,cFI"I

· L/_,_J_F

z._,,, .=_.e.,_ /

,,_ll4_ ,I_,,/,_,_T

I

29

UNITED TECHNOLOG|ES

SER-70602

data is only available for the longitudinal and vertical compon-

ents. As previously discussed in Section 3.1.2 the wash compon-

ents are normalized by the downwash in the plane of the main

rotor and are a function of rotor wake skew angle and

longitudinal flapping. The rotor wash data was obtained from

the Sikorsky wake analysis program (DWSHT) based on Reference

14. It should be noted that rotor wash data is not provided to

cover rearward or sideward flight.

In the case of rearward

flight the value at/)_= 0 is retained.

Angle of Attack and Sideslip

The angle of attack and sideslip are derived from the body axes

components of velocity.

These comprise the components of

flight path velocity, gust components and rotor wash. The

definition of the angles are those used in the wind tunnel.

That is, angle of attack is the geometric pitch angle subtended

by the model relative to tunnel axis at zero yaw angle. It does

not change with yaw angle. Angle of sideslip, equal to minus

yaw, is defined as yaw table angle in the horizontal plane of

the tunnel, irrespective of angle of attack. It should be noted

that these angles are not Euler angles. It should also be noted

that angle of attack and sideslip are only defined in the range

±90 ° . Fuselage aerodynamic data is not available for rearward

flight.

However, to avoid discontinuities

near hover the

absolute value of Vxb is used. This together with the square

root in the sideslip definition implies that during rearward

flight the aerodynamics

of the fuselage are derived from the

corresponding

forward flight case.

These assumptions

are

justified, based on the fact that near hover, fuselage dynamic

pressures are low and the rotors dominate the flight character-

istics.

Caution should be exercised if large rearward or

sideward airspeeds are comtemplated.

Fuselage Aerodynamic Loads

The fuselage aerodynamic characteristics

used in this module are

specific to the BLACK HAWK helicopter.

The six component force

and and moment parameters (ft 2 and ft 3 units respectively) are

presented in wind axes as a function of angle of attack and wind tunnel yaw angle (equal to -/ON_. The data has not been gener-

alized in any way and is derived from Quarter Scale Wind Tunnel

Tegts documented in References 15, 16 and 17. Approximately 2.5 ft- of drag was added as a bias to the wind tunnel data to

approximate the measured drag on the aircraft, based on perform-

ance calculations.

The data was also faired to smooth out

anomalies, and the side force, rolling moment and yawing moment

were made symmetrical

as would be expected with rotors and

empennage off. The small effects of angle of attack on rolling moment, yawing moment and sideforce have been ignored. Fuselage

5.2-20
5.2-22 through
5.2-37

30

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

_..j"
angular velocity damping components are provided for. The data

obtained from these wind tunnel tests up to post stall condi-

tions was extended to ±90 ° to cover the low speed flight re-

gimes. Near hover, the most important forces (tail off) are the

vertical drag and side force which can be estimated fairly

accurately.

Longitudinal aerodynamic coupling with sideslip is

provided for over a limited range, which covers angles likely to

be experienced at higher speeds and dynamic pressures.

The wind axes normalized force and moment coefficients are

transformed into body axes and transferred from the wind tunnel

model mounting point to the fuselage center of gravity position.

Forces and moments are obtained by multiplying

by dynamic

pressure.

Because of the definitions of angle of attack and

sideslip the transformation

equations give invalid body axes

forces and moments when these angles both approach 90 °. Again

as previously discussed caution must be exercised in extracting data for side flight if the lateral speed is high.

5.2-9

To avoid problems during pilot-in-the-loop

simulation, filters

are presented which fade out the transformation and introduce

fixed body axes parameters, estimated specifically for hover and

low speed flight.

5.2-10

EMPENNAGE MODULE

3.3.2

Overview of the Empennage Model

The aerodynamics of the empennage are treated separately from

the forward airframe.

This separate formulation allows good

definition of non-linear tail characteristics

that would other-

wise be lost in the simplifications

of multivariate total air-

craft maps. With this approach, changes to the empennage can be

made without reloading basic airframe maps.

The aerodynamic

characteristics

are defined by non-linear lift and drag coeffi-

cients as a function of local angle of attack. These angles of attack are developed from the free stream velocity, plus rotor

wash and fuselage wash. Dynamic pressure effects from the air-

frame are accounted for by factoring the free stream velocity

components.

The interference

effects are introduced as non-

linear maps as a function of fuselage angle of attack and side-

slip. All aerodynamic characteristics

are analytically extra-

polated to 90 ° angle of attack. The simulation of the empennage

is representative

in all flight regimes.

Detailed Description of the Empennage Model

The major elements of the empennage simulation module are presented in block diagram form on figure 3.3.1. This module calculates the aerodynamic forces on the horizontal and vertical

k_/ 31

_
k_1

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

ORIGINAL PP,GT. f3 OF POOR QUALITY

FIGURE 3.3.1 EMPENNAGE EQUATION FLOW

SER-70602

[_ ,i gJ,=,,,
di,va_f:
p,-

F-
1
t

32

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

tail surfaces resulting from the local airflow.

The component

velocities are derived at, and the aerodynamic forces assumed to

act at the panel center of pressure.

The empennage can experi-

ence aerodynamic

interference

effects

from many sources.

Components of flow from the main rotor and fuselage are defined

for this model. Although the calculation of the horizontal and

vertical panel forces are separated in Volume I, the following

paragraphs will discuss them in combination.

Local Velocities at the Empennage

Provision has been made in this model for three components of

rotor wash at the tail. For BLACK HAWK, data is currently

available for only the vertical and longitudinal flow compon-

ents. In addition, the vertical tail is assummed to experience the same interference valocities as the horizontal tail. As in

the case of the fuselage, rotor wash velocity components, nor-

malized by the downwash at the main rotor disk, are developed as

a function of rotor wake skew angle and longitudinal

rotor

flapping.

This data was derived from Sikorsky's program DWSHT,

based on Reference fuselage.

14, in a similar manner to that for the

5.3-5 5.3-9 5.3-24
-25

The downwash and sidewash from the fuselage are presented as a

function of fuselage angle of attack and wind tunnel yaw angle

respectively.

This data was based on unpowered tail on/tail off

%_._j;
wind tunnel test data, documented in References 15, 16 and 17.

Interference cross flow components were ignored, as in

typical fixed-wing practice.

In the calculation of the actual

5.3-6

interference velocities, downwash and sidewash angles are

5.3-I0

assumed to be small. The resulting velocities are delayed to

account for the time taken by the airflow to reach the tail.

The dynamic pressure loss at the tail surfaces, resulting from

fuselage/rotor

hub blockage, is derived empirically such that,

wind tunnel data synthesized from the simulation compares to

the original tail on test data. Data is provided as a function

of fuselage angle of attack and wind tunnel yaw angle for the

horizontal and vertical tail respectively.

It is evident that the wash from the tail rotor will have some

interference effect on the empennage.

This effect has not been

quantified for the BLACK HAWK and has not been introduced into the model. It will be noted, however, that the model has been

formulated to allow easy introduction of additional interference

components at a later time.

5.3-7 5.3-26 5.3-33

k.J 33

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

The local velocity components at the tail surfaces are made up

of contributions from the basic body axes translational and

angular velocities, gust effects, rotor wash and fuselage down-

wash and sidewash.

The loss of dynamic pressure, due to block-

age by the fuselage/rotor

hub, is introduced by factoring the

components of the free stream and fuselage wash terms. Angular

velocity components are assumed to be unaffected by blockage.

The actual local dynamic pressure is calculated from the result-

ant local velocity vectors.

This approach allows a more repre-

sentative definition of dynamic pressure at low speeds where

downwash from the rotor predominates the flow at the tail. The

local angle of attack on the horizontal and vertical tail panels

are calculated using the local velocity vectors.

The same

definition of angles is used as for the fuselage.

In the case

of the vertical tail, angle of attack has the same connotation

as sideslip. The definitions of these angles and tail incidence

angles are illustrated on figure 3.3.2.

Empennage Aerodynamic Loads

The lift and drag characteristics

for the tail surfaces are

based on isolated tail test data , Reference 15, and Reference

5.3-29,30 31,32

18. The latter Reference was used to compensate the wind tunnel

isolated tail data for the changes in the size of the horizontal

tail following the wind tunnel tests. The trailing edge of the

k_/ vertical tail was also modified after the tests. Only a small portion of trailing edge was retained and it's camber was

reduced to 7 degrees.

Reference 19 was used to analytically

modify the test data. Tail panel moments about their own axes

are not accounted for. The isolated tail aerodynamics

are

analytically

extrapolated

to ±90 ° angle of attack.

As for the

fuselage, in rearward flight, the tail aerodynamic data look-up

will use the corresponding values for forward flight. The lift

and drag forces in local wind axes are resolved into body axes

at the tail. Finally, the component forces at the empennage,

are transferred

to the center of gravity together with the

corresponding moments.

TAlL ROTOR MODULE

Overview of the Tail Rotor Module

The BLACK HAWK canted tail rotor is represented in this simula-

tion by the linearized,

Bailey theory, closed-form,

model.

Terms in tip speed greater than squared have been eliminated.

The local airflow encountered by the tail rotor is developed in

a similar manner to those for the empennage.

Corrections for

tail rotor pitch/flap coupling and blockage due to the proximity

of the vertical tail have been introduced into the basic Baily model. This model does not account for stall effects and there

34

_
k_/

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

ORIGINAL PAGE i3 OF POOR QUALITY

FIGURE 3.3.2 EMPENNAGE AXES SYSTEM

SER-70602

I
. k,_.)

. __

C_

,,_,,_'o,,w",e'l.. ";",._,(..

|
k._" 35

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

3.4.2

is no treatment of the reverse flow at high speed. Further

assumptions can be found in References 4 and 20. The model

presented calculates thrust which is considered to be the only

significant output from the tail rotor. However, there is an

increasing awareness for the need to introduce a torque calcu-

lation (for power train) and a longitudinal flapping calculation

which would allow tilting direction.

of the thrust vector

in the drag

Detailed Description of the Tail Rotor Module

This module calculates the thrust force, generated by a canted

tail rotor, resulting from blade pitch control input and local

airflow.

The tail rotor is represented by a simplified, closed

form Bailey solution as developed in Reference 20. The major

elements of this model are presented in block diagram form on

figure 3.4.1. The orientation of the axes system has been de-

fined such that the main rotor blade element analysis may be

inserted as an alternative module, if dictated by the level of

sophistication of the analysis.

Local Velocities at the Tail Rotor

Interference effects at the tail rotor have been defined in a

similar manner to those for the vertical tail. The main rotor

wash characteristics

are assumed to be equivalent to those for

the horizontal tail. Sidewash and downwash components are those

defined for the vertical and horizontal tail respectively.

The

dynamic pressure loss due to the main rotor hub and fuselage are

assumed equal to that for the vertical tail. These approximations are considered acceptable and provide some simplification of the simulation.

The airflow, in body axes, impinging on the tail rotor is devel-

oped from the free stream, body angular rate effects, gust velocities and the previously discussed interference effects.

The three component,

summed velocities,

are then resolved

through the cant angle into tail rotor shaft axes as defined on

figure 3.4.2. These velocities speed to make them consistent

are normalized by tail rotor tip with the normal Bailey equation

formulation.

The Bailey theory equation is normally presented

as the thrust coefficient in terms of the 't' coefficients.

It

should be noted that the equations have been manipulated to

obtain an expression for downwash as shown below. This was

found to be necessary to obtain an unconditionally

stable solu-

tion. It is important that program flow follows the equation

flow for a stable tail rotor solution.

5.4-4,5 5.4-6
5.4-7

36

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL pAGE |S OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.4.1 TAIL ROTOR EQUATION FLOW DIAGRAM

('',IY ,',zJ_

I -_,'-qP_ 7"=, [

_,,,¢.,.,..r_ _

._,,,,,_v.._,/_..i¢ I -

,'t"'='¢_,'_ / "+'=<"'=" I

37

_ _J

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

ORIGINAL p_,GE 13 OF pOOR QUALITY

FIGURE 3.4.2 TAIL ROTOR ,AXES SYSTEM

SER-70602

,_S_ _5 I
11

l
"

.kr-_

_-:_

f

X_

ZTxy

i_

WLT,_

A

38

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

ORIGINAL PAGE iS OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

d'- _i.
F,,<+.l )

i' AdT _ . :r'a
t'9

+ ,,,

Now Dw can be solved based on a last pass value of _ from which

a new value of A can be obtained.

Thus

The bailey equations have not been changed but just manipulated

in a manner which allows for a stable sequential thrust.

computation

of

Tail Rotor Blade Pftch

In order to obtain the actual tail rotor collective pitch (STR) for the BLACK HAWK, it is necessary to modify the Bailey equa-

tions to account for blade pitch/flap

coupling (_S). This

coupling reduces blade pitch impressed by the controE system.

The Bailey model does not introduce blade flapping and therefore

some artifice must be used to obtain the effects of _3. The approach taken in this model, is to establish an empzrical,

linear relationship between tail rotor coning and thrust. This

then allows the determination

of flapping (and _q effects) from

the instantaneous

value of thrust developed _n the rotor.

Linear blade twist effects are accounted tion.

for in the basic equa-

5.4-7

v
39

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

Tail Rotor Thrust

The tail rotor thrust equation is developed in a modified form

as a function of d6wnwash.

This follows from the previous dis-

cussion of the downwash equation.

The thrust equation incor-

porates factors for accounting for changes in rotor shaft speed

and vertical tail proximity blockage.

At low forward speed

significant thrust losses due to blockage are experienced, these effects wash out with increasing forward speed. The blockage

correction model presented is empirically derived and based on test data. The tail rotor thrust is finally transformed into

body axes and the forces and moments transferred to the center

of gravity of the airframe.

FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM MODULE

Overview of Flisht Control System
The flight control system for BLACK HAWK presented in this module covers the primary Mechanical Control System and the Automatic Flight Control System (AFCS). The AFCS consists of three major subsystems; analog stability augmentation system, digital AFCS, and the stabilator system. These control functions collectively enhance the stability and control characteristics of the BLACK HAWK and maintain desired attitude, speed and heading. A detailed description of the AFCS can be found in Reference 21 and 22.

Flight Control System Description

This description of the BLACK HAWK Flight Control System is

presented

to provide background

information

and aid in the

understanding of the simulation of the control system. Care has

been taken to make the simulation representative,

however, some

secondary functional differences may exist.

The flight control system defined in
comprised of the following elements. order of flow for the simulation.

this simulation model is They are listed in the

a) Sensors

b) Stability Augmentation System (SAS)

c) Pitch Bias Actuator (PBA)

d) Flight Path Stabilization

(FPS)

e) Mechanical Controls (mixer, actuator, etc.)

f) Stabilator

g) Trim System

The functional relationship of these elements can be identified on the simplified diagrams presented on figures 3.5.1 and 3.5.2.

5.4-8

40

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.5.1 FLIGHT CONTROLS SIMPLIFIED BLOCK DIAGRAM

COCXPIT CONTROLS

PILOT ASSIST $ERVOS

I

i
CYCLIC PITCH
, ROLL

TRIM i _

TRIM I

"I"_ BOOST _-

I J

MIXER

MAIN ROTOR (PRIMARY) SERVOS

ov__o
T 0 R

41

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES
AO__
FIGURE 3.5.2 AFCS SIMPLIFIED BLOCK DIAGRAM

SER-70602

CONTROL FPLAIGNHETL

)

SAS/FPS

COMPUTER
oo...o-r,!-ypf

ACTUATORS TRIM

t SENSORS I SENSORS

STABILATOR CONTROL AMPL #2
$TABILATOR CONTROL AMPL #1

STABILATOR ACTUATORS

I SENSORS I

$AS AMPLIFIER

42

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

k_1

3.5.2

A more detailed understanding of the way in which these elements interact in each individual control channel can be obtained from

figures 3.5.3, 3.5.4, 3.5.5 and 3.5.6 taken from Reference 23.

These figures present diagramatic representations

of the col-

lective, pitch, roll, and yaw control channels respectively.

It is appropriate to note at this time those elements which are

not represented in the simulation.

The boost servos and primary

servos shown on Figure 3.5.1 are not represented.

In the latter

case this is becuase the swashplate transformations

are bypassed

for simplification.

The servo dynamics are however, included as

shaping of the blade pitch inputs. The trim system function is

important to pilot-in-the-loop

simulation, but has no signifi-

cance when the the simulation is being used in an open loop

(analysis) mode.

Therefore,

it is not defined within the

control system section (5.5) of Volume I, but in the final

section (6.0) of Volume I which specifies the cockpit interface

with the pilot.

Detailed Description of the Flight Control System Module

A detailed description of the Flight Control System and the corresponding simulation representation is given below.

a) Sensors. These are the helicopter motion transducers which

provide feedback input to the AFCS. They are repre-sented

in the simulation by high frequency second order transfer

functions which match the manufacturers specification for

the component.

Signal conditioning (6-7 hz First Order

Filter) is applied to all sensor outputs.

b) Stability Augmentation System (SAS). This system provides

three-axis rate damping and pseudo attitude retention.

It

enhances the basic helicopter stability about the pitch,

roll and yaw axes using rate and lagged rate feedback.

A

7sec and 2sec washout of the ra£e damping signal is incor-

porated in the pitch and yaw channels respectively to prevent saturation during a steady turn. The yaw lagged rate

feedback only functions below 60 knots, so as not to counter the coordinated turn feature which is active at speeds

greater than 60 knots. The feedbacks applied to the yaw

channel for turn coordination above 60 kts, are roll rate

and lagged lateral acceleration.

The SAS is a dual system with one subsystem controlled by

the analog SAS amplifier and one subsystem controlled by

the digital SAS/FPS computer.

(figure 3.5.2) Both SAS

subsystem command signals drive a single SAS actuator in

each axis. During normal operation with both SAS engaged,

each provides one-half of system nominal gain and one-half

5.5-6
5.5-7 -8 -9

43

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.5.3 UH-60A BLACK HAWK COLLECTIVE FLIGHT CONTROLS BLOCK DIAGRA/_!

MIXING UNIT

2ND STAGE PRI SERVO

SWASHPLATE

COLLECllVE ST1CX

COIL BOOST SERVO

1ST STAGE PRI SERVO
CABLES
2ND STAGE 1ST STAGE TAIL ROTOR SERVO

44

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.5.4 UH-60A BLACK HAWK PITCH FLIGHT CONTROLS BLOCK DIAGRAM

-- SPRING
PITCH TRIM SERVO

PITCH
BOOST SERVO

PITCH BIAS ACTUATOR

2ND STAGE 1ST STAGE

FWD OR AFT PRISERVO REF

45

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED
_0__

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.5.5 UH-60A BLACK HAWK ROLL FLIGHT CONTROLS BLOCK DIAGRAm!

TRIM ACTUATOR

/
CYCUC A

·

SAS

2ND STAGE

r---I

" L.__I MIXING UNIT

1ST STAGE

SWASHPLATE

46

TECHNOLOGIES _ _U[N__ITVED
FIGURE 3.5.6 UH-60A BLACK HA_Z YAW FLIGHT CONTROLS BLOCK DIAGRAM

SER-70602

TRIM ACTUATOR

MIXING UNIT

2ND STAGE PR! SERVO

SWASHPLATE

YAW BOOST SERVO

1ST STAGE PRI SERVO
r
CABLES
2ND STAGE 1ST STAGE TAIL ROTOR SERVO

47

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

of total system control authority.

The control authority

of each is electrically

limited to ±5 percent of total

control travel in pitch, roll, and yaw. SAS inputs to the

SAS servo valves are additive to provide a total authority

of I0 percent. The sum is limited to ±I0 percent authority

by mechanical

limits of SAS actuator travel.

These two

channels can be selected separately on the Automatic Flight

Control Panel, Figure 3.5.7. If one channel is selected

off because of a failure, gain in the 'ON' channel is

doubled but the authority remains at ±5%.

c) Pitch Bias Actuator (PBA). The PBA is an integral part of

the BLACK HAWK control system.

The pilot has no control

switch for this system in the cockpit. The purpose of the

PBA is to improve the apparent static longitudinal

sta-

bility for the aircraft through attitude and airspeed

feedback. The PBA is, in effect, a variable length control

rod which changes the relationship between longitudinal

cyclic control and swashplate tilt, as a function of flight

parameters.

The attitude feedback covers the entire speed

envelope.

The airspeed feedback is only active between 80

and 180 knots.

Below 80 knots, the high gain of the

stabilator

airspeed

feedback,

performs

the stability

function.

In addition to the attitude and airspeed feed-

back, pitch rate feedback is also present. Hence, there is

also position feedback to the longitudinal

stick propor-

tional to pitch rate. The authority of the PBA is 15

percent of longitudinal cyclic full throw and is limited by

the computer to a maximum rate of 3 percent per second.

The functional relationship of the PBA relative to the rest of the control system can be seen on Figures 3.5.1, 3.5.2 and 3.5.4. PBA shaping is derived in the digital computer.

d) Flight path Stabilization

(FPS). The FPS system provides

the BLACK HAWK with outer loop stabilization through the

pedals and the longitudinal and lateral stick trim actua-

tors, as shown on figure 3.5.2. In addition, the FPS con-

tains a coordinated turn feature which complements the SAS

at speeds above 60 knots.

The FPS can drive the cockpit control to any position to

which the pilot/copilot can trim the controls, resulting in

a 100-percent FPS parallel control authority.

The AFCS

limits the rate of FPS within the maximum override force

limits stated in the trim system section. Since FPS inputs drive the cockpit controls through the trim actuators, the TRIM must be ON in order to have FPS. The attitude hold

function of the FPS is designed to maintain pitch and roll

attitude, plus a desired heading.

If TRIM is off the FPS

5.5-I0
5.5-11 -12 -13

48

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.5.7 AUTOMATIC FLIGHT CONTROL PANEL

$TABILATOR CONTROLS

MAN SLEW UP

_ TEST

AUTO CONTROL

F DN

- AUTO FUGHT CONTROL

SAS !

SAS 2

TRIM

FPS

"_

BOOST

FAILURE RESET

L-POWER ON _ET-I
ii i

49

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

synchronizers are in a track mode and zero error is output.

Thus, if the pilot wishes to change trim he can establish a

new condition,then

disengage TRIM, (which releases the

force) then re-engage to have the new trim condition

maintained by the FPS. At speeds above 30 knots the pitch

axis of the FPS seeks to maintain the airspeed for which

the trim attitude has been established.

When the reference

pitch attitude is changed, a time delay in the airspeed hold function allows time to stabilize at the new trim

airspeed, prior to initiating the airspeed hold function. During this time the attitude hold function maintains the

pilot-selected pitch attitude.

The FPS presented in the Flight Control module identifies

the FPS switch, the 30 kts speed switch and the turn switch. These functions are desirable when using the model

in an open loop analysis mode. When the simulation is

developed for pilot-in-the-loop

investigation the synchron-

izers must be linked to the trim switch.

The FPS is

activated by the pilot through a switch on the AFCS panel.

(figure 3.5.7)

e) Mechanical Controls.

The mechanical control system (essen-

tially control mixing) of BLACK KAWK is shown in diagram-

atic form on Figure 3.5.8. It is designed to re duce pilot

work load by mechanically coupling the controls to account

for natural single rotor helicopter coupling responses to

given control inputs. The following control couplings are

incorporated.

I, Collective stick to tail rotor blade pitch - an increase in collective requires an increase in tail rotor thrust to counter the main rotor torque change.

. Collective stick to longitudinal cyclic - The center

of gravity envelope for the BLACK HAWK lies entirely aft of the main rotor. Therefore, an increase in main

rotor thrust from a collective stick increase, causes

a nose up pitching moment.

In addition, in forward

flight, increasing collective causes a higher blade

loading on the advancing blade relative to the retreating blade which causes the rotor to flap rearward

imparting a nose up pitching moment.

To compensate

for these nose up pitching moments forward cyclic is

coupled to an increase in collective stick.

. Collective stick to lateral cyclic - The coupling of the collective stick to the tail rotor which is loca-
ted above the c.g. also causes a right rolling moment. An increase in collective stick increases the main

5.5-14 -15 -16 -17

50

_
k_/

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.5.8

UH-60A BLACK HAWK FLIGHT CONTROL MIXING UNIT SCHEMATIC

PITCH BIAS ACTUATOR COLLECTIVE PITCH

ROLL PEDAL

LAT

AFT

FWD

TAIL ROTOR SERVO

51

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

rotor coning which gives an effective increase in the

angle-of-attack

of the blade over the nose, thus

increasing

the blade loading.

Since the flapping

reaction occurs approximately

90 degrees of azimuth

later, the rotor flaps to the right causing a right

roll. To compensate for these right rolling moments,

left lateral cyclic collective stick.

is coupled

to an increase

in

4, Pedal to longitudinal cyclic - Pedals are coupled to

the longitudinal

cyclic to automatically

compensate

for the pitching moment caused by the canted tail

rotor when pedal position is varied.

The high level of control mixing, together with the

various control stops, results in irregular limits on

control motion. The control rigging input provided

for the control system in Volume I is linear. It does

not contain

any of these irregular

"Cut-offs".

Typical BLACK HAWK rigging diagrams are provided on

figures 3.5.9, 3.5.10 and 3.5.11 for longitudinal

cyclic, lateral cyclic, and tail rotor blade pitch,

respectively.

It can be seen that corners of the

rigging envelope are clipped by various stops in the

control system. This loss of travel could be impor-

tant to pilot-in-the-loop

simulation evaluations.

It

should be emphasized that' the rigging diagrams pro-

vided are nominal and may not compare exactly to any

given BLACK HAWK helicopter.

Two approaches are used in representing the actuators

in the Flight Control Module depending on information

available.

If the actuator is not rate limited and

experimental

data is available then a second order

transfer function is matched to the frequency char-

acteristics. is used as Volume I.

Otherwise, shown on the

a simplified actuator model simulation block diagrams in

f) Stabilator - The BLACK HAWK helicopter has a moving

stabilator, the position of which is dependent on a

number of feedbacks.

These include airspeed, collec-

tive, pitch rate and lateral acceleration.

The

schedule of these feedbacks was selected to satisfy a

number of requirements.

In low speed maneuvers a

stabilator

incidence as high as 40 degrees is re-

required to reduce the impact of rotor downwash on the

stabilator

with its associated

high aircraft nose

attitudes.

In the normal speed range from g0 knots to

VH effectively a constant stabilator value of zero

5.5-20 5.5-18

52

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL PAGE _3 OF POOR QUAL_

FIGURE 3.5.9 LONGITUDINAL CYCLIC RIGGING

SER-70602

_-=_ ,._-_AX_,_- _ N,-=r_ ,,'_._.,4.
i,

53

O_:_pGO'NOAR&QOU_'&L__t.'_3'PA&E
FIGURE 3.5.10 LATERAL CYCLIC RIGGING

SER-70602

,Z/M/ fEW

/.J,_/ rEd
_f_z I

,&cO:

!
Q
,e'_/._ O._,_

I

,4.4ri,_,, d)'Cz,'C

r
i
r

54

L__ UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

OF POOF_ _Z/_., _7''.-

FIGURE 3.5.11 TAIL ROTOR CONTROL RIGGING

SER-70602

l-fir 3Z

e%

0
55

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

degrees provides satisfactory aircraft pitch attitudes

and levels of flapping through the weight - c.g.

envelope.

The steep gradient of stabilator incidence

with airspeed from 40 to 80 knot is a necessary

transition slope.

The requirements for the collective feedback are based

on the need to reduce the pitch attitude excursion

with collective inputs in forward flight over that

accomplished

by the mechanical

coupling previously

discussed.

The pitch rate feedback is primarily

effective in improving the BLACK HAWK maneuver stabil-

ity (stick force per g) in turns. As the aircraft

enters higher load factor turns the pitch rate in-

creases driving the stabilator more leading and therefore the aircraft more nose down.

edge up This in

turn requires the pilot to displace the longitudinal

cyclic stick further aft from trim in order to keep the nose up. Since the force system is effectively a

spring force which is proportional

to displacement

from trim, the higher the g level the higher the stick

force. The lateral acceleration feedback'is added to

the stabilator system to counter attitude with sideslip.

coupling

of pitch

The stabilator system is composed of two analog amp-

lifiers (see figure 3.5.2) which operate from inde-

pendent input sources and command the position of two

electric jackscrew actuators acting in series. During

normal operation these jackscrews operate in unison,

with each providing one-half of the stabilator posi-

tion input.

The system is independent

of other

SAS/FPS subsystems although it shares common inputs.

The system is activated from a switch on the AFCS

panel (figure 3.5.7). The pilot can activate a manual

slew at any time.

g) Trim System - As previously discussed the trim system

is not directly applicable to the simulation being

used in an open loop, analysis mode. However, it will

form an integral part of pilot-in-the-loop

system.

The validity of the system in the simulation will be

critically dependent on the capability of the simula-

tor cockpit stick force system.

The background

information presented 6.0 in Volume I.

here is applicable

to Section

The trim system provides control position selected by the pilot, force plus gradient, and a pedal

centering about a a spring breakout damper force. The

kj 56

k_1
k_/

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

system is activated by a switch on the AFCS control panel (figure 3.5.7).

With the trim system selected OFF there is no control

force gradient or control centering in the cyclic

control system or directional control system. Directional control movements will still be resisted by a

pedal damper.

This damping force is continuously

active without regard to TRIM switch position.

With

the trim system ON, directional and lateral control

forces are developed in the electromechanical

trim

actuators.

These actuators incorporate an electric-

ally controlled rotary spring assembly which allows the pilot to select the zero force control trim posi-

tion. The designed maximum override force for full

opposite control position, is 80 pounds in directional

and 19 pounds in lateral cyclic control. Longitudinal cyclic control forces are developed in an electro-

hydromechanical

pitch trim actuator

maximum override force of 20 pounds.

with a designed

With the trim system selected ON and FPS OFF, the

pilot/copilot

may change the cyclic trim control

position through two means:

a cyclic trim release

switch and cyclic beep trim switch. The beep trim

switch is a four-position stick grip. Activation

switch mounted on the cyclic of the trim release button

switch releases the force gradient on the longitudinal

and lateral cyclic.

The position of the cyclic

control when the trim release switch is opened (re-

leased) becomes the new cyclic trim position.

At

airspeeds below 60 kts, when the pedal switches are

closed, the electronic

control on the yaw force

gradient spring is repositioned by pedal movement and

resisted only by the pedal rate damper.

When the

pilot removes his feet from the pedals which releases

the pedal switches,

the electronically

controlled

rotary spring reengages, holding the pedals at the new

trim position dient spring.

through the pedal breakout, plus graAbove 60 kts the pedal switches and the

TRIM REL switch together provide yaw trim release.

ENGINE/FUEL CONTROL MODULE

Engine/Fuel Control System

Prior to simulation It should

presenting a description of the engine/fuel control a short description of the T700 system is presented.
be noted that features in the actual engine described

57

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

k_i below (for completeness sake), may or may not be represented in

the simulation.

The following information is extracted from

Reference 24.

The General Electric T700-GE-700

is a compact, lightweight

turboshaft engine rated at 1543 horsepower.

It has a combina-

tion axial/centrifugal

compressor, an annular combustor with

central fuel injectors, an air-cooled gas generator turbine, and

a free power turbine with a coaxial drive shaft extending

forward through the gas generator.

The forward end of the drive

shaft is connected, via a splined joint, to the engine output

shaft assembly.

The compressor has variable stator vanes.

These components are illustrated schematically on figure 3.6.1.

Basic T700 engine data characteristics

are given on Table 3.6.1.

The engine control system from the pilots point of view is com-

prised of four primary elements.

Power control system; Load

Demand System; Engine Speed Trim Control System and Overspeed

protection.

The power control levers in the cockpit (figure

3.6.2) are connected to the power available spindles (PAS) on

each engine's hydromechanical

unit (M}fU). Each power control

lever has four detent positions; OFF, IDLE, FLY, and LOCKOUT.

The power lever is advanced to FLY for flight. The PAS setting

represents the highest power that could be supplied if demanded.

Power turbine speed is not governed until the power lever is advanced from IDLE. The simulation assumes that the PSA is

V

always in the FLY position.

This simplifies the engine simula-

tion module with no loss to fidelity evaluations.

for handling

qualities

TABLE 3.6.1

Model

General Electrical T700-GE-700

Type of Engine

Turboshaft

Output Power (intermediate rating)

1543 shp at sea level, standard static uninstalled conditions

Type of Compressor

Combined axial/centrifugal

Number of Compressor Stages

6 stages, 5 axial and 1 centrifugal

Variable Geometry

Inlet guide vanes, stage 1 and 2 stator vanes

Type of Combustion Chamber

Single annular chamber with axial flow.

58

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

OF POOR Q,,_._,,i°_:

FIGURE 3.6,1 TT00 ENGINE SCHEMATIC

SER-70602

INLET SECTION

COMPRESSOR SECTION

COMBUSTION SECTION

TURBINE EXHAUST SECTION SECTION

AIRFLOW

COMPRESSORROTOR!:

FUEL NOZZLE

IGNITOR

TEMP SENSOR

k_1 59

TECHNOLOGIES _UNITED

ORIGINAL PAC;_._".._;_ OF POOR Q_.j_l_ _

k_J FIGURE 3.6.2 ENGINE CONTROLS

SER-70602

k.J

NO. I ENG
FiRE "T" HANDLE

COLLECTIVE STICK

TWO WAY STOP (FRONT AND REAR FOR POWER LEVER
j- N U

NO. 2 ENG FIRE "T" HANDLE

"_'L "eLl

J_

1
[ N G I N

QUADRANT COVER

FLY · ¢OCZOU

!

__" ( J

/
TWO WAY STOP

NO. 1 ENG FUEL SELECTOR LEVEL
NO. 1 ENG POWER CONTROL LEVER

STARTER BUTTON

NO. 2 ENG FUEL SELECTOR LEVEL
2 ENG POWER CONTROL LEVER

6O

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

TABLE 3.6.1 (Continued)

Gas Generator Stages

Turbine

Power Turbine Stages

Direction of Engine Rotation (from rear, looking forward)

Clockwise

Engine Weight (dry)

415 Ib

The Load Demand Spindle (LDS) input is a function of the col-

lective pitch. It provides compensation to reduce transient

droop of N o. The spindle, inputs load demand signals directly

into the hgdromechanical

unit. A reduction in collective pitch

decreases LDS position, reducing fuel flow and giving immediate and accurate gas generator response. The new setting is trimmed

by the ECU to satisfy the Np/Nr and load control requirement set by the Electrical Control Unit (ECU). This function is represented in the simulation.

The speed control system allows the pilot to adjust Np/Nr

between 96.4% and I00.5_ by activation of the beeper trim

switches on the pilot's collective grip as shown on Figure 3.6.2.

The engine Np/Nr speed reference signal, sets the datum for the

Electrical Control Unit (ECU). An overspeed protection system

protects the power turbine from destructive overspeeds. If a

malfunction should cause Np to reach 106%, the electrical

overspeed system will automatically decrease fuel flow to the

engine as necessary to prevent Np/Nr from exceeding I06%. This

feature is not represented in the simulation.

For those area's

of simulation operation where overspeed could be experienced

(Burst from autorotation for example) caution should be exer-

cised during analysis of the results.

The engine control quadrant, figure 3.6.2, centered on the upper

console permits either the pilot or copilot to select engine

speed. The ENG POWER CONT lever positions are marked NUMBER I

ENGINE and NUMBER 2 ENGINE, and identify the OFF, IDLE, FLY and

LOCKOUT positions.

They are connected mechanically to each

engine's HMU and are used to govern engine speeds. The HMU

starts to open whenever the power control lever is advanced more

than 2 ° from OFF and increases proportionately to FLY.

with engine speed

61

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

3.6.2

Detailed Description of the Engine/Fuel Control Module
Historically the rotor shaft speed degree of freedom has been ignored by flight dynamics simulation models. It was expedient to fix rotor speed at a nominal value and avoid the (computing) problems associated with releasing the rotor shaft degree of freedom. Under some circumstances this is still acceptable. However, there is now increased awareness of the consequences, as discussed in Reference 2. These include differences in initial response to control input and interactions with airframe modes. The former results from the energy initially absorbed by the shaft degrees of freedom. The latter is due to phase lags between rotor speed response and torque reaction on the airframe.

The engine/fuel control module developed for this simulation is

a linearized representation of the T700 system, with coeffi-

cients which vary as a function of engine operating condition. All the usual restrictions and assumptions of linear simulation

are applicable and should be observed. Maneuvers which result

in large torque changes from trim may result in discrepancies in

the simulation.

In the future development of the model, for

pilot-in-the loop simulation, an artifice must be created for

tracking and updating the steady state engine torque levels and

fading them with those generated from the linear model. The engine is assumed to be operating in a sea level environment.

One engine/fuel control system is represented and the total

torque is obtained by doubling that for a single engine. Torque

balance control is therefore eliminated.

The model adequately

provides for closing the rotor shaft speed loop through out the

normal operating envelope of the helicopter.

However, it is

emphasized that engine/fuel control systems are highly non-

linear. Therefore, maneuvers which result in significant rotor

speed excursions may result in discrepancies in the simulation.

Typically, the simulation does not represent temper ature or engine speed limitations and the acceleration schedule is a

fixed value. This module should not be used for engine per-

formance evaluations.

More complex engine/fuel control repre-

sentations are available and the modular formulation of the

BLACK HAWK simulation facilitates their introduction, if re-

quired, at a later time.

The basic engine control system operation is through the interaction of the Electrical Control Unit (ECU) and Hydromechanical control unit (}{MU). In general, the HHU provides for gas generator speed control and rapid response to power demand. The ECU trims the HMU to satisfy the requirements of the load so as to maintain constant rotor speed. The Load Demand Spindle (LDS) is a function of collective pitch setting and provides
k_J
62

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

compensation to reduce rotor transient droop. Any steady state errors resulting from inconsistent collective positioning are trimmed by the ECU. In general, isochronous governing of the rotor speed is maintained by developing an error relative to the reference speed and commanding more or less power to stabilize at the required speed. Basically, this process involves the speed error demanding a change in gas generator speed via the shaping of the ECU electrical newwork. This signal is summed with the LDS input in the }{MU, and compared with the actual gas generator speed. The subsequent error, commands changes in fuel flow leading to a higher or lower gas turbine speed and changes in the gas flow. This in turn provides increased or decreased power at the driveshaft from the power turbine. A detailed background to the complete T700 engine/fuel control system is given in References 25 and 26.

Engine/Fuel Control Simulation Representation

The major elements of the simulation of the engine/fuel control

are shown on the simplified block diagram, figure 3.6.3. They

comprise the collective control interface with Gen Hel, fuel

control, gas turbine, power turbine and rotor shaft speed

degree-of-freedom

interface with the Gen Hel rotor. In this

model, the simplification of linearization has been retained at

the same time as providing a reasonable envelope of operation,

by allowing the linear coefficients to vary as a function of gas k_/ generator speed.

Initialization of the engine/fuel control module is accom-plished

by using the steady state engine performance required

to trim the helicopter simulation in free flight. Specifically

engine output torque can be plotted as a function of gas gener-

ator speed.

Hence, inverting

this relationship,

allows the

direct determination

of gas generator speed to trim the torque

required by Gen Hel, to maintain reference rotor shaft speed.

(This torque is specified at rotor shaft speed) Now, if the load

demand spindle input from collective was ideally matched to the

operating condition, it would set the }{MU such that the engine

would be in trim. However, differences are usually present

which must be trimmed by the ECU. The balance conditions for

I.C. are forced in the simulation by making the power turbine

speed equal to the reference speed and arranging that the in-

cremental demand on the fuel control, _NGG)REF,

is equal to

zero. The error falls out as a trim bias on _hq_e ECU. The IC

flow path is shown as dotted on figure 3.6.4. The other prerequisite of trim, is that engine torque supplied must equal that required by the rotor, such that no accelerating torque exists on the shaft in the IC mode.

5.6-9

k./ 63

_
_,,._jJ

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.6.3

ENGINE/FUEL CONTROL INTERFACE WITH THE ROTOR

TORQUE

t TPUORWBIENRE

/ \
/ /
\/

FUEL CONTROL 1 J--'---'GAS
N_

P--- BODY STATES PILOT

NG

YAW _.

"_CI-L

V ERTICAL

LATERAL

64

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

ORIGI_'_AL P.'_:¢!_ _,:_ OF PO0_ £,..,.,5_._ =

FIGURE 3.6.4 ELECTRIC CONTROL UNIT (ECU)

SER-70602

,+
I
k_y
I

65

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

In the compute mode, any excursions in power turbine speed will

result in outputs from the ECU, which will modulate fuel flow.

If the helicopter is flown from a low power operating condition

to a higher level, gross changes in fuel flow are commanded by

the collective compensation.

The ECU will adjust to compensate

any mismatch which would lead to power turbine speed (rotor

speed if the clutch is coupled) excursions.

The computational

flow for the ECU is given in analog form on figure 3.6.5. There

is essentially a high, or low, gain loop active, depending on

speed error and torque level.

5.6-11 -12 -,13

The gas generator speed required to match the torque demand is

set in the }{MU. In the simulation this set signal is a perturbation from trim which is compared with the actual gas generator change in speed from trim. The error causes an incremental

change in fuel flow which accelerates on figure 3.6.4.

the gas turbine, as shown

In the model, torque output from one engine _Qpt) is derived from three sources. From direct changes in fuel flow, from

5.6-16

changes in gas generator speed and as a result of changes in

power turbine speed. This latter term is turbine damping. These

increments are summed to obtain a total change in engine torque

from trim, which is subsequently

factored by the number Of

operating engines and engine/rotor

gearing ratio, to obtain

engine torque output to the rotor shaft. This increment is also k_J
used to provide the torque reaction on the airframe (which is

incorporated venience).

into the main rotor module for computing con-

Rotor Speed Degree of Freedom

The interface of the engine with the main rotor (it should be

noted that tail rotor torque is not calculated and is accounted

for approximately by factoring main rotor required torque) is

via a free running clutch which will disengaged the rotor from

the engine at a zero torque level. Under these circumstances,

the engine speed feedback to the fuel control will cause the

engine to seek an operating condition dictated by the control.

The clutch will reengage when the rotor speed drops below power

turbine speed as shown on figure 3.6.6. The introduction of a

clutch in the drive system recoveries to be executed.

allows

autorotation

entries and

The rotor can be visualized in simple terms as a damper res-

ponding to changes in rotor speed. However, the significant

effect of the rotor relates to the changes in torque loading as

a result of control inputs and changing states.

Rotor shaft

accelerations

result from torque differences

in output from the

power turbine and torque required by the rotor. The simulation

66

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL r_,,_. _r_._. {3 OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGLTRE 3.6.5 ENGINE/FUEL CONTROL BLOCK DIAGRAM

i
67

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.6.6 ROTOR DEGREE OF FREEDOM CLUTCH MODEL
ORIGINAL ___ '_
OF POOR QUALifY

<

-_ = _a'_/_ r 68

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

k_/ is initialized at trim such that the rotor is at the input speed

and torque is in balance.

Under normal powered flight condi-

tions the clutch is locked and the difference between engine torque and rotor required torque must accelerate the total transmission inertia. (Note this inertia does not include rotor

blades. freedom)

They are separate bodies, with their own degrees of

Under these circumstances,

power turbine speed and

rotor shaft speed are equal, as shown on the block diagram,

figure 3.6.6. Each program pass, the rotor required torque is checked to see if it drops below zero. If it does, the clutch

disengages, and a different flow path is executed, in which the

power turbine and rotor shafts accelerate under their own

torques and inertias.

Because of the harmonic characteristics

of rotor torque, it is necessary to perform the logic check for

zero torque level on a filtered signal.

In coding the clutch

model, care must be taken to ensure that, if a trim in autorota-

tion with split needles is requested, the appropriate flow path

and initialization

of shaft speed and rotor speed are executed.

A detailed flow diagram Figure 3.6.7(a) and (b).

of the clutch model is presented

on

LANDING INTERFACE MODULE

3.7.2

Overview of Landing Interface Module

This module calculates the forces and moments at the airframe

C.G. resulting from landing gear interaction with the ground plane. All necessary space/body axes geometry calculations are

incorporated in order to track a free helicopter landing on the

ground. The landing gear is represented by separate non-linear

tire and strut dynamic characteristics

as shown in Figure 3.7.1.

Tire in-ground-plane

loads are developed as a non-linear func-

tion of the tire deflection and normal load. These forces are

adjusted depending on the friction criteria which determines

tire skid characteristics

at the deck surface. Finally, strut

loads are summed with other external forcel and moments at the

helicopter CG.

Detail Description of the Landing Interface Module

Two axes systems are used in this landing interface module as

shown in Figure 3.7.2. All landing gear forces and moments are

formulated in axes parallel to the primary body axes system

passing through the C.G. The space axes system, of which the

ground plane is set at WLFD, is used to determine the landing

gear proximity to the ground.

Inplane friction forces are

checked in the space axes system.

k_J 69

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES
_G_V

Of poor Q_

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.6.7(a) ROTOR CLUTCH MODEL - DETAILED PROGRAM FLOW DIAGRAM

I ame'4. -om,_9

_-
l-lF,-.xt_.._.

'

F

kj

p

°"" 7I R-._._._.:.=.J +
o..-,,=_ I

.

I

_ 70

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

OF POOR QU._L!'_¥

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.6.7(b) ROTOR CLUTCH MODEL - DETAILED PROGRAM FLOW DIAGRAM (Cont'd)

[2"
_
_,,
I t
I
71

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.7.1 LANDING GEAR TIRE AND STRUT REPRESENTATION

OR!GIN_-L p,..:_,e.!S

V:

"_" 72

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORLGI,'qs-%LP;_}_ i3 OF POOR QU._L_J¥

FIGURE 3.7.2 LANDING MODULE AXES SYSTEM

SER=70602

,,j
73

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

Tire Contact Geometry

In the equations defining the geometry of the landing gear,

Figure 3.7.3, it is assumed that the strut moves along the

line parallel to the helicopter Z axis. No account is taken of

drag linkage constraints which cause the axle to move in an arc

in the X-Z plane.

This geometry, together with the Gen Hel

calculated position of the helicopter C.G. position in space, is

used to establish the location of the tire, axle reference and

gear reference points for each gear in space axes. These

coordinates are used later to determine the proximity of tire

contact and subsequent tire and strut deflections.

5.7-9,10, -11,-12

The determination of tire contact, for an arbitrary orientation of the helicopter relies on establishing the length of the normal from the ground plane to the axle reference position and the true angle which this line makes with the gear line. The derivation of these geometric relationships are given in Reference 27. (ie the true angle between two lines is given by Cos

5.7-13

DTRUE = Cos0_ r cos_2 + Cos_t cos_2 + cos_ cos_ 9 where
=_, _] _ are the dlrection cosine angles) For-this case _ _,_o
90 and _ = 0 for the normal to the ground. Thus, the true -*_ole

is equal to the last term in the helicopter to space transforma-

tion matrix. When the distance along the gear line becomes less

5.7-13,14

than the tire radius, contact of the tire with the ground has

occurred.

Subsequently,

this difference is defined as radial

k_J

tire deflection.

In practice tire contact can occur at any

point on the width of the tire. In the model the contact point

is assumed to be at the center of the tire tread, irrespective

of the distortion resulting from radial or axial loading. The

geometry for tire contact is illustrated on figure 3.7.4.

In order to establish the degree of inplane deflection and corresponding loading on the tire, it is necessary to track the

intersection of the landing gear line relative to the ground plane. Using the positions of the axle reference and the gear

reference in space, two equations of the gear line can be

developed, (each projected into a 2D plane) and solved for the

X-Y intersection

with the ground plane.

When contact for an

individual tire is established,

the point of intersection

is

retained and on subsequent iterations

deflection is determined by comparing

intersections.

The coordinates

of

through the program, tire the new and old gear line the initial contact are

retained until the tire leaves the deck or are modified by the

tire slipping. initialization

If contact is lost, for any given tire then the is reset to zero. This is necessary, since the

tire/gear can bounce in and out of contact. The re-initialization for the contact point following tire slipping is discussed

later. Following the transformation

of the deflections into

helicopter body axes, the three components of deflection at each

5.7-15 5.7-16

74

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL PAGE i'3 OF POOR QUALITY

FIGURE 3.7.3

LANDING GEAR GEOMETRY

SER-70602

75

_
k_J

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES
_G_V

QR..IG..INAL rr_-_,:"¢--__-, _,-, 0_' POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.7.4 GEAR/GROUND-PLANE INTERFACE GEOMETRY

',,.i'

76

%/
k_J

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

SER-70602

tire can be used to determine, from the tire characteristics

data file, the potential

three components

of tire force.

"Potential" qualifies these loads, because until the tire is

checked fined.

for slipping,

the actual inplane loads cannot be de-

Tire Loads

The tire loads are made up of two components - that due to spring stiffness and that due to damping. The vertical stiffness data is well defined by the manfacturers load deflection tests and is

used directly in the simulation.

However, the inplane loads are

less well defined, and the assumption is made that they can be

treated as separate orthogonal components.

Laterally a non-

linear stiffness is extracted from test data as a function of

vertical

tire deflection

and tire pressure.

Longitudinal

stiffness is based on Reference 28. The damping terms are tuned

to a fixed frequency and while the acceptability of this techni-

que is clear for, say ground resonance analysis, it's suitabil-

ity for impact landing is not clear.

In any event, it is

necessary
velocity tion.

to filter the damping terms to effectively smooth the

obtained by numerical differentiation

of tire deflec-

Tire Inplane Friction Load Check

Following the determination of tire forces from the helicopter

relative motion, a test of the ability of the inplane friction

forces to resist the applied forces without slipping, must be

established.

The tire forces obtained in helicopter axes must

be transferred to the ground plane for the friction check. In

executing this transformation

it should be noted that in order

to retain the X-Y alignment of the forces with body axes when

transformed to the ground plane,_ b must be set to zero in [AHBS]. Here again it should be noted that no attempt has been made to treat the friction criteria based on the resultant

inplane force. The method retains orthogonality of the inplane

forces.

In practice the resultant force does determine slip

conditions but the model becomes more complex and the simplified

approach facilitates the introduction

of brakes.

Classical

friction considerations

provide for a coefficient of static

friction and a coefficient for sliding friction. In the former

case (when brakes are set), the maximum amount of inplane load

which can be resisted without slipping, is proportional to the coefficient of friction and the normal loading. When this level

is exceeded, motion will result. Then the force resisting the motion will depend on a reduced (sliding) coefficient of friction. In practice, there is a smooth transistion between the

two conditions.

However, the model assumes a discrete change.

When the brakes are activated, it is assumed that the wheels are

5.7-18 -19

77

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

k.j locked. For brakes off, a very low coeffeicient of friction is

introduced

into the tire X direction.

The wheel degree of

freedom is not currently represented

and therefore spin up

inertia loads are not calculated.

If slip is not occurring,

calculated tire forces are passed unchanged.

If slippage is

occurring, friction.

the inplane forces are set to the value for sliding The final tire loads are transferred to the axial

reference point.

For the conditions where the inplane loads exceed the allowable

static friction level and the tire slips, a re-initialization

of

the tire contact point must be undertaken.

Under conditions of

no-slip the tire inplane deflection is developed from consecu-

tive calculations of the gear line intersection with the ground plane. During slip conditions, the contact point for the tire

moves, and the initialization of the gear-line intersection must be revised to reflect the tire movement and establish a new

value for the contact point to be used on the next pass through

the program, as shown on figure 3.7.5. It is assumed that the

actual tire deflection

can be determined from the sliding

friction force and the tire inplane stiffness.

5.7-21

Landing Gear Strut Loads

Under steady conditions, the loads transferred to the airframe

5.7-23

by the strut will be equal to the tire reactions.

However,

k_J

under transient conditions,

the acceleration

of the unsprung

mass can modify the loading.

A diagramatic representation

of

the strut is shown on figure 3.7.1. Three elements of the strut

are modelled.

The preload restraint, the isentropic air spring

and a velocity squared damper. Under light loading condition

(where a significant portion of helicopter weight is reacted by

the rotor), the strut operates in the preload range. Under

these conditions, where tire reaction load is less than the

strut preload setting, tire loads are transferred to the air-

frame with zero strut deflection.

Once the preload setting is

exceeded, the strut (unsprung mass) is accelerated depending on

it's own dynamic characteristics,

the tire applied loads, and

the unsprung mass. Note that logic precludes the equation flow

reverting back to the preload mode until the natural transient

provides a zero strut deflection condition.

The model for the strut air spring assumes isentropic expansion

of the air as the strut deflects.

While this is a reasonable

assumption for large deflections transient an adeabatic expansion

experienced during a landing assumption may be more appro-

priate once the strut has deflected and is moving about some

average deflection point. Strut damping is achieved by forcing fluid through an orifice and is represented in the model by a

fixed coefficient,

velocity squared term. The strut system

78

_ UNliTEb TECHNOLOGIES

OF pOOD QUAL|'t'_.

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.7.5 REINITIALISATION OF GEAR LINE INTERSECTION POINT

79

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

contains high frequency components and care should be taken in

selecting the integration time interval, if a straight sequen-

cial algorithm is used. A software switch is provided which

allows bypassing the strut calculation, such than tire loads are

transferred directly to the airframe.

This will give approxi

mate solutions under some circumstances

without loading the

simulation down with the strut calculations.

Finally, the strut

loads are transferred to the helicopter C.G. for summation with

other external forces.

This landing interface algorithm and the corresponding

input

data has been used by Sikorsky to analyze hard landings and

ground resonance.

The results obtained compared acceptably with

test data.

3.8 GROUND EFFECT MODULE

This module simulates the copter by modifying the manipulation of the inflow

effect of ground proximity rotor forces and moments equation.

on a helithrough a

The airflow surrounding a helicopter when it is close to the

ground is highly complex, especially under transient flight

conditions.

Most of the experimental

data available is for

steady conditions where the flow pattern has stabilized.

Any

transient data is highly configuration oriented.

It is likely

that recent and on-going research on this subject (Reference 29)

will lead eventually to an empirical model describing the local

rotor inflow velocity due to the hyperbolically

shaped ground

vortex and its image that has been shown to exist at low speeds.

Unfortunately,

sufficient data for correlation of such a model

has not yet been published.

With these limitations

in mind a model was formulated which

accounts for the gross effects of changing inflow through the

rotor when it is operating close to the ground. The algorithm

incorporates an altitude and forward speed effect. The latter effectively washes out the altitude effect based on the rotor

wake skewing rearwards with increased speed. BLACK HAWK hover

flight test results, Reference 30, were used to develop an

empirical factor with which to force correlation.

This ground

effect factor modifies the main rotor calculated downwash when

altitude is less than five times rotor radius.

The downwash

change causes a change in rotor loading, rotor thrust.

especially

effecting

5.8-3

3.9 GUST MODULE

This module produces local air velocities at all rotor-blade segment positions and at the fuselage and empennage component

80

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

aerodynamic centers, caused by various types of gusts. The gust

input may be discrete or continuous having deterministic and

non-deterministic

characteristics

respectively.

The discrete

gust functions which can assume the shape of a step, ramp or

pulse, are explicitly defined as a function of penetration dis-

tance. The continuous gust is represented by the Dryden model.

Conceptually

this model is relatively simple.

However, the

computer mechanization

is somewhat complicated by the need to

store and retrieve gust data for any blade segment, at any blade

azimuth station, at any state of penetration.

The blanket

storage of this data is not feasible and a "rotating ring array"

was developed to cope with this problem.

In the computer implementation,

large "rotating

gust data are generated.

Specifically vertical

gust tables, TABLEV and TABLEH, of size equal

points are loaded to represent gust velocities

tance apart. Because the "rotating ring array" table it should be noted that the first and last

ring arrays" of and horizontal to MAXPNT data at TABINK disis, in fact, a table locations

are co-incident on the "ring can be visualized as wrapping figure 3.9.1.

array". around

In general the helicopter the ring array as shown in

Loading the Tables with Gust Velocities

Two gust tables are specified TABLEV vertically and TABLEH

horizontally.

For the discrete gust function, lateral com-

ponents of gust result from specifying relative helicopter/wind

headings. For the continuous gust the horizontal gust must be

aligned approximately along the aircraft x axis to be within the

assumptions of the Dryden model.

If lateral Dryden gusts are

required the model can be expanded to include this component.

During the IC condition it is necessary to enter sufficient data into the tables to allow for deviations in helicopter airspeed after entering the compute mode. At the same time, because the table is effectively a "ring", data cannot be loaded towards the end of the table. If this occurred, erroneous gust input would be experienced on the aft portion rotor disc after entering the compute mode. This concern is evident from the illustration on figure 3.9.2. Using this "rotating ring" concept, the helicopter will cover a distance 2(P_ +_FT) on the closed table. As

TABINK (=VFT_*TIME) decreases be covered--Sy the aircraft.

in valeu, more of the table will A logical test must be made to

avoid the aircraft doubling over. An appropriate test is if

(ICUPD + 12) data points are equal to INPPNT the table margin is

insufficient

for the operating

conditions.

This limit is

illustrated on figure 3.9.3. The_kFT defined, (Figure 3.9.1)

also serves the purpose of providing a dead space at the begin-

ning of the table, allowing a short period following entry to

5.9-12

81

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

ORIGINAL P'_c _ OF POOR QUALITY

FIGURE 3.9.1 DEFINITION OF GUST RING ARRAY

SER-70602

I,_¢PD,Arr
82

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL PA_q_ _ OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.9.2 GUST TABLE LOADING RESTRICTIONS

J / / !
\ \

,
/

m

r_

v
83

TECHNOLOGIES _ UN,'-T_D-- .....

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.9.3 EFFECT OF DECREASING "TABINK" ON TABLE LOADING

84

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

3.10

the compute mode before the rotor experiences the gust. Thus, data is loaded between ICUPD and INPPNT in the I.C. mode. In the compute mode a data point is placed in the table for each

program pass. It represents the gust velocity at a distance,

TABINK, (=VFLD*TIME) from the previous entry, where V F_ is the propagation rate of the gust front, (in I.C.). Thus We heli-

copter tends to remain diametrically

opposite the table update

point. When TABMAX is reached new data will refresh the data at

the beginning of the table, (hence rotating ring).

Gust Penetration Distance and Table Look-Up
A penetration distance G(ft) is defined as a function of the
propagation velocity, VF.D, which represents the distance that the aircraft reference _ub centroid has penetrated the gust front. This reference is used to calculate the penetration of other points on the rotor, GPRS, (see Figure 3.9.4). These values are used to set the pointer for the table look-ups.

Initially the helicopter is oriented to place the front of the rotor tip path plane at the end of each gust table, (ie Go = -R_) see figure 3.9.2. Now, if in the compute mode the heli-

copter maintains its trim speed a fixed point on the helicopter will advance through the table at the same rate as the table is

updated.

(ie. G increases by TABINK each pass.).

However,

deviations in helicopter airspeed, will result in the helicopter

gaining on or slipping relative to the fixed update rate,(which

is determined by the IC value of VFLD).

Penetration of empennage components are determined by delaying the gust value for the rotor centroid by an appropriate amount.

A simplified flow diagram shown on figure 3.9.5.
HELICOPTER MOTION MODULE

of the computer

implementation

is

5.9-9 5.9-16

This module brings together all the forces and moments acting on the rigid airframe and develops the motion of the helicopter in the body axes system, illustrated in figure 3.10.1. This module also is a catch-all for small elements of the simulation which are not appropriately specified elsewhere.

The external forces and moments in body axes at the airframe center of gravity, calculated in the various modules, are summed to form the total external forces and moments used in the

general equations of motion. For convenience the gyroscopic effects of rotating mass (shafts rotor hub etc.) are introduced

at this point. These gyroscopics rotational speeds.

are based on fixed (input)

5.10-4

v
85

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL. PAG_ _,_ OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.9.4 HELICOPTER PENETRATION OF GUST FRONT

_.J_-.

86

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED

ORIGINAL PAGE 15 OF POOR QUALITY

SER-70602

FIGURE 3.9.5 PROGRAM FLOW FOR LOADING GUST TABLES

14C
°< __°.r,c _ PD

11"_= __+__
i,

I

V

"D

"£as_
l
[II I

l
I

v
87

TECHNOLOGIES _ UNITED
FIGURE 3.10.1 BODY AXES SYSTEM
v

SER-70602

Z&

Xb' Yb" Zb

Body Axes System. Origin at the Center of Gravity. X Axis Parallel to Aircraft Center Line.

88

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

The general equations of motion are standard and can be found

in Reference I. A comparison will show that some small terms

have been ignored.

It should be noted that these equations are

written about the airframe center of gravity.

(that is less

rotor blades which are treated as separate bodies).

Gross

Weight and C.G. are input to the program and are modified in the

rotor module to provide airframe values as discussed in Section

3.1.2. However, airframe inertia must be provided as input.

The lateral C.G. offset components have been eliminated from the

equations of motion presented, such that the coupling between

degrees of freedom can be reduced.

Thus, only PDOT and RDO T

need be solved simultaneously

rather than all three angular

degrees of freedom.

The impact of the simplification

is that

the dynamic effects of lateral C.G. offset are not modelled.

Statically, no accuracy is lost and the simulation can be used

for such analysis.

The solution of the acceleration equations

depends on last program pass values of all variables except

translational velocities.

Here a half pass predictor is used

to ensure numerical stability.

The introduction of these pre-

dictors is based solely on passed experienced.

The motion in

space axes is developed using the standard Euler equations for

the angular velocities

and a 3 axes transformation

in the

sequence _b' 8b' _b for the translational velocities.

5.10-6

The equations for motion at any point on the airframe are writ-

5.10-10,11

ten in terms of accelerations that a pendulum, suspended at any

v-

point on the airframe, would experienced.

They are defined in

the opposite sense to normal body axes accelerations.

These

terms are used for control system feedbacks and for determining

the accelerations and velocities at any point on the airframe or

pilot's seat for motion system drives.

The so called 'g'

vectors are derived from these accelerations.

The remaining equations in this module are either generated specifically for a control system feedback or for output. are self explanatory.

They

Reference to the summation of external force and moment equa-

tions, indicates components (XYZLMS) ANn" These components are provided such that emperical correc£Td_n terms, which may not

have analytical foundation, can be introduced into the simula

tion. A typical use of these elements is the downwash correc-

tion terms. Here an empirical correction is made to the sideforce, rolling moment and pitching moment due to downwash vari-

ations under conditions of sideslip flight. available to develop a more sophisticated

Information is not model, thus this

empirical fit of wind tunnel test and flight test data has been

introduced at this point.

5.10-12,13 5.10-4 5.10-19

89

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

4.0 SIMULATION TRIMMING CONCEPTS

Several approaches to trimming the helicopter simulation are

available.

These vary from simple single channel loop closures,

to multi-loop,

steepest descent methods employing simplified

rotor calculations to initialize the trimming algorithm.

The

method recommended for the BLACK HAWK simulation, and presented

below, is based on the integral of the error between the current

state and the commanded state. In most applications the latter

is zero. Conceptually this trimming method is simple and with

appropriately selected gains, very stable.

The general form of the trimming algorithm is:

CONTROLLER=GAINJ(XcuRRENT-XcoMMANDED)dt

where X is most often an acceleration,

but can be any other

parameter.

The controller for the specified degree of freedom

is adjusted by the integral of the error until balance is

obtained and the integral goes to zero. Using this method all

trimming loops can, and should, be closed simultaneously.

For computing efficiency it path in the X-Z plane only.

is desirable to define the flisht Thus Vxb = 1.69 Vcom. cos(eb-_c)
Vzb = 1.69 Vcom. sin(gb-_c)

where

Vxb, Vcom @b _c

Vzb are body axes velocities commanded flight path airspeed pitch attitude climb angle

(knots)

This approach, which eliminates
quence having to operate through city transformation.

Vyb, avoids a cumbersome

the trimming sethree axes velo-

Typically in the Sikorsky implementation,

the TRIM is based on a

rate check of the controller motion. The controller is checked

every 20 program passes.

If for 5 consecutive

checks the

controller has not changed by more than the tolerance, that

degree of freedom is judged to be trimmed. The helicopter is judged to be trimmed when all of the controllers are within

tolerance.

If a controller is out of tolerance, the check is

reset at the new position.

Checks of all channels are continued

until the helicopter is trimmed.

90

UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

SER-70602

v
Typical trimming loop closures are given below:

Acceleration

Controller

Gain

For steady level flight V_b 8b

.35

Vpb* V_b
P

#b/Vyb XC XA XB

-.35/5.0 .07
-1.0 1.0

_- XP -I.0 For climbing flight, change as follows:
V_b ]c -.35

Vc XC -.0002

For autorotation, change as follows:

V_b QHBMR_

_'c -.35 XC -.00001

Tolerance
.05 .05/.05
.01 .01 .01 .01
.05 .01
.05 .01

*Either _b or Vyb may be used to trim V@b. be specified.

The other must

#QHBMR specified equal to zero for autorotation or some

desired value for part power operation.

Under normal

unaccelerated flight trim conditions rates are set to zero.

the body angular

91

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

5.0 FUTURE SIMULATION MODEL DEVELOPMENT

The BLACK HAWK mathematical model provided to the Army under

this contract is considered to be a good engineering represent-

ation for Handling Qualities and some Performance analysis. The

level of sophistication

was selected to permit analysis within

the band width of the flight control system. Therefore, in the

future development of a real time pilot-in-the-loop

model it may

be expedient, and from a computing requirement, a necessity, to

eliminate certain high frequency elements.

An example would be

some of the elements in the control system. It should be noted

however that phase characteristics

are summed and can have an

impact at relatively low frequencies.

Based on a variety

of correlation

investigations,covering

several Sikorsky helicopter types, it would be expected that

this engineering simulation would provide good trending data and

representative

absolute comparisons

in most flight regimes.

However, there are area's in the model that can be improved, but

test data is required to establish that more sophistication

is

meritted, and that the corresponding

increase in computation

time is justified.

The BLACK HAWK flight test program, to be

conducted by the Army, will provide valuable information.

The following is

improvements

may

because of reduced

for simplification

a discussion of area_ in the model where

be necessary.

They have been identified

confidence in their representation or because

purposes, they have been approximated.

Main Rotor

a) Inflow Modelling

- New theoretical

approaches

are avail-

able, but closely controlled test data for an articulated

rotor is still limited.

b) Unsteady Aerodynamics

- The trade-off for introducing this

complexity needs evaluating for the band-widths of concern

for Handling Qualities and Control System design.

c) Blade Flexibility

- It is known that significant torsional

wind-up occurs with the BLACK HAWK rotor blade. A flexible

blade representation,

at least torsionally, might increase

confidence for expanded flight envelope simulation.

Empennage and Tail Rotor
a) Sideslip effects of main rotor wash at the tail are treated
in a gross sense because of lack of experimental data other than the knowledge, from flight test, that a significant effect exists.

92

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

b) Tail rotor wash on the vertical tail has been ignored in
the model based on the fact that this is consistent with

the approximations

inherent in the rotor downwash in the

vicinity of the empennage.

Data is available for improving

the vertical

tail blockage

of the tail rotor witNout

significantly increasing model complexity.

c) For some analysis tasks a more sophisticated

tail rotor

formulation may be necessary which includes torque and tip

path plane tilt.

Aerodynamics of the Airframe at Low Speed

Analysis and validation in rearward and side flight are required to confirm the assumptions that have been made in the model that only the rotors are important.

Engine

The limitations of the linear engine model were identified and

discussed in Section 3.6. As the BLACK HAWK simulation activity

matures it may be appropriate tion.

to upgrade the engine representa-

Ground Effects

v
There is interest in the Handling Qualities effects of flying

helicopters

close to the ground for certain mission tasks.

Recent experimental

data may allow the formulation of an im-

proved generalized model. transient conditions.

This area is lacking especially

for

Failure Modes Development

The BLACK HAWK model presented requires development ate a full failure modes representation.

to incorpor-

v
93

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

6.0 REFERENCES

I. Etkin, B; Dynamics of Flight, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 1959.

o Kuczynski, W; Cooper, D; Twomey, W., Howlett, J: The Influence of Engine/Fuel Control Design on Helicopter Dynamics and Handling Qualities, AHS paper 79-37 Presented at the 35th Annual National Forum. May 1979.

° Cooper, D; Howlett, J: Ground Based Helicopter Simulation,

Symposium on the Status of Testing and Modelling Techniques V/STOL Aircraft AHS 1972.

for

° Gessow and Myers: Aerodynamics of the Helicopter, MacMillen Co. 1952.

. Ormiston, R:; Peters, D; Hingeless Helicopter Rotor Response
with Non-Uniform Inflow and Elastic Blade Bending, Journal of Aircraft Oct 1972.

. Crews, S.; Hohenemser, K: An Unsteady Wake Model for a Hingeless Rotor, Journal of Aircraft Dec. 1973.

° Harris, F.: Articulated

Rotor Blade Flapping Motion at Low

Advance Ratios, Journal of the American Helicopter 1972.

Society, Jan

. High Speed Aerodynamics and Jet Propulsion Volume Vlll. Aerodynamic Components of Aircraft at High Speed. Princeton University Press.

. Jepson, W.: Two Dimensional Test of four Airfoil Configurations with an Aspect Ratio of 7.5 and a 16 inch Chord up to a Mach Number of I.I SER-50977, April 1977.

I0. Paglino, SER-50620,

V.: Yawed Sept. 1969.

Bladed

Element

Performance

Method,

II. Klusman, S.; BLACK HAWK Lag Damper Force/Velocity

Characteris-

tics. Sikorsky Internal Memo. TEM-G2-0594 July 1978.

12. Houck, J.; Moore, F.; Howlett, J.; Pollock, K.; Browne, M.:

Rotor Systems Research Nov. 1977.

Aircraft

Simulation

Model NASA TM-78629,

13. Du Val, R.: Inertial Dynamics of a General Purpose Rotor Model, NASA TM-78557 March 1979.

94

TECHNOLOGIES UNITED

SER-70602

14. Heyson, H.: Equations Rotor with Non-Uniform TN D-394, 1960.

for the Induced Velocities Near a Lifting Azimuthwise Vorticity Distribution, NASA

15. Warner, J.; Flemming, R.: YU}{-60A Quarter Test Report. SER-70531 May 1973.

Scale Wind Tunnel

16. Rorke, J.: YIIH-60A Quarter Scale Drag Reduction Test Report. SER-70097 July 1975.

Wind Tunnel

17. Barnard, R.: YI_-6OA/T700

Engine I.R. Suppressor Test Report.

Appendix III Quarter Scale Infrared Suppressor Wind Tunnel Test.

SER-70094 June 1976.

18. Ellison, D.; Mattham, L.: NSAF Stability and Control Datcom,

McDonnell

Douglass

Corp., Project No. 8219, Flight Control

Division, Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Wright-Patterson

Air Force Base. Sept 1970.

19. Smith,

H.; Schaefer,

R." Aerodynam_s

Characteristics

at

Reynolds Numbers of 3 x 105 and 6 x I0 v of Three Airfoil Sec-

tions Formed by Cutting Off Various Amounts From the Rear

Portion 1950.

of the NACA 0012 Airfoil

Section, NACA TN 2074, Feb

20. Bailey, F.: Simplified Theoretical

Method of Determining

the

Characteristics

of a Lifting Rotor in Forward Flight, NACA

Report 716.

21. BLACK HAWK - Detailed Specification

for the Stability Augmen-

tation System and Flight Path Stabilization

System Hardware

Production Program. SES-701208.

Prepared under Contract DAAJ01-73-C-0006,

22. BLACK HAWK - Detailed Specification

for the Stability Augmen-

tation System and Flight Path Stabilization

System Hardware

Production Program.

Prepared under Contract DAAJ01-73-C-O006,

SES-701209.

23. BLACK HAWK - MOS 35K Avionics Training Manual Publication.

Mechanics

Course.

Sikorsky

24. UH-60A.

Familiarization

Training

Support Training Publication.

Course.

Sikorsky Product

25. Curran, J.: T700 Fuel and Control System, AHS National Forum Paper, Preprint No. 771, May 1973.

26. General Electric:

TT00 Operation Manual.

v
95

TECHNOLOGIES _ U_0N_IT_ED

SER-70602

27. Apalategeric and Adams. Aircraft Analytical Geometry.

28. Simley and Home:

Mechanical Properties

Special Reference

to Modern Aircraft

of Pneumatic Tires With

Tires.

NACA TR-R-64.

29. Sheridan and Wiesman:

Aerodynamics

of Helicopter

the Ground. AHS Paper 77.33-04 May 1977.

Flight Near

30. Sikorsky Letter LTC AR Todd to R. Merrit. ance. 22 Oct. 1976.

Free Hover Perform-

96

I. Report No.
NASA CR-166310
4. Title and _itle

2. Govornrmmt Accmdon No.

UH-60A Black Hawk Engineering Simulation Volume II - Background Report

Program:

3. Recipienz's Catalog No.
5. Repo_ Date
December 1981
6. Performing Organizaticm Code

7. Author(s)

8. Plrformi_ Or_ni_ti_

Report No.

J.J. Howlett

9. Perfuming _ganiution Name end _dreu

United

Technologies

Sikorsky

Aircraft

Stratford,

Connecticut

06602

12. S_nsoring
National Washington,

Agency _rne and Addrul

Aeronautics

& Space

DC 20546

Administration

SER 70602
10. Work Unit No.
11. Contract or Grant No.
NAS2-I0626
13. Type of Report and Period Covered
14. s_mra_ A_,cyco_

U.S. Arm y Aviation

15. _p_ementaw

Not_

Research

& Development

Command

Technical Monitor:

Thomas S. Alderete, Mail Stop 245-5, NASA

Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035 6415) 965-6171, FTS 448-6171

Volume 1 - Mathematical

Model is NASA CR-166309

Ames

Reseach

16. Abstract

A non-linear mathematical

model of the UH-60A BLACK HAWK helicopter has been

developed under Contract NAS2-10626.

This mathematical model, which is based

on the Sikorsky General Helicopter (Gen Hel) Flight Dynamics Simulation,

provides the NASA with an engineering Qualities evaluations.

simulation for Performance

and Handling

This mathematical

model is a total systems definition of the BLACK HAWK

helicopter represented at a uniform level of sophistication

considered

necessary for Handling Qualities evaluations.

The model is a total force,

large angle representation

in six rigid body degrees of freedom.

Rotor blade

flapping, lagging and hub rotational degrees of freedom are also represented.

In addition to the basic helicopter modules, supportive modules have been

defined for the landing interface, penetration.

power unit, ground effects and gust

Volume I of this report defines the mathematical model using a modular format.

The documentation

of each module is self-contained

and includes a descriptive,

mathematical

definition and input for the BLACK HAWK. Volume II provides

background and descriptive

mathematical

model.

information

supportive to an understanding

of the

"17. Key Words (Suggested by Author(s))
UH-60A BLACK HAWK Math Model Simulation Handling Qualities
19. Securi_ Qmif.(of'this _rt)
Unclassified

18. Distri_ti_ Statement

U.S. Government Agencies Subject Category 08 Point of Contact: Thomas

Only S. Alderete

_. SecuHW' Clamif. (of this page)

21. No. of Pages

22. _ice"

Unclassified

99

Available:

NASA Scientific B.W.I. Airport,

& Technical MD 21240

Information

Facility

