Cooperative Systems Challenges in Virtual Enterprises
L.M. Camarinha-Matos 1; H. Afsarmanesh 2
1 New University of Lisbon - Faculty of Sciences and Technology, Portugal, cam @uninova.pt 2 University of Amsterdam - Faculty of Computer Science, The Netherlands, hamideh @wins.uva.nl

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses implementation approaches to industrial Virtual Enterprises (VE) considered as Cooperative Systems. The main types of cooperation problems are identified for the various kinds of virtual enterprises. Component technologies to be used in the development of a cooperation platform are discussed. The PRODNET architecture for a VE infrastructure is summarized and the information sharing and management requirements identified. Finally a list of the major challenges in developing a cooperation environment for VEs is presented.

1. INTRODUCTION
Virtual Enterprises represent one of the most challenging application areas for Cooperative Systems. By Cooperative System we mean a system in which a set of autonomous agents (computational and human) interact with each other through sharing their information, decision making capabilities and other resources, and distributing the corresponding workload among themselves, in order to achieve common or complementary goals. The paradigm of virtual enterprise (VE), as a temporary alliance of enterprises that come together to share skills and resources in order to better respond to business opportunities and whose cooperation is supported by computer networks, challenges the way industrial production systems are planned and managed. The materialization of this paradigm, although enabled by recent developments in communication technologies and computer networks, requires the definition of a reference architecture for cooperation and the design and development of a supporting platform and appropriate protocols and mechanisms. The research area of VE represents a complex, large scale and multidisciplinary domain. The cooperation scenario in VEs involves distributed, heterogeneous and autonomous agents (software and people). Several international research projects are addressing various aspects of VE requirements, but current approaches and prototypes are quite limited, still lacking a comprehensive and flexible characterization of the multiplicity of scenarios. This paper proposes a cooperative systems approach to model and support a VE and is based on results of an ongoing Esprit project (PRODNET II1). The needs of Small and Medium size Enterprises (SMEs) are particularly addressed.
2. TYPES OF COOPERATION BY CLASS OF VE
In order to characterize the various types of cooperative processes involved in VEs, it is important to first identify the various classes of VEs and their life cycle phases. Classes of VE. A first classification according to a number of characteristics such as duration, topology, coordination, and visibility scope, has been proposed in 4]. However, further characteristics are defined here to better classify different kinds of VEs:
 This research is partially supported by the ESPRIT project 22647, PRODNET II of the European Commission. This project involves the following partners: CSIN (PT), New University of Lisbon (PT), University of Amsterdam (NL), ESTEC (PT), Uninova (PT), Lichen Informatique (FR), CIMIO (UK), Federal University of Santa Catarina (BR) and Herten (BR).

-Duration. Some enterprise alliances are made for a single business opportunity and are dissolved at the end of such process. This situation corresponds perhaps to the most typical kind of virtual enterprise for which examples can be found in large scale engineering systems, such as, for instance, consortia involved in building a bridge. But there are also long term alliances that last for an indefinite number of business processes or for a specified time span. In most cases of supply chains in food industry or in the automotive industry it is more typical to find long term alliances. -Topology. According to the topology of the network, there are situations that show a variable / dynamic nature, in which some enterprises (non strategic partners) can dynamically join or leave the alliance according to the phases of the business process or other market factors. But in many sectors there are supply chains with an almost fixed structure (little variation in terms of suppliers or clients). The case of dynamic topologies, may require specific functionalities for partners (suppliers) search and selection, maintenance of directories of suppliers, and support for the joining / leaving actions. Another aspect to be considered is the interaction with other enterprises not belonging to the VE, such as occasional suppliers or spontaneous clients (electronic commerce). -Participation. Another facet related to the 'geometry' is the possibility of an enterprise participating simultaneously in various networks or being committed to a single alliance (exclusivity). In the non-exclusive case, it is necessary to handle various virtual participation spaces following different cooperation rules. -Coordination. In terms of network coordination various models can be found. In some sectors, as typified by the automobile industry, there is a dominant company "surrounded" by a relatively fixed network of suppliers (starlike structure). The dominant company defines "the rules of the game" and imposes its own standards, namely in terms of information exchange and access rights. Similar examples can be found in the agribusiness sector. The concept of extended enterprise can be used to describe this particular case, as it is like the dominant enterprise extending its borders over the satellite suppliers. A different organization could be found in some supply chains without a dominant company (democratic alliance) in which all nodes cooperate on an equal basis, keeping their autonomy, but joining their core competencies. But even in this case, a coordinator node might be necessary in order to keep general information regarding the VE membership, organizational structure and cooperation principles. In some other cases, once a successful alliance is formed, companies may realize the mutual benefits of having some common management of resources and skills and they may tend to create a kind of common coordination structure (federation). The implicit reduction in local autonomy of each

node would be compensated by a global optimization at the VE level. There are less real life examples of federated structures, except in the cases of groups owned by the same holding, but it will not be surprising if the market dynamics forces SMEs to embark in such deeper coordination alliances. Examples of this tendency can already be found in the small retailers sector as a reaction to the large hypermarket chains. -Visibility scope. Both related to topology and coordination is the aspect of visibility scope, i.e., "how far", along the network, can one node "see". In most cases a node only sees its direct neighbors (suppliers, clients). That is the case observed in most supply chains. The list of suppliers is normally considered a secret asset of each company. In more advanced coordination situations, a node might have some visibility over other (non direct) levels, including some levels of information access which may lead to a more optimized operation of the VE. Examples of functions that could benefit from a wider visibility scope are forecasting and distribution logistics planning. Life cycle of a VE. Various phases can be identified in the life cycle of a VE: creation, operation and dissolution. In each phase specific types of interactions between members of the VE take place. Types of cooperation problems. For the various phases and classes of VEs, a number of cooperation processes can be identified. Examples: -Partners search, selection and consortium formation, VE entry/leave operations; -Contracts - conditions specification, configuration of workflow / coordination mechanisms, setting access rights and visibility scope; -Orders related interactions - orders emission / reception / acceptance, orders change, monitoring; -Technical data interchange - technical product specification, quality related information, process related information, manufacturing status monitoring, etc.; -Shared supervision - when a client enterprise have the right to observe or even act upon the local supervision system of a supplier; -Joint scheduling / workload distribution; -Concurrent / distributed engineering.
It shall be noted that although a VE can be considered a cooperative system, as its members got involved on such organization on a volunteer basis and directed by some common goals, the individual members are not totally cooperative. Individual companies have their own individual goals, some times competing goals, and may naturally show different levels of distrust. On the other hand, it is also important to consider that a VE is not an isolated system. Interactions with outsider enterprises, via a general purpose communications infrastructure, will naturally happen and special care is necessary regarding the non-cooperative (even malicious) actions of some outsiders.
3. COMPONENT TECHNOLOGIES
The implementation of a supporting infrastructure for cooperative systems in VEs can be based on a number of component technologies and paradigms. In our opinion, more than an effort to define totally new paradigms, it is necessary to integrate paradigms and technologies developed in different (but close) disciplines. The infrastructure should involve:  Interoperability and integration of standards, such as STEP (technical product data), EDI (business related transactions), TCP/IP, KQRML-like protocols, etc.  Integration of workflow systems in order to model and manage the concurrent activities involving the various agents in the network.

 Integration of safety and authentication mechanisms, such as those being developed in the area of Electronic Commerce cryptography based on public keys, digital signature, definition of access rights, etc..
 Integration of Multiagent Systems development environment, considering a "not so cooperative" assumption and an unsafe / unreliable environment. It is important to realize that the various nodes of the VE network want to preserve much of their autonomy, in some cases they have even antagonic goals, and as networks are subject to piracy acts and to temporary failures, this environment cannot be considered a friendly one. This has to be reflected in the organizational structures, levels of information redundancy and protection. It is also important to consider the integration of legacy systems such as PPC / MRP, CAD, DB repositories, and other tools that companies may already have. These are quite heterogeneous systems but they have to be preserved. In terms of communication infrastructures, the main aspects to be considered are the adoption of Internet or VAN (Valued Added Networks) and also the challenges provoked by mobile communications (mobile agents in the cooperative environment). In terms of the information sharing and exchange infrastructure some components are: Federated / distributed DBMS, integration of DB and WEB, integration of DBMS with WFMS, and the information exchange approaches and tools such as CORBA, etc. Some of the required functionalities in a VE environment involve direct interaction with the human operators, possibly located in different (remote) nodes of the network. HTMLbased interfaces combined with JAVA applets represent a good implementation approach easily supported by the current browsing technology on the Internet (fig. 1). That is the case, for instance, of accesses to the Electronic Catalog or supporting the human-launched orders.

Server node

HTML Doc/Java
Applet
Client node

Middleware
Distributed object framework/ http_based services
Figure 1 Middleware and Java applets
In this case the client node does not need to buy "any software" to access its supplier. It just downloads a HTML/Java document from the remote supplier. Nevertheless, due to the need for security and authorized data access mechanisms, it will be necessary to deliver small modules of software to the client nodes, depending on the implementation strategy chosen for the VE platform.

Mediator/wrapper
Legacy database

Middleware Layer

Supplier node

Electronic Catalog DB

MiddleWare Layer

Supplier node

Client Tool
Client node

Figure 2 Integration of information sources
In many cases the information sources to answer the remote access queries are contained in the legacy systems (internal information systems and internal enterprise management software). An integration of these heterogeneous information sources with the WEB-based technologies is necessary. This integration can be based on a mediator / wrapper approach, where information sources are "wrapped" in a way that their interfaces to the outside appear uniform, and the mediators are built to mediate the execution (local workflow) of the local tasks in the source nodes. Middleware technology, distributed object framework (such as CORBA, JAVA/RMI, Microsoft/DCOM, or CGI-based extensions to current DBMSs) can be used to support this integration process. Some other functions, such as forecasting or product flow tracking, need to have access to the information maintained in different nodes of the VE / supply chain. The same general uniform approach based on a common middleware technology can be adopted to support these tools, but it is also necessary to install, in each information supplier node, an agent to interact with the requests issued by remote client tools (fig. 2). Agentbased (e.g. JESS and JAT tools) or distributed object request brokers paradigms can be considered as candidates for this implementation. It is important to notice that the technologies in these areas are still not stable and a lot of advances are expected in the next two years, in specific to what relates to the middleware and the safe access mechanism components.
Besides the integration aspects it is also important to consider the extensions to legacy components. For instance, to support the problem of handling / monitoring orders, information update notifications, integration and interface with PPC, integration of EDI and STEP, some extensions to handle the incomplete and imprecise orders, will impose extensions to the various components and notably to the PPC.
4. PRODNET ARCHITECTURE
To support this environment and coping with the enterprises' legacy systems PRODNET II proposes an infrastructure including two main modules [3], [4]: Internal Module and Cooperation Layer. The Internal Module represents the autonomous unit of a particular company. It includes the complete structure of the company's information (data bases, information systems, etc.) and all the internal decision making processes / enterprise activities (internal PPC and engineering systems). The Cooperation Layer contains all the functionalities for the inter-connection between the company and the entire net. It represents the communication and coordination role and works as the interlocutor of the company within the net. For each node of a VE network, PRODNET proposes the following architecture:

Advanced Coordination Functionalities

User Configur. Interface Module

STEP Module

PCL

EDI Module

PPC Production Planning and Control

PICP

Engineering & other internal modules

DIMS
Federated schema manag.
Federated query proces.

LCM
Workflow Engine
Protocol Handler

Infor. handling & Coordination kernel

PCI
Safety & Authentication
Communicat. Manager

PECP

Figure 3 PRODNET Reference Architecture

Where the main components are: PPC - Production Planning and Control System. This is the most important component of the internal module of a VE node. It includes functions as: i) Industrial Logistics Management: Orders flow management, Product data management, Sales Forecasts handling, Actual Requirements Planning; ii) Master Production Scheduling; iii) Production Control; iv) Quality Control / Tracking; and v) Industrial Costing. DIMS - Distributed Information Management System. The Distributed Information Management Subsystem in the PRODNET Cooperation Layer is responsible to model and manage all cooperation support information [Afsarmanesh97]. EDI Module. This module is responsible for receiving and formatting orders-related messages in EDIFACT format. Among its functionalities, it will check / parse EDIFACT syntax (for various versions of the standard), check for completeness of messages contents, and generate appropriate formats for sending out EDI messages. It will also detect and extract EDI messages embedding information represented in other formats, such order-associated STEP specifications. STEP Module. The STEP module's function is to handle the technical product data used within PRODNET. Ideally all product data should be exchanged in STEP format. The STEP services provided to PRODNET will allow for the transmission and reception of STEP files that have been clear text encoded according to a defined schema; as described in Part 21 of the STEP standard. It should also be possible to query that STEP data held within PRODNET by the usage of the Standard Data Access Interface, SDAI, or via a SQL interface. PCI - PRODNET Communication Infrastructure. This module is responsible for handling all communications with the other nodes in the network. It includes functionalities such as: Selection of communications protocol and channels; Basic communications management; Privacy mechanisms (cryptography); and Secure message communication channels between nodes. Configuration and User Interface. The PRODNET platform is intended to support a large diversity of enterprises and interconnection modes. This means a large heterogeneity in terms of available / installed services and desired management procedures. Therefore it is necessary to specify the desired cooperation behavior in an explicit plan (each enterprise has to define its particular activity flow plan) that will be "executed"/controlled by the Local Coordination Module. Additionally, the Configuration Component will allow a specification of the structure of the VE and the access rights of all its members. The User Interface assures an interface between the human operator (responsible for the interactions with the VE) and the PCL. The level of human intervention in this process will depend on the policy of each company and will be specified at the configuration phase (configuration and workflow plan). LCM - Local Coordination Module. This component is the "executor"/controller of the activity flow plan defined by the Configuration Component (a kind of workflow engine). In other words, it is responsible for the behavior of the PCL and

interacts with all the other modules. It handles all Cooperation Events according to the specified rules for the particular enterprise. These events have an asynchronous nature and are provoked by other nodes of the VE, by the Internal Module of the enterprise or by the Human Interface. PICP and PECP. An important component in any cooperative system is the protocols to support the interactions between the involved agents. PRODNET defines two different protocols to deal with communications from both the company internal side and the outside world. The protocols are the so-called PRODNET Internal Communication Protocol (PICP) and PRODNET External Communication Protocol (PECP). Advanced Coordination. PRODNET is addressing a few advanced coordination aspects: i) Partners search and selection; ii) Integrated logistics decision support system, which aims at providing the enterprise with "real-time" information about operations going on on its current suppliers. The expectation is that the trust building process and the decision to move forward in the integration process, at the SME level, can be facilitated by demonstration of such functionalities and their potential benefits.
5. INFORMATION SHARING AND MANAGEMENT
Enterprises involved in a VE, although competitors otherwise, need to share and exchange a part of their information in order to achieve the common goal of the virtual organization, and to support the VE functions as a single organization. However, in such a network, on one hand, due to the competitiveness of pre-existing enterprises and their proprietary information, it is not realistic to assume a single global schema defining all the information that is visible and exchanged within the VE platform. On the other hand, based on the specific fractal-shaped configuration of the VE(s) coordination in which an enterprise is involved, it is not realistic to even assume that all enterprises are at the same level and visibility by all the other enterprises involved in the VE(s). Rather every enterprise needs to independently and autonomously evaluate its relation with other enterprises and decide on the shared information with each of them. Consequently, the approach of distributed databases, warehouses, and any federated database that requires the definition of a single global schema to be shared and accessed by all enterprises, will fall short of properly supporting the VE paradigm. The support for enterprises autonomy can be provided through a "pure" federated cooperative architecture, which is not based on a single shared global schema. A natural consequence of this architecture is the support for security of shared data and provision of different access levels and rights to shared data, based on the roles of each enterprise in the VE. With reference to the PRODNET II architecture, a part of the enterprise information at its PCL needs to be made available and shared with other enterprises. Similarly and at the same time, some information from other nodes must be accessible and acquired also when the node is involved in more than one VE, by this enterprise. However, the visibility levels of the enterprise information from external nodes, must be carefully determined by the node, in order to ensure its autonomy and information privacy. In order to support these requirements, and proper interoperation among PCLs in different nodes, a federated database architecture is defined for the DIMS module in PRODNET [2],[3]. This federated architecture has its roots in the PEER federated database system, developed at the University of Amsterdam [1]. PEER is a fully federated, object-oriented information management system with special emphasis on node's autonomy and the complete distribution of both data and control within the cooperative network. Namely, it supports the sharing and exchange of information among cooperating autonomous and heterogeneous nodes without the

centralization and data-redundancy. In PEER, interdependencies between two nodes' information are established through the schemas defined on their information; thus there is no need to store the data redundantly in different nodes. Every node is represented by several schemas: a local schema (LOC), several import schemas (IMP), several export schemas (EXP) and an integrated schema (INT). The local schema is the schema that models the data stored locally. The various import schemas model the information that is accessible from other databases. An export schema models some information that a database wishes to make accessible to other nodes (usually, a node defines several export schemas). The integrated schema presents a coherent view on all accessible local and remote information. In general terms, federated database systems are multidatabase systems, in which every node in the federation maintains its local autonomy on the data and defines a set of export schemas through which the data is made available to other specific nodes. Also, every node will be able to import data from other nodes through their import schemas, and access their data according to the predefined access permissions. As a consequence of this general interaction facility, the approach allows the cooperation between the federated nodes in order to accomplish a common or global task, while the local autonomy and independence of every node is preserved and reinforced. The complex PRODNET distributed information management requirements can be satisfied by means of a federated architecture, in which the same PCL schema is repeated in all nodes and data can be imported/exported through the PCL schema, but with proper access rights defined for external nodes. Namely, the sharable data in every node can be accessed through the schema structure of its PCL information while preserving the proper information access and visibility constraints by means of well-determined export schema definitions.
6. OTHER CHALLENGES
Other important challenges in a cooperative environment for VE include:
i. Coordination. Aspects such as the explicit representation of coordination strategies (by adoption of a workflow language or Petri nets), the execution of the coordination strategies (workflow engine or Petri nets simulator), the cooperative system organization (negotiation, consortium formation), etc., represent major research topics being addressed by PRODNET II. Particularly in the context of SMEs, a large diversity in the way companies do business can be found. For instance, a company may want a strong human-based control of the client orders processing, while others may prefer to rely on more automatic procedures implemented in the PPC system. In each company a number of support services may be available and the company has to handle a large number of cooperation-related events, but the way these events are treated and which services to activate are a local autonomous decision. The separation between services and the control part is a promising approach towards the implementation of flexible behavior. Therefore it is important that the behavior of each company regarding its participation in a VE can be explicitly configured through a plan and other general profile characteristics. One approach to represent the dynamic behavior is through the Workflow Process Definition Language following the general workflow reference architecture proposed by the Worflow Management Coalition [8].Figure 4 illustrates a graphical definition of a process plan.

Figure 4 Graphical Workflow Definition Language Editor
Another alternative to represent the dynamic behavior of each VE node is a Petri Net. There is already a large tradition of using Petri nets in the modeling of manufacturing systems. A preliminary attempt to apply this formalism to model the business processes in a VE can be found in [...]. A comparative assessment of the two approaches has still to be made. Besides the dynamic plan, other aspects requiring configuration are: specification of the global structure of the VE, its topology and roles played by each member; definition of shared data and access rights; and characterization of the internal environment of each company in terms of available services. Another challenge is the design of a hierarchical coordination approach. On one hand, there are two clearly distinct levels: the global VE coordination level and the coordination of the cooperation events inside each member enterprise. On the other hand, even inside a single VE member, there are a large number of cooperation events to be handled, which require the definition of several sub-workflow plans. In order to facilitate the understanding and management of such plans the definition of a hierarchy of coordination levels seems adequate.
VE Coordination

VE member coordination

... VE member coordination

EDI STEP Coordination Coordination

Other services Coordination

Figure 5. Hierarchical workflow coordination

For instance, a lower level of coordination could include the EDI-related workflow, while an upper level takes care of the general management of the various services offered by the cooperation layer. A hierarchical approach can be complemented by the definition of a catalog of templates for the basic services (EDI, STEP, etc.) that can be used by default. In this way, the complexity of the configuration process can be reduced. -Negotiation in distributed dynamic scheduling. Dynamic scheduling is a major challenge in agile manufacturing systems for which the "agentification" and use of the contract negotiation paradigm appears to be a promising approach. This approach has now to be extended [6] to the VE scenario in which the production resources are distributed by several nodes and subordinated to different local coordination strategies and even aiming at partially different goals. Therefore, unlike the

single enterprise scenario, one of the major challenges here is to generalize the negotiation paradigm to a community where the agents are not totally cooperative, may have competing goals (an enterprise may participate in several VEs), and the information acess and information reliability are limited. Different members of the VE may also show a different level of willingness to participate in a global coordination.
ii. Services. The emergence of new service providers, namely specialized directories of suppliers with intelligent search engines, specialized decision support and advice systems, or electronic commerce sites, must be fully understood and appropriately interfaced by a VE platform. A number of services, not exclusive to VE but that might influence the VE, are emerging in the Internet or being suggested by end users. Examples of such services include:
-Advise services. Access to specialized information and advisory services is an important requirement identified in some application areas. For instance in agribusiness, farmers need to have a simplified and well organized access to information / advice on crops production, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), weather forecast, etc. Another example of shared information that needs to be accessed is the market data. For instance, also in the agribusiness sector it is important to have access to worldwide statistics and forecasts on crops production. Several sources of such information are already available on Internet but difficult to find and to use by nonexperts. Information Brokers that contact the expert information service provider, such as an IPM consulting service that gives advice on usage of fertilizers based on the soil and product information, and provide transparent access to this remote information for the users, need to be developed.
-Electronic catalogs and selling / buying agents. The implementation of electronic catalogs of products / services provided by each company and associated "marketing" services is an important challenge. Besides the basic multimedia presentation functionalities and integration with the internal DBs of the product suppliers, additional intelligent functionalities shall be included, such as: advanced search mechanisms, supporting selling agents to participate / interact with shopping agents, negotiation of prices taking into account the specificities of the interacting clients, etc. Another service that might be important for VEs is the support to Electronic Markets. Some experiments are already available in terms of using Internet-based "blackboards" for posting product offers / buyers notices. The Electronic Market tool should have a pro-active characteristic trying to achieve (promote) the best match between offers and requests. Links between the VE members and such "virtual trading markets", namely in terms of the Electronic Catalogs, will be necessary. In particular, one such "market" may be managed by the VE coordinator or by any other independent organization outside of a particular VE.
iii. Social and organizational issues and their consequences at technical level. It is particularly important to consider the evolution in the decision making process and the evolution in the levels of trust, which imply flexible and evolutive coordination approaches, evolutive data schemas, etc. -New organizational forms are expected. Besides the technological aspects it is very important to identify the important consequences in terms of the working structure, the processes, and also the roles played by all social intervening actors. SMEs are, in many cases, characterized by a strong human-centered decision making philosophy, strong feelings of autonomy, and information privacy. The paradigm of VE requires the acquisition of a new culture, the willingness to share and trust, and a new idea of ownership that goes beyond the borders of each contributing node. New organizational

forms are therefore expectable which makes necessary to determine and plan for the necessary changes in the roles and skills of human operators. -Telework and cooperative work. The same communications infrastructure that supports the VE can support telework and cooperative work, like concurrent engineering, among members of different enterprises. The concepts of concurrent engineering and collaborative work have, therefore, to be extended to the VE scenario. -Legal issues. This is another mandatory issue to be addressed in order to allow practical implantation of VEs. The legal framework of the VE itself, namely in terms of establishment of members' contracts, definition of roles, duties, authorities, and rights [7], as well as the legal aspects related to outsiders (other clients and suppliers, governmental organizations, etc.) need to be understood and supported. The understanding of these aspects is important not only for the implantation phase but they may also impact the architecture design.
iv. Reengineering. Methodologies for reengineering of legacy systems and implantation methods are one of the most difficult needs for the successful formation of VEs. Examples of aspects to be addressed here: -Reengineering the PPC system. Even the PRODNET approach of separating the internal functionalities of an enterprise and its cooperation layer does not eliminate the need for some reengineering of the legacy systems, namely the PPC system. This reengineering may involve: i) Extensions to the functionalities of the PPC such as functions to answer requests coming from the cooperation layer, such as requests about orders status or quality related information. ii) Mappings between the PPC internal data models and the data structures handled by the cooperation layer (namely by EDI or STEP). iii) Integration of internal and VE related decision making: workload distribution / production planning, partners search and selection, etc. -VE business process modeling. In order to better characterize the types of interactions between VE nodes and also to promote the necessary organizational changes, it is necessary to model all business processes supported by the VE. This task can be facilitated by a categorization of the processes according to a list of facets. For instance, PRODNET is using as a working framework a categorization based on the following facets: stock-related logistics, orders planning and type of interchanged data. Based on these characteristics, 13 classes of bilateral interactions could be identified for typical industrial virtual enterprises. -Progressive implantation. The implantation strategy is a key issue in the establishment of a VE, specially considering that participating enterprises exist a priori and have their own legacy systems and "traditions". Besides a strong involvement of the end users in this process, it is necessary to devise a stepby-step implantation approach. The first phases shall provide only basic, but secure, information exchange mechanisms. The coordination functionalities have to be added gradually.
7. CONCLUSIONS
The field of Virtual Enterprises represent a very challenging application area for cooperative systems approaches. The architecture being developed by the Esprit PRODNET II project addresses some of these challenges offering an open environment for cooperation between autonomous enterprises. Starting with a set of functionalities that support basic cooperation (simple client-supplier interactions), this platform is designed to cope with a progressive level of trust building between participating enterprises and, therefore, flexible

behavior configuration mechanisms as well as advanced coordination services are included. The complexity of this area and its large multidisciplinarity, involving not only IT aspects but also social, organizational and legal issues, raises a lot of important challenges for cooperative systems that demand further research.
8. REFERENCES
[1] H. Afsarmanesh; F. Tuijnman; M. Wiedijk; L.O. Hertzberger (1993) - Distributed Schema Management in a Cooperation Network of Autonomous Agents. Proc. of the 4th Int. Conf. on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA'93), LNCS 720, Springer-Verlag, Sept 93.
[2] H. Afsarmanesh; L.M. Camarinha-Matos (1997) - Federated Information Management for Cooperative Virtual Organizations, Proc. DEXA'97, 8th Int. Conf. on Databases and Expert Systems (LNCS1308, Springer Verlag), Toulouse, France, Sept 97.
[3] L.M. Camarinha-Matos; H. Afsarmanesh (1998)- Virtual Enterprises: Life cycle supporting tools and technologies, to appear in Lyfe Cycle Engineering Handbook, A. Kusiak, A. Molina, Chapman & Hall.
[4] L.M. Camarinha-Matos; H. Afsarmanesh; C. Garita; C. Lima (1997) - Towards an Architecture for Virtual Enterprises, Proc. of the 2nd World Congress on Intelligent Manufacturing Processes & Systems, Budapest, Hungary, June 10-13, 1997.
[5] L.M. Camarinha-Matos; R. Carelli; J. Pellicer; M. Martin (1997) - Towards the virtual enterprise in food industry, Proc. of the ISIP'97 OE/IFIP/IEEE Int. Conf. on Integrated and Sustainable Industrial Production, Lisboa, Portugal, 14-16 May 1997, Chapman & Hall, ISBN 0 412 79950 2.
[6] R. Rabelo; L.M. Camarinha-Matos (1996) - Towards Agile Scheduling in Extended Enterprise, Proc. of BASYS'96: Balanced Automation Systems II, L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh (Eds.), Chapman & Hall, Jun 1996, ISBN 0-41278890-X, cap.41, pp.413-422.
[7] R. J. Scherer ­ Legal framework for a virtual enterprise in building construction, Proc. ICE'97 Int. Conf. Concurrent Enterprising, Nottingham, Oct 97.
[8] Workflow Management Coalition (1994) - Workflow Management Coalition, The Workflow Reference Model Document Number TC00 - 1003, Issue 1.1, Brussels, Nov 94.

