HYBRID NEURAL-BASED CONTROL 

SYSTEM FOR MOBILE ROBOT 

Andrey V. Gavrilov1, Vasilij V. Gubarev1, 

Kang-Hyun Jo2, H.H. Lee2, 

1Department of Computer Science, 

Novosibirsk State Technical University, Nemirovich-

Danchenko str. 136, Novosibirsk 

630087, Russia, Tel: +7(3832)460492, 
E-mail: avg/Gubarev@vt.cs.nstu.ru, 

2School of Electric-Electronic Information System 

Engineering, University of Ulsan,  
San 29, Mugeo-2 Dong, Namgu, 

Ulsan, 680-749, Korea 

Tel: +82(52)2591664, Fax: +82(52)2591686 

E-mail: jkh@islab.ulsan.ac.kr 

 

Abstract 
The architecture of control system for mobile robots is 
proposed in this  paper. This architecture is based on 
hybrid  approach  using  neural  networks 
for 
classification of images and organization of associative 
memory  as  well  as  semantic  networks  for  natural 
language processing and organization of memory and 
achievment of goals. 
Keywords:  hybrid  intelligent  systems,  mobile  robots, 
neural  networks,  semantic  networks,  natural  language, 
recognition of images.  

In last decade investigators and developers of applied 
artificial intelligent systems are trying to develope hybrid 
approach  to  implementation  of  AI  systems  [1-6].  This 
approach  includes  as  logical  processing  of  data  by 
classical  kinds  of  inference  such  associative  processing 
by neural networks. From one hand its application allows 
to  use  many  results,  achived  in  knowledge  engineering, 
with  its  comfortable  for  visualization,  verbalization  and 
formalization  of  knowledges.  From  other  hand  it  allows 
to  use  possibilities  of  lerning  and  really  work  with 
fuzzyness of neural networks. 

Hybrid approach is most interesting in development of 
intelligent 
all 
achievments of  AI, and task of impementation of  strong 
AI is connected with creating of robots. In this paper one 
kind of robot  - mobile intelligent robot, is consided. 

accumulate 

because 

robots 

ones 

In  wide  world  hybrid  approach  to  control  of  mobile 

robots is developed in last some years [7-13]. 

Architecture, described in this paper of control system 
of  mobile  robot,  is  based  on  two-level  structure  of  data 
processing  in  mind  and  model  of  associatve  memory  of 
intelligent  system,  proposed  by  one  from  authors  in 
[14,15]. 

Intelligent  system  may  be  subscribed  as  two  levels: 
logical (verbal) and associative thinking or processing of 
knowledge. Logical level deals with concepts, which may 
be described in any  sign  system (in particular  in natural 
language).  On  this  level  processes  well  known  in 
knowledge engineering are used, for example, inference, 
different  kinds  of  search.  Associative  level  deals  with 
images  (patterns)  and  in  this  level  solving  of  task  is 
described as associative processes – storing and recall of 

associations,  as  well  as  classification,  clusterization  and 
generalization. 

Set  of  images  can  be  divided  on  static  and  dynamic 
and into homogeneous and heterogeneous images. Strictly 
speaking, the static images do not exist at all in the real 
world. However, for simplification of representation and 
handling of knowledge it is useful to consider separately 
images,  which  do  not  depend  essentially  on  time  and  to 
consider as their static. 

In  corresponding  to  model  in  [14]  and  described 
includes 

above,  proposed  control  system  of  robot 
symbolic and image levels. 

Symbolic  level  is  based  on  semantic  network  and 
executes functions of recognition of sense of sentences in 
natural  language  and  planning  of  achivement  of  goals. 
Image level consists of part for processing of sensor data 
and part for control of engines. For one’s part processing 
of  sensor  data  consists  of  functions  of  classification 
(clusterization)  (neural  network  1)  and  associative 
memory (fig.1).  

Semantic network 
Programming and 
achieving of goals, 

syntactic and semantic 

analysis 

Words, 
sentences, 
commands 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associative memory 
 
 
Associations 
 
between images, 
 
positions and signs 
 
(names)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clusterization and 
 
recognition of 
 
images and situations 
 
 
 
 
 

Neural network 1 

Images 

Neural network 2 

Associations between 
states of engines, 
images and 
commands to 
optimize trajectories 
f

i

Actions 

Fig1. Hybrid architecture of Control System 

 
This control system may be used for solving of 

following tasks: 

1.  Control  by  sentences  in  natural  language  after 
to  associations  between  words  (concepts), 

learning 
coordinates and images. 

2.  Description of place, where robot is situated. 
Human  may  be  name  any  object  being  in  front  of 
robot  (in  field  of  vision).  For  example,  it  may  be  table, 
cupboard, chair, man and so on. At that associative links 
are  created  between  image  of  object,  its  localization 
(coordinates) in environment  and its name. Then human 

may  be  order  to  robot  “move  to  table”  and  robot  is 
making this motion.  

Neural network 2 is used for storing and execute path 

to place with found coordinates 

Other  possibility  of  this  architecture  is  to  explain 
where robot is situated. In this case query for associative 
memory may be recognized image. 

There  are  many  models  of  neural  networks  used  for 
classification  and  clusterization.  Most  known  from  ones 
are:  perceptrons  with 
forward  and  errors  back 
propagation, self-organizing maps of Kohonen, RBF-nets, 
model  of  Hemming,  the  models  ART-1  and  ART-2  of 
Grossberg-Carpenter. 

First  three  from  ones  has  determined  disadvantages. 
Main  of  its  is  necessary  of  previous  knowledge  about 
number of classes and also its approximate characteristics 
(in RBF-nets and Kohonen’s maps). Model of Hemming 
can work with binary input vectors. 

From  our  view  to  provide  solving  of  tasks  describes 
above  neural  network  for  classification  and  recognition 
(neural network 1 in fig.2) must have following features: 
1)  learning algorithm must be constructive and must 

provide solving of clustering, 

2)  model of neural network  must support  work  with 

analog signals as well as binary. 

low 

Such  demands  are  supported  in  model  ART-2  of 
Grossberg  and  Carpenter.  For  proposed  control  system, 
modified  model  ART-2  may  be  used.  Modification  is 
following.  In  unlike  to  classical  model  in  this  kind  two 
regimes  are  proposed  –  learning  and  using.  In  regime 
“learning”  it  is  possible  to  create  new  clusters  (new 
output neurons) and in regime “using” this possibility is 
locked.  First  regime  is  set  when  it  is  needed  to  store 
association  between  image  (its  class)  and  any  words  (or 
sentence).  The  second  regime  is  set  when  robot  is 
monitoring for environment during motion. 

For  implementation  of  static  associative  memory  for 
store  of  association  between  recognized  images,  words 
(concepts) and position (coordinates) may be used model 
of Hopfield and its modifications but model of Hopfield 
has  one  disadvantage  – 
information  capacity. 
Therefore,  errors  during  processing  of  query  to  memory 
are very possible. Yet task demands exact corresponding 
between  recognized  word  (concept)  and  coordinates  of 
object  (position),  named  by  this  word.  In  addition,  for 
implementation of this associative memory on Hopfield’s 
model  is  necessary  determined  number  of  inputs  and 
outputs (number of neurons) that is impossible after using 
of ART-2. So simple table is proposed for organization of 
associative memory. For every new cluster (from ART-2) 
new record of table is created including index recognized 
concept or word and coordinates. 

Known  some  examples  of  application  of  neural 
networks for control of mobile robots, which may be used 
for  implementation  of  dynamic  associative  memory  for 
store of associations between coordinates, states of robot 
and actions. Most known and interesting of ones are robot 
GMD [10,11] and DRAMA [8]. 

Similar neural network allow to solve following task 
for  robot.  Robot  can  to  learn  with  teacher  by  show  him 
how  it  is  needed  to  act  in  determined  situation  (for 
example, in front any obstacle) or sequence of actions for 
achievement of goal (in particular to turn of obstacles).   

In  last  decade  one  of  actual  areas  of  an  artificial 
intelligence and robots is development of devices for care 
for  elders  and  people  with  disabilities.  In  particular,  in 
many  laboratories  of  the  world  works  on  creation  of 
robots wheelchairs [25], which, due to use of AI, allow to 
facilitate  control  of  them  are  conducted.  One  of  such 
projects  is  the  project  which  is  carried  out  in  laboratory 
«Intellectual  systems»  of  Research  center  NARC 
University of Ulsan (Republic Korea) [26]. 

Till  now  this  wheelchair  could  work  in  one  of  three 
modes: manual with control by joystick, automatized with 
control  by  head  (turn  of  a  head  operates  turn  of  an 
wheelchair, a nod of a head is corresponding to set/off of 
movement),  automatized  with  control  by  ball  (the 
wheelchair  goes  on  the  certain  distance  behind  a  ball, 
which is carried ahead by the person). 

Last  two  modes are based on use of  technical  vision 

(video camera). 

The  architecture  of  a  control  system  of  the  mobile 
robot  suggested  in  the  present  article  is  used  for 
implementation  of  the  fourth  mode.  In  it  the  wheelchair 
can be trained in a verbal designation of a place, where it 
is  or  object  which  it  sees,  and  then  to  execute  a  verbal 
order to move to this place (object). 

test  and  debugging  of  connections  between 
modules of proposed architecture, for check features and 
possibilities  of  model  ART-2  for  recognition  of  images 
program model of control system was developed.  

To 

In program model following functions were 

implemented: 

- Clusterization and classification of images (pictures 

from graphic files in format .bmp); 

- Simulation  of  placement  of 

robot 

in  2D-

- Simulation of moving of robot from current position 

environment; 

to position-goal; 

- Storing  associations  between  coordinates,  images 
and names of situations (“viewed” images) in associative 
memory, implemented as table; 

- Fuzzy recognition of words – name of images (part 
of technology of natural language processing, described 
above); 

- Simulation  of  recall  of  association  between  input 
word  and  coordinates  and  moving  of  robot  to  position-
goal with its coordinates. 

In  fig.  2  structures  of  processes  and  data  in  this 

program model are shown. 

To  test  features  of  application  of  model  ART-2  as 
neural  network  1,  possibilities  of  fuzzy  recognition  of 
words and abilities of connections between ART-2, words 
recognition  and  associative  memory,  some  experiments 
are provided with this model. 

From results following conclusions are done: 

1)  the  model  ART-2  is  able  to  solve  task  of 
recognition  of  images  in  proposed  control  system  if 
threshold is choose enough correctly; 

2)  the  shifts  of  image  don’t  serious  influence  on 

carefully of recognition; 

3)  the  light  does  more  influence  on  carefully  of 

recognition; 

4)  even in case  with errors this errors don’t exerts 
influence on solving of first task (order to robot to move 
by name of place, where he must go); 

Associative memory 

Execution 
 of command 

Neural Network 

Storing of association 

Recalling of association 

Clusterization 

Recognition of word 

Recognition of word 

Dictionary 

Image (bmp) 

Input of image 

 

 

Word 

Command with word 

Recognition of command 

Fig 2. Structure of program model of hybrid control system of robot 

Input of sentence 

 

5)  there is task to select right value of threshold for 
on one  hand to recognize  similar images if it is needed, 
and  from  other  hand  do  not  create  many  clusters  for 
analog images, which must recognized as similar; 

6)  there  is  task  to  select  time  of  calculate  of  new 

coefficient of normalization for new several images. 

Also  this  program  model  was  used  for  test  of  fuzzy 

recognition of words. 

For  example,  for  threshold  equal  0,8  word  “kitchen” 
was  recognized  right  for  following  input  words  with 
errors:  kitchens,  kichen,  kitchan,  ketchen,  kithen.  For 
threshold equal 0,7  words  “kechen” and  “kichene”  were 
recognized as “kitchen” too. 

In this paper the hybrid architecture of control system 
for  mobile  robots  is  developed,  based  on  neural  and 
semantic  networks.  The  application  of  this  architecture 
for implementation in robot wheelchair is proposed. This 
architecture is oriented on  supply of control by  voice in 
natural language. 

As shown in experiments with program model of this 
architecture, one can to solve tasks to order for robot go 
by  call  of  position-goal  in  natural  language.  Moreover 
was  shown  that  proposed  for  this  architecture  model 
ART-2 and technology of fuzzy recognition of words are 
suitable.  At  the  same  time  the  simulation  of  this 
architecture and analyzing of features of this architecture 
show  any  problems  for  solve  in  continue  of  this 
investigations: 

to  adapt  ones 

language  processing 

1.  The  continues  development  of  technology  of 
natural 
for 
description  of  situations  (positions)  and  its  using  for 
forming  and  achievement  of  goals  and  explain  where 
robot  is  situated  (now  this  technology  is  oriented  for 
search texts by query in Natural Language. 
 

2.  Development and investigation of application of 

speech for control of robot. 

3.  Development of methods and devices of adapt of 
parameters  “threshold  for creating of  new cluster” and 
“threshold  for  words  recognition”  during  action  of 
robot,  as  well  as  development  of  adaptation  by 
recalculation of coefficient of normalization of images. 
4.  Development  of  subsystem  for  control  of 

moving of robot to goal based on neural network. 

Moreover, of cause at first the physical experiments 

with robot wheelchair are planned in short future. 

 
This  work  was  supported  by  NARC  ((Network-
based  Automation  Research  Center))  of  University  of 
Ulsan (Republic Korea) and was implemented in main 
during of visit of Gavrilov A.V. there. 

 
References 
 
[1] Honavar, V. Symbolic Artificial Intelligence and 

Numeric Artificial Neural Networks:  Toward a 
Resolution of the Dichotomy. Invited chapter. In: 
Computational Architectures Integrating Symbolic and 
Neural Processes. Sun, R. and Bookman, L. (Ed.) N. 
Y.:Kruwer, 1994. – Pp. 351-385. 

[2] Funobashi M., Moeda A., Morooka, Y.Mori K. 
Fuzzy and Neural Hybrid Expert Systems: Sinergetic AI. 
- AI in Japan, IEEE, 1995, august. - Pp. 33-40. 

[3]  Averbukh  A.B.,  Hybrid  intelligent  architecture 

for real time processing. - IEEE, 1999. - Pp. 4107-4110. 

[4] Meesad P., Yen G.G. A hybrid intelligent system 

for medical diagnosis. - IEEE, 2001. - Pp. 2558-2563. 

[5] Mori H., Aoyamu H., Yamanaka T., Urano S. A 
hybrid  intelligent  system  for  fault  detection  in  power 
systems. - IEEE, 2002. - Pp. 2138-2143. 

[23] Hazel A., Peacock A., Smith S., Wintermute H. 
Initial  Report  on  Wheelesley:  A  Robotic  Wheelshair 
System. - Proc. of IJCAI’95.  

[24] Hilman M., Hagan K., Jepson J., Orpwood R. 
The Weston Wheelchair Mounted Assistive Robot - 
The  Design  Story.  -  Robotica,  Cambridge  University 
Press, 2002. - Vol.20, Pp.125-132.  

[25] Yoshinori Kuno, Nobutaka Shimada, Yoshiaki 
Shirai. A Robotic Wheelchair Based on the integration of 
Human and Environmental Observations: Look Where 
You’re Going. – IEEE Robotics and Automation 
Magazine, March, 2003. – Pp.26-34.  

[26]  Kang-Hyun  Jo,  Yeo-Hong  Yoon.  Intelligence 
for  a  Wheelchair  Robot  using  Camera.  -  //  Proc.  of  Int. 
Conf. IST-2003, Novosibirsk, 2003. – Vol. 3, Pp.  

[6] Gavrilov A.V. A combination of Neural and 

Semantic Networks in Natural Language Processing. - // 
Proc. of the 7th Korea-Russia Int. Symp. KORUS-2003, 
Ulsan, 2003. – Vol. 2, Pp. 143-147. 

[7]  M.Huber,  R.A.Grupen.  A  Hybrid  Architecture 
for  Learning  Robot  Control  Tasks.  –  AAAI  Spring 
Symposium Series: Hybrid Systems and AI, 1999.  

[8]  A.Billard,  G.Hayes.  DRAMA,  a  Connectionist 
Architecture  for  Control  and  Learning  in  Autonomous 
Robots. – Adaptive Behavior, 1999, 7(1). – Pp. 35-63. 

[9]  Yoichiro  Endo,  Ronald  C.  Arkin.  Anticipatory 
Robot  Navigation  by  Simultaneously  Localizing  and 
Building  a  Cognitive  Map.  –  Mobile  Robot  Laboratory, 
Georgia Institute of Technology. 2003. – 7 p. 

[10]  A.Weitzenfeld, 

F.Cervantes, 
R.Olivares,  F.Corbacho.  A  Neural  Schema  Architecture 
for  Autonomous  Robots.  –  Mobile  Robot  Laboratory, 
Georgia Institute of Technology. 1998. – 15 p. 

R.Arkin, 

[11]  A.Weitzenfeld, 

F.Cervantes. 
J.F.Peniche.  Visualization  of  multi-level  Neural-Based 
Robotic  Systems.  -  Mobile  Robot  Laboratory,  Georgia 
Institute of Technology. 1998. – 10 p. 

R.Arkin, 

[12]  Hallam  B.  Animal  Learning  Models  as  Robot 
Controllers. – Proc. of the SIRS2000, MIT Press, 2000. – 
Pp. 131-140. 

[13]  Chohra  A.,  Scholl  P.  Neural  Networks  (NN) 
Based  Learning  of  Elementary  Behaviors  and  their 
Integration  in  FPGA  Architectures  for  a  Fast  Moving 
Robot Team (RoboCup). 

[14]  Gavrilov  A.V.  About 

  Knowledge 
Representation  and  Processing  in  Intelligent  Systems.  – 
4-th Int. Symp.  “KORUS-2000”, V. 2, Ulsan.. - Pp. 84-
87. 

[15]  Gavrilov  A.V.  The  model  of  associative 
memory  of  intelligent  system.  -  /  The  6-th  Russian-
Korean 
International  Symposium  on  Science  and 
Technology. Proceedings. -  Novosibirsk, 2002. - Vol. 1.- 
Pp. 174-177. 

[16] Gavrilov A.V. Interactive system for preparing 
of  programs  for  robots.  –  In  book:  Automatyka,  v.99, 
Glivice, 1988, p.173-180. 

[17]  D.E.  Rumelhart,  G.E.  Hinton,  R.J.  Williams, 
Learning internal representations by error propagation, in: 
D.E.  Rumelhart,  J.L.  McClelland 
(Eds.),  Parallel 
Distributed Processing: Explorations in the microstructure 
of  Cognition,  Vol.  I,  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  1986,  pp. 
319–362. 

[18] T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps. Berlin, 

Theory, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1992. 

[21]  Carpenter  G.,  A.,  Grossberg  S.  Pattern 
Recognition  by  Self-Organizing  Neural  Networks, 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1991. 

[22] Hopfild J.J. Neural networks and physical 

systems with emergent collective computational abilites// 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA.- 1982.- 79.- p.2554-2558. 

Heidelberg: Springer, 1995. 

[19]  S.  Chen,  C.F.N.  Cowan,  and  P.M.  Grant. 
Orthogonal least squares learning for radial basis function 
networks.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Neural  Networks,  2(2): 
302-309, 1991 

[20]  Artificial  Neural  Networks:  Concepts  and 

