In: Proceedings of COA 2007 - 8th IFAC Symposium on Cost Oriented Automation
Affordable Automation Systems, Ciudad de la Habana, Cuba, Feb 12 - 14, 2007.

TOWARDS A SEMI-TYPOLOGY FOR VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION BREEDING ENVIRONMENTS
Hamideh Afsarmanesh 1, Luis M. Camarinha-Matos 2
1University of Amsterdam Kruislaan 403 ­ 1098 SJ Amsterdam - The Netherlands
E-mail: hamideh@science.uva.nl
2New University of Lisbon Quinta da Torre ­ 2829-516 Monte Caparica - Portugal
E-mail: cam@uninova.pt
Abstract: The need for collaboration among heterogeneous and autonomous organizations has manifested in a wide variety of domains and application areas. Many of these cases represent collaboration among organizations from different disciplines and sectors. Unlike earlier approaches, today both research and practice have concluded that the most efficient manner to dynamically create VOs, is through the pre-existence of long term strategic alliances of organizations that act as the breeding environment for VOs. Virtual organization Breeding Environments (VBEs) are strategic alliances that provide necessary conditions and supporting mechanisms for fluid cost/time effective brokerage of VOs. This paper identifies the main distinguishing characteristics of the VBEs, and addresses the challenges involved in defining a VBE typology. Copyright © 2007 IFAC
Keywords: Virtual organizations, collaborative networks, virtual enterprises, breeding environment.

1. INTRODUCTION
Areas that require organizations' collaboration range from: product/service-based environments (e.g. for network centric manufacturing and tourism), to scientific developments (e.g. for drug discovery) and even to national/international crisis management areas (e.g. for rescue missions and recovery initiatives involved in earthquake/floods), etc. Some earlier approaches, have suggested the possibility of dynamic on-demand creation of Virtual Organizations (VOs) formed out of the open universe of organizations accessible through the web. Both research and practice have concluded today that the most efficient manner to dynamically create VOs is through the pre-existence of long term strategic alliances of organizations, also called clusters, networks, and clubs of organizations.

These strategic alliances that we have named Virtual organizations Breeding Environments (VBEs) (Afsarmanesh, Camarinha-Matos 2005, CamarinhaMatos, Afsarmanseh 2003) provide the necessary conditions and supporting mechanisms and environment for fluid cost/time effective brokerage, planning, and launching of VOs. In 2003 for example, the government of Japan invested more than 200 million Euros into setting up a large number of VBEs in varied sectors, in order to increase their potential VO involvements (Kaihara 2004). These VBEs constituted SMEs as well as large industrial organizations, Universities, and research institutes in Japan.
A VBE represents an association of organizations and their related supporting institutions, adhering to a

base long term cooperation agreement, and adoption of common operating principles and infrastructures, with the main goal of increasing their preparedness towards rapid configuration of temporary alliances for collaboration in potential Virtual Organizations. Namely, when a collaboration opportunity is identified by one member (as a broker), a subset of VBE organizations can be selected to form a VO (Afsarmanesh, Camarinha-Matos 2005).
Some earlier cases of VBEs were mostly business based and focused on a regional basis (Fig. 1), but new forms are emerging, also including the non-profit VBEs involved in non-regional activities.

Global

Virtual organizations Breeding Environment (VBE)

Virtual Lab

Business Ecosystem

Disaster rescue network

Regional

Industry district Industry cluster

For profit

Non-profit

Figure 1 ­ Examples of VBEs

In order to study the wide variety of VBEs and to model their structure, components, functions, and behavior, in a systematic approach we first need to characterize the VBE paradigm. A further challenge however is the classification/categorization of different types of VBEs based on their characterization. This paper both identifies a set of distinguishing characteristics for the VBEs, and addresses the challenges involved in the classification of VBEs based on their characteristics and challenges in defining a VBE typology.

The Challenge. Classification is a generic abstraction mechanism used in systems modeling. Depending on the purpose of the classification and the attributes used, many different results may be produced by such mechanism. As such, many possible classifications can be developed to model different aspects of a limited environment, depending on the considered purpose.

A typology is a classification based on definition of particular types or categories,where the members of each type or category are identified by postulating their specified attributes. Typically, types/categories in a typology are: (1) mutually exclusive, and (2) collectively exhaustive. For example in the biodiversity area, the taxonomy defined for limited collection of animals on earth, although taken some centuries follows a straightforward procedure for creating the typology classifying them, through which also identifying a few exceptions where the defined types are not mutually exclusive.

Considering the above definitions, it becomes clear that defining a typology for a new "paradigm" such as the VBE with the purpose to classify existing and emerging VBEs , is a big challenge if at all possible. This is simply due to the fact that on one hand the VBE paradigm is not a limited environment, while it has a large number of manifestations. On the other hand there is a wide diversity of purposes and perspectives through which the VBEs can be classified. Therefore, prior to our research towards identification of a VBE typology, we are aware of the fact that we will not be able to identify a set of mutually exclusive types to classify the VBEs, and thus we aim at a VBE semi-typology to tackle the challenge of identifying a number of types that can collectively exhaust both the existing and the forthcoming VBEs. It is our belief that such classification, even if not providing clear cut categorization of VBEs, as exemplified above for the Bio-diversity area, is still valuable, providing insight into the characterization, understanding, and thus modeling of the VBEs. This is specially the case, if our identified semi-typology has an "intuitive" appeal for categorization of VBEs, and gets adopted by research and practice in this paradigm. This paper represents the results achieved so far in relation to the typology of VBEs.
In our approach, further to the literature study on the past research, we also studied and analyzed the "determining characteristics" of several running clusters/networks of organizations. In this analysis we faced a large number of VBE distinguishing characteristics that can be used in one way or another as the main purpose/criteria for VBE semi-typology classification. These include the following:
Multiplicity of sectors/domains: Single sector, Multi-sector, ... Variety of collaboration drivers: Customer induced, Capacity achievement, ... Orientation (value system): Business orientation, social welfare orientation, ... Level of dynamism: Dynamic pace (evolving), Static pace, ... Financial support mechanism: Publicly supported, Privately supported, ... Localization: Regional, Non-regional, ... Size: Small (under 20), Medium (under 100), Large (under 1000), Very-Large (above 1000) number of members, ... Nature of output results: Tangible output, Intangible output, ... Mission categories: Profit-based, Non-profitbased, ... Application of ICT tools: Base management services, advanced services, ... etc.
Among a number of studied VBEs, six European networks/clusters of SMEs were analyzed in depth for this purpose, which provided a rich ground for developing a VBE semi-typology. These SME

networks were chosen from different countries, including: Italy, Finland, Germany, and Spain. Representing real examples from the market and society, these six SME networks are quite varied in their VBE characteristics. Based on our previous analysis, the following issues/questions constituted the main investigated criteria in these networks:
· How many sectors are involved in the VBE? · How and which source supports the VBE
financially"? · How does the VBE find the VO opportunities? · What is the frequency of VO configuration and
VBE members' involvement in VOs? · How are the VBE management, administration, and
governance organized? · What are the functions performed by the VBE
administration? · How is the VBE configured in terms of roles of its
actors, permitted competition, location of VBE members, etc.? · What kind of organizations can be included or are invited to join the VBE and how large is the VBE? · Are VOs always configured only from the VBE members, or also consisting of some organizations from outside? And if so, under what conditions? · What is the relationship between the VO customers and the VBE?
2. INVESTIGATED NETWORKS OF ORGANIZATIONS
Following is a summary of our investigation results related to each of the six networks of SMEs. We preserve the anonymity of these SME networks by referring to them as VBE-A, -B, -C, -D, -E, and -F.
1.VBE-A (Italy). This VBE is made up of 200 member companies that mostly constitute the information and communication sector in their respective district. This VBE is fully financially supported by the government. In its operation, the VBE administrator helps the member companies in finding business opportunities. Further to configuring VOs, this VBE in some cases also generates and configures new specialized VBEs, focused on certain regional specialties, and constituting organizations that know and trust each other. But also, sometimes, this VBE helps these generated sub-VBEs to merge into a larger VBE. The VBE administration does not get involved in VO coordination. Only partial overlap of competencies is allowed among organizations, and the VBE tries to avoid any competition.
2.VBE-B (Finland). This VBE consists of 12 member companies mostly in paper and automation industry ranging in size from big to small, and coming from close by regions. This VBE does not receive any financial support from the government. It is privately supported, by collecting a token fee of 100 Euros, charged to each member company. VBE management also does the brokerage of VOs, and in most cases making decisions about new business opportunities

are also handled by the VBE management. However, once the VO is initiated, the VBE management does not provide any more support for the VO operation, which will be led by the VO coordinator. For this VBE, it was stated that a few software services may be helpful to assist with the VBE management tasks, but for the moment all activities are supported manually. This VBE avoids any possible competition between member companies (no overlap of expertise is allowed) in the network, believing that it is not good for trust establishment. Furthermore, in this VBE, there is an "oral" set of rules, and a number of "boards" of people in charge of different network activities, but there are no written rewards/sanctions rules to handle conflicts. Only some ethical rules in written form but even those they are not compulsory.
3.VBE-C (Germany). This VBE has 28 member companies from the aircraft industry, and it has been growing both in size and in making profit continuously. It has a single customer that is a major aeronautics company in Europe, which constantly gives them many opportunities for which they can configure VOs. In fact the motivation to create this network came from the fact that the aeronautics company decided to reduce the number of suppliers and therefore these companies had to join efforts in order to qualify as a supplier. Financially, the VBE administration depends on the actual profits made from opportunities/projects (it charges about 5% of the profit) made by the VOs that are configured in the VBE. In this VBE, the management does the marketing and brokerage, but other partners can also bring in opportunities. Member companies in this VBE trust each other and work together very well, not competing but some overlaps are allowed in case it is required to fulfill customer's orders. This VBE believes that more and more companies join in the network because the amount of the product/services demanded is high and no company alone can provide the products and the needed capacity in the required time. Furthermore, VOs can still be configured including non-member companies, but only when the capacity cannot be achieved within the VBE or the required expertise is not available within the VBE. Usually losses in a VO are taken by the VO partners, but this VBE also has a loss insurance contract for the sake of the VBE as whole.
4.VBE-D (Finland). This VBE is a one year old regional engineering and automation network consisting of 16 engineering companies as its members. Financially, it depends on small membership fees. In addition to brokerage of business opportunities, the VBE initiates the VO, and also supports the VO management. For easier searching of suitable partners and also management of the VBE at large, the VBE management believes that it needs to maintain and manage a competency/expertise matrix, and share knowledge and experience, promote cooperation, raise the image of companies, support collaboration in marketing activities, and making bigger and more international contacts.

5.VBE-E (Italy). The region around this VBE in Italy represents a very old collection of more than 10,000 manufacturing companies, from a wide variety of areas that includes from sport clothing to furniture, etc. but all focused on innovation and new products. The government supports establishment of self organizing clusters, a kind of VBE, in the area. Each cluster must have a minimum of 80 SMEs in order to qualify for funding. There are already about 40 clusters formed in this region. Organizations in the region represent a strong mix of competition. The tradition in the area governs the cooperation, and defines the rules. The aspects of time and fashion are the most important criteria for successful cases and projects. As it is, this VBE does not run any VBE management system.
6.VBE -F (Spain). This VBE has a strong consulting company associated with it. It has 23 member companies and 20 other associated supporting SMEs, mostly in the aeronautics industry. The consulting company is working as a supporting institution for the VBE, and mostly providing legal assistance. This VBE is supported financially both by the government and also through the token membership fees from its members that use some tools provided in the VBE for their VO internal operations. When a business opportunity is identified, it is presented to the VBE members, where several VBE members may plan some VOs and submit a proposal to the VBE administration. Depending on the case, the evaluation of these proposals is either done by the VBE administration to suggest to customer and/or together with customer itself to choose the best VO and start it. VBE management only configures and initiates VOs and does not coordinate it. Currently, the VBE management of the VBE has perceived the need for the following aspects in order to improve the VBE management functionalities: · Trust management measures and ensuring
confidentiality issues. · Storage of the past history/performance of
organizations, to ensure trustability / trustworthiness evaluation. · Better legal framework for non conformance and for conflict situations. · Competencies management.
3. BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE INVESTIGATED NETWORKS
In order to best benefit from the study of these networks of SMEs, the following table (Table 1) is developed to represent the main criteria for characterization and comparison of different VBEs. For each criterion, the table also provides a few potential categories for the networks, as well as a clue to the main impact of the criteria on the network.
4. CHOSEN PERSPECTIVES TOWARDS A VBE TYPOLOGY

Considering the wide variety of purposes/perspectives through which the VBEs can be classified, we have chosen three perspectives as addressed below. The choice of these perspectives although primarily represent the preferences of the authors, is also validated within the ECOLEAD project, through reaching consensus in brainstorming sessions among researchers. Our studies concluded that these three perspectives are more dominant (and more intuitive) in representing and classifying the VBEs than other possible choices. Below, for every perspective, also the criteria from Table 1 that are closely inter-linked with that perspective are listed by providing their respective numbers.

Table 1 ­ Criteria used in analyzing VBEs

Criteria

Potential network categories

Criteria impact

1 Finances

Public support

2 Orientation / Profit Value system

Own support (membersfee or % of turnover)
Non profit

Level of VBE's autonomy
Pressure from market or society

3 Localization Regional

4 Customer

One or few

Non-regional Many

Legal and tax issues
Strong or weak customer's dependence

5 Product / service

One or few

Large diversity of Product / service products / services dependency

6 Sector / domain

Single sector

Multi-sector

Sector dependency

7 Collaboration Cost reduction aim

Innovation

Goal dependence

8 Dynamism level

More static

More dynamic

9 Member

Based on

Based on both

Competencies complementarities complementarities

and competition

Stability Trust issues

10 Integrating new members
11 Origin
12 Focus

Loose alliance ­ Tight alliance ­

limited term/

permanent full

conditional alliance members

VBE with strong historical roots

New VBE

Product / service Market / society

oriented

oriented

Role of actors, membership level
Strong impact on ICT tools Volatility

13 Stage of VBE's life cycle
14 Size

Creation / Operation
Small <20 Medium <100

Evolution / Metamorphosis
Large <1000 Very large >1000

Needs in terms of guidelines, methodologies and ICT tools
Role of the administration and needed ICT tools

15 Role in VO

None

16 Current use of Low / Medium technology and ICT tools

17 Members types

Business companies only

18 Broker

Internal

19 VO

Recurrent

20 Profiles

Informal Limited

(management)

(Excel)

21 Competencies Informal Limited

(management)

(Excel)

Full domination High

Coordination and conflict resolution
Level of ICT tools dependency

Business +
non-business organizations

More potential, less coherency

External

Access rights and members roles

Formed with new Needs for VO members each time creation tools

Database

Potential to be processed by ICT tools, trust, and access rights

Database

Potential to be processed by ICT tools, trust, and access rights

Considering the close relevance of a large number of criteria to each perspective, they can potentially serve as candidates for VBE typology identification:
I. Domain categories (1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21)
II. Main Collaboration Drivers (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21)
III. Orientation/Value Systems (1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21)
In the following text, applying each perspective, a few types (and their main characteristics) are identified. For every perspective, the identified types collectively exhaust the categorization of the so far reported as existing or emerging VBEs. Please notice that as explained above, the typology defined for VBEs under each perspective may not present mutually exclusive VBEs; namely while an existing VBE may primarily be a member of one type, it may at a secondary stage be also a member of a second type in that typology. Therefore, at best these three provide a semi-typology for VBEs. Below the VBE semi-typology is identified for each of the three perspectives:
I. Domain categories ­ Based on the investigated characteristics (both in literature and in the field) and with the perspective of categorizing the main domains, this VBE typology identifies the following four types of VBEs. For each type of VBE, the SME networks (among the six mentioned above) that best fit each type are also identified below.
Type A1- Stable products/services domain (e.g. VBE-C, VBE-B, VBE-D)
Type A2- Stable one-of-a-kind domain Type A3- Emerging domain (e.g. VBE-F, VBE-A) Type A4- Innovation driven domain (e.g. VBE-E).
The Stable products/services domain VBE type is primarily characterized by substantiated sectors or domains, business or social oriented, traditionally regional but nowadays more with a mix of regions, and constituting VBEs of different sizes (from large to small), and using some IT related tools (e.g. VBEs to support traditional manufacturing and services industry). Some general principles for this type of VBEs are already established both in research and in practice. In several business oriented domains some body of knowledge as well as practiced regulations are already created and instantiated, that provide a strong base for the current study of this type of VBEs. These VBEs are operation-based, meaning that their daily activities are known and repetitive, and thus do not require new or innovative solutions for each product and service (Bremer et al. 1999; Mejia, Molina 2002; Pluss, Huber 2005). Nevertheless, this type of VBE still lacks proper mechanisms and semiautomatic tools for the management of its competency and profile, establishing trust, developing generic ontology, and enhancing the potential of the VBE in responding to the market/society demands.

The Stable one-of-a-kind domain VBE type ­ typically identified with substantiated sectors and domains focused on longer term VOs to develop one of a kind products/services - typically with a mix of business & possible social orientation, constituting medium size regional VBEs with a high trust level among the members from multi-sector and complementary organizations, using IT related tools (e.g. VBEs to support traditional construction industry, environmental cleansing of wastes). Similar to the stable products/services domain, also for the one-of-a-kind domain in some areas, e.g. construction industry, there is a rich body of knowledge and formal definitions of some general principles that can be used as the base. Despite the fact that these VBEs are well established, their products are always unique, e.g. a bridge, an airport, etc. Thus, they have a project-based working style where some unique ideas are necessary for every new product. Once developing proper IT tools for trust establishment among VBE member organizations, this type of VBE can benefit from extending its boundaries to include new non-regional members that may increase its level of competency.
The emerging domain VBE type is primarily characterized by the merge of organizations from several substantiated domains in order to respond to some new market/society demands. The VBE for emerging domain will constitute organizations from different sizes with complementary capabilities, established knowledge, culture, and practice tradition. A number of challenges rise due to the merge of these heterogeneous domains, e.g. the integration/interlinking of their substantiated and formalized knowledge, developing rules of cooperation and establishing trust and recognition among the involved organizations. Examples of this type of VBEs include the merge between the housing and ambient intelligence domains to address the house of the future, merge between the broadcasting, mobile devices, and the entertainment industry to address the entertainment of the future, or the merge between the public safety and environmental scientists/engineers to address the environmental cleansing of the future.
The Innovation driven domain VBE type ­ this classification of VBE mostly identifies with the establishment of its short term VOs to deliver innovation for the market or society's benefit, constituting a number of organizations potentially from different sectors with complementary competencies. The degree of readiness of the organizations in this VBE must be very high and typically, due to the role that these VBEs play in a region and the risks involved in innovation-based VOs, there is usually public support available to these VBEs. The new line of products in clothing, e.g. from Italy, and in computer hardware, e.g. from California, are examples of this type of VBEs.

Type C1 Type C2 Type C33 Type A1 Type A2 Type A3 Type A4

Table 2 - Brief summary of the VBE typology according to

the Domain categories

Colaboration driver
Ecosystem, capacity
achievement,

Dynamism level
Some static / dynamic

Degree of readiness Medium

Customer Finance Typical VO's
One / Many Self support Medium

Customer induced cost reduction
Customer induced

Static

Medium

One Self support Long

Complement competence

Market induced Evolving Cost reduction

High

Many Need public Medium support

Innovation

Evolving

Very high One / Many Need public Short support

Please notice that the following is considered for measuring the duration of the VOs: Short = some weeks to 6 months, Medium= between 6 months to 1 year, Long= longer than 1 year.

II. Main Collaborative Drivers - If we put our perspective on the main collaboration drivers, a different VBE typology classification can be established including the following four classes: Type B1- Customer induced VBE, when the alliance is formed to qualify as a supplier (e.g. VBE-C). Type B2- Capacity achievement driven VBE, formed to support high demands (e.g. VBE-F, VBE-D). Type B3- VBE oriented towards complementary competencies, formed to capture new markets, new products/services, or new dimension (e.g. VBE-B). Type B4- Regional ecosystem, formed to preserve local specificities, tradition, culture, benefiting from government incentives (e.g. VBE-E, VBE-A).

Table 3 - Brief summary of the VBE typologies according

to the main collaboration drivers

Membership Overlapping of Support Market competencies institutions accesss
Enterprises & Possible Limited Extremely

others

focused

Highly selective

Organizations in
same domain/sector

Mostly

Limited

Focused in one domain
(general)

May cover various Possible,

sectors

limited

Basic adhesion (regulated)

rule Specific sector Possible

(mostly)

Regional basis

Limited

Generic (as much as possible)

Strong

Generic with regional focus

Type B1 Type B2 Type B3 Type B4

III. Orientation/Value systems - With the perspective of the underlying value systems, another VBE typology classification may include the following three classes: Type C1- Profit / market oriented ­ to produce economic profit (e.g. manufacturing ­ VBE-C, VBEB, VBE-D, VBE-F, VBE-A , VBE-E) Type C2- Social oriented ­ to support the society (e.g. environment support) Type C3- Hybrid market/social ­ (e.g. R&D on new source of energy).

Table 4 - Brief summary of the VBE typologies according

to the value system

Main expected benefits
Economic (profit)

Membership
Private organizations

Outputs Products

(enterprises) Services

Social prestige
Coverage Social prestige
Economic sustainability

Public organizations
NGOs Public & Private organizations

Services (mostly)
Services Products (some)

5. CONCLUSIONS
This research addressed the purpose of typology in general, with the main aim of mutual exclusivity and collective exhaustion. It argues that for the VBE paradigm, a variety of perspectives can be applied for identification of its typology, and that at best a VBE typology can only determine a set of types to collectively exhaust the existing and forthcoming VBEs. It then presents a list of potential perspectives that can be used towards the identification of suitable VBE typologies. Furthermore, three perspectives are chosen from that list, and their respective VBE typologies are identified and presented.
Nevertheless, in parallel to the emergence of new collaboration forms, the technology evolution is expected to have great impacts on the new VBEs, and potentially will affect the VBE typology. So, the proposed typologies have to be considered as a working classification that can facilitate the analysis and discussion of VBEs but they certainly need to be revised from time to time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported in part by the ECOLEAD project funded by the European Commission. The authors thank the valuable contributions of their partners, especially Servane Crave and Ines Oliveira.

REFERENCES

[1] Afsarmanesh H., L. M. Camarinha-Matos (2005). A framework for Management of Virtual Organization Breeding Environments, in Collaborative Networks and their Breeding Environments, Springer, Boston, pp.3548.
[2] Kaihara T. (2004). A Challenge towards VO in Japanese Industry: Industrial Cluster, in Collaborative Networked Organizations ­ A research agenda for emerging business models, Springer, Boston.
[3] Bremer, C.; A. Mundim, F. Michilini, J. Siqueira, L. Ortega (1999). A Brazilian case of VE coordination, in Infrastructures for Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer, Boston.
[4] Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; H. Afsarmanesh (2003). Elements of a base VE infrastructure, J. Computers in Industry, Vol. 51, Issue 2, pp. 139-163.
[5] Mejia, R.; A. Molina (2002) Virtual enterprise broker: Processes, methods and tools, in Collaborative business ecosystems and virtual enterprises, Kluwer, Boston.
[6] Plüss, A.; C. Huber (2005). Virtuellefabric.CH ­ A source network for VE in mechatronics, in Virtual Organizations ­ Systems and Practices, Springer, Boston.

