The Syntactic and Semantic Development of Body Part Prepositions in Valley Zapotec Languages

Brook Danielle Lillehaugen University of California, Los Angeles

0. Introduction1
This paper examines the syntactic and semantic development of body part prepositions in the Zapotec languages of the Tlacolula Valley, drawing data from three languages: Tlacolula de Matamoros Zapotec2 (TMZ), San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec3 (SLQZ), and San Juan Guelavía Zapotec4 (SJGZ). I argue that the body part (BP) terms used in locative expressions, though identical in form to the nouns for body parts, are not syntactically nouns. I present evidence that these BP terms have been reanalyzed and grammaticized as prepositions and propose a possible series of semantic changes and a syntactic reanalysis to account for this development.
Zapotec languages belong to the Oto-Manguean stock and are spoken in Oaxaca, Mexico, and by many immigrants in the greater Los Angeles area. I will be referring to the language group that contains SLQZ, SJGZ, and TMZ as Valley Zapotec (VZ). The VZ language group contains the languages classified by the Ethnologue (Grimes et al. 1996) as San Juan Guelavía Zapotec (Western Tlacolula Zapotec, Guelavía Zapotec; code ZAB).
Although all VZ languages should be considered endangered, TMZ seems to be the most critically endangered of the languages presented here. There are at most a few hundred speakers of the language, the youngest speakers of which are probably in their 50s.
Zapotec languages are head initial languages and most sentences have the constituent order VSO, although the order SVO is also very common, especially for TMZ. Consistent with head initial typologies, possessed noun phrases precede their possessor (1a), and prepositions precede their objects (1b).

(1) a. b.

Ni'ih me'es guùi'ch. foot table PERF.break The leg of the table is broken.
Bèe'ecw ca-cabiecy cààan gezhi'iilly. dog PROG-run around chair `The dog is running around the chair.'

1. The Phenomenon: Body Part Terms in Locative Constructions
The use of body part terms in locative expressions is an areal feature of MesoAmerican languages. (2-3) below give a few examples5 from TMZ6 where the same word is used to refer to a body part in the examples labeled (a) and in a locative construction in the ones labeled (b). (Where I have glossed BP terms in all capital letters,

69

I mean to abstract away from the syntactic category in the gloss. For example dehts glosses as `back' means the BP noun; glossed as `behind' means the preposition; glossed as BACK means that for that particular gloss, I have not specified whether the word is syntactically a preposition or a noun.)

(2) a.

R-ahcnah

lù7=a'.

HAB8-hurts FACE=1s

`My face hurts.'

b. Nàa're' zòob=a'

loh me'es.

I NEU.sit=1s FACE table

`I am sitting on the table.'

(3) a.

R-ahc

làa'iny=a'.

HAB-hurts STOMACH=1s

`My stomach hurts.'

b. Nàa're' zòob=a' làa'iny

co'ch.

I NEU.sit STOMACH car

`I am sitting in the car.'

The body parts which can be used as both BP nouns and locatives in TMZ are presented in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Body Parts in TMZ

guë'ëhcy `head'
dehts `back' cwe'eh `side' zh:ààa'n `buttocks'

lohoh `face' ru'uh `mouth'
têë'ix `chest, torso'
làa'iny `stomach'
nnaàa' `hand'

ni'ih `feet'
In this paper I will address the following questions: What is the syntactic status of BP terms used as locatives (as in the (b) examples above)? What is the relationship between these terms and other BP terms?

70

All of the VZ languages considered here also have prepositions borrowed from Spanish and some native non-body part prepositions. The tables below give examples of each type, respectively, from SLQZ.

Table 1. Spanish Prepositions in SLQZ

meaning

cëhnn

with

co'nnr

against

dehsdeh

to; since

pohr

for; because of

sihnng

without

tráhsdeh

in back of

data from Munro 1998, p.c., Munro, Lopez, et al. 1999

Spanish origin con contra desde por sin tras de

The native prepositions, including the BP prepositions discussed in this paper and the prepositions in Table 2, take as their object either an overt nominal or a bound pronominal clitic. In this way they differ from the prepositions which have been borrowed from Spanish, like those in Table 1, which require either a free pronoun or an overt nominal as their object (Munro, Lopez, et al. 1999, 24).

Table 2. Native Non-Body Part Prepositions in SLQZ

càa'nta'

along, by

gagyèe'i

around

gahx:

near, close to

gayààa'

along the edge of, around

lài' through (a group); among; into the middle of

x:tèe'n

of, about, for

data from Munro 1998, p.c., Munro, Lopez, et al. 1999

2. Methodology
The locative data is this paper was collected using a method I found to be very useful. In consult with Pamela Munro, I used a collection of children's toys to model various locative relationships. I would set up a locative relationship with the toys and ask my consultants to describe the scene. Often times my consultants would also alter the relationships between the toys and describe the new scene they created. All of the consultants I worked with seemed to enjoy this methodology, and it sometimes seemed to dramatically engage speakers and produced very interesting data that I would not have gotten through an elicitation task. Moreover, working in this way I could be sure that my consultants and I were discussing the same locative relationship, since it was displayed while we were working. Throughout this paper, I have included photographs of some of these scenarios as examples.

71

3. The Debate
Some linguists studying Zapotec languages have assumed that BP locatives are syntactically nouns and that the locative meaning is derived through metaphorical extension, (MacLaury 1989, Jensen de López 2002) while others have asserted that these words are indeed syntactically distinct from nouns, when used in locative constructions (Munro, Lopez, et al 1999, Stubblefield and Stubblefield 1991).
In a paper discussing the metaphorical system employed in the use of body parts as locatives, MacLaury (1989) says of a non-Valley Zapotec language, Ayoquesco Zapotec 9:
[the] body-part locatives are not prepositions, because there is no justification for setting them apart from their primary classification as nouns. Unlike English prepositions, they are identical in form to the nouns applied to body organs, their use in syntax is optional, they only add specificity to other locative expressions, they do not complicate syntax, they do not denote direction, and they do not mark grammatical relations as do case markers (120).
However, the grammatical status of the BP locatives is not the focus of his paper, and he mentions the above in a footnote only.
Other linguists have commented on the semantic variation of these words in their dictionaries. Munro, Lopez, et al (1999) say of SLQZ that:
There are two classes of Zapotec prepositions. Many basic prepositional ideas are expressed with body part words...; the prepositional object is expressed either with a possessive pronominal agreement clitic or with an overt noun following the preposition. Such prepositions... are identified in the Dictionary as "prep." (24).

To my knowledge, there has been no work done directly on the categorial status of these words in Valley Zapotec languages apart from my previous research (Lillehaugen 2003). Consistent with head initial typologies, possessed noun phrases precede their possessor, and prepositions precede their objects. Because of this, the string ni'ih me'es is potentially ambiguous between a possessed NP `the foot of the table' (4a) and the PP `under the table' (4b).

(4) a. b.

ni'ih foot Possessed NP
ni'ih under P

me'es table Possessor NP
me'es table NP

`the foot of the table' `under the table'

Although string ambiguous, (4a) and (4b) would have distinct syntactic structures, as represented in Figure 2 below.

72

Figure 2. Syntactic Structures for NP and PP

NP

ro

N PP

| ru

ni'ih P

NP

foot |

4

Ø me'es

table

PP
ru
P NP
|5
ni'ih me'es
foot table

I will argue in this paper that BP terms used in locative expressions are indeed prepositions and not possessed nouns. Classifying these terms as prepositions in the syntax of these languages provides for the simplest account of their syntactic distribution. I contend, therefore, that although these words historically developed from the body part nouns, synchronically they are syntactically distinct.

4. Syntactic Evidence of the Categorial Status of Body Part Locatives

There is syntactic evidence from adjunction in intransitive sentences, categorial selection for locational verbs, and coordination of like constituents that the BP terms used in locative expressions are not nouns. First consider intransitive verbs, which by definition do not take complements (excluding cognate objects, e.g. `I sing a song'). As can be seen below intransitive verbs require no complement (5a), PP adjuncts are allowed (5b), but NP adjuncts (5c) are not. (I will be using * to mark sentences which are syntactically ungrammatical, and # to mark sentences which, though syntactically wellformed, are semantically infelicitous.)

(5) a.

Ca-yu'ul=na'. PROG-sing=3dist `He is singing.'

b. Ca-yu'ul=na'

làa'iny

yu'uh.

PROG-sing=3dist STOMACH house

'He is singing in the house.'

c. *Ca-yu'ul=na'

yu'uh.

PROG-sing=3dist house

The difference in grammaticality between (5b) and (5c) suggests that làa'iny yu'uh `in the house' and yu'uh `house' are not of the same syntactic category in sentences like those above. Làa'iny yu'uh `in the house' can function as an adjunct in the sentence while yu'uh `house' cannot.
Another piece of syntactic evidence that the body part locatives are prepositions comes from categorial selection (c-selection) of verbs. The ability of verbs to require the complement they select to be of a certain grammatical category is referred to as c-

73

selection. The difference in grammaticality between (6b) and (6c) suggests that ni'ih me'es `under the table' and me'es `table' are not of the same syntactic category in sentences like those below.

(6) a.

*Bèe'ecw nu'uh. dog NEU.be.loc

b. Bèe'ecw nu'uh

ni'ih me'es.

dog NEU.be.loc FOOT table

`The dog is under the table.'

c. *Bèe'ecw nu'uh

me'es.

dog NEU.be.loc table

Finally, it is a syntactic characteristic that only like constituents can be coordinated. The fact that làa'iny me'es can be conjoined with cààan gezhi'iilly, suggests that làa'iny me'es must be of the same syntactic category as cààan gezhi'iily in constructions like these. Cààan `around' is a non-body part preposition, like those presented in Table 2.

(7) a.

Bèe'ecw ca-cabiecy cààan gezhi'iilly. dog PROG-run around chair `The dog is running around the chair.'

b. Bèe'ecw ca-cabiecy làa'iny

me'es ne cààan gezhi'iilly.

dog PROG-run STOMACH table and around chair

`The dog is running under the table and around the chair.'

5. Semantic Evidence of the Categorial Status of Body Part Locatives
This section presents arguments for an analysis of BP locatives as syntactic prepositions that appeal to the semantics of the body part terms when used in locative constructions.

5.1 Mismatch between Location of Figure and BP of Ground
Usually, which a figure is located on top of an object, it can metaphorically be seen as located at the head of that object. This is not always the case, however, and some interesting characteristics of BP prepositions can be observed when the location of the figure does not in fact correspond with the BP of the ground. (Henceforth I will refer to the two objects involved in the locative relationship as the figure and the ground. The figure is the object that is located in relation to another object, which is referred to as the ground. In the sentence the cat is on the table, cat is the figure and table is the ground. There is a one-to-one correspondence between these terms and another pair of terms sometimes often used in the field: trajectory (figure) and landmark (ground).)
Consider Scenario I, presented in Figure 3 below. The baby is sitting against the leg of the table (ni'ih me'es). However (8a), which attempts to use ni'ih me'es `the leg of

74

the table' as a location for the baby is not appropriate to Scenario I. Although as a noun ni'ih means `foot', as a preposition it means `under', and the baby is not under the table in this scenario, although she is sitting against the table's leg. Both sentences (8b) and (8c) could be used to describe this situation.
Figure 3. Scenario I: Baby Beside Table
ni'ih me'es foot table `the leg of a table'

(8) a. b.
c.

#Mi'iny zòob ni'ih me'es. baby NEU.sit FOOT table
Mi'iny zòob ni'ih me'es. baby NEU.sit under table `The baby is sitting under the table.'
Mi'iny zòob cwe'eh me'es. baby NEU.sit beside table `The baby is sitting beside the table.'

So, while it's true that the baby is sitting by the leg of the table, it is false that the baby is under the table, which is what (8a) asserts, as seen below in (9):

(9) Mi'iny zòob

ni'ih me'es.

baby NEU.sit under table

`The baby is sitting under the table.'

5.2 Semantically Infelicitous Possessed Body Parts
If one were to argue that BP terms used in locative constructions are nouns, one would assume that there must be a referent for every NP that arises through this construction, and the locative meaning of this NP would be derived through metaphorical extension. If the phrase is a NP, then it should be a possible NP even when not used in a locative construction. However, this is not the case, as can be seen in example (10) below, which refers to Scenario II, presented in Figure 4. Although ni'ih is used in the locative expression in (10a), there is no such referent as ni'ih ca'rr `the car's foot/feet' (10b). Speakers also rejected the possibility that the wheels or tires might be called ni'ih ca'rr; I was told that those are not `the car's feet' (10b), but are called ya'annt `tires' (10c).

75

Figure 4. Scenario II: Snake Under Car

(10) a. b. c.

N-u'u

bèe'elld ni'ih ca'rr. (SJGZ)

NEU-be.loc snake FOOT car

`The snake is under the car.'

#ni'ih ca'rr (SJGZ) foot car `the car's foot'

ya'nnt ca'rr (SJGZ) tire car `the car's tires'

In Scenario II it is true that the snake is under the car, but it cannot be true that the snake is located by the car's foot, since the car does not have a foot.
Even if tires could be considered `feet', consider Scenario III and (11) below. In fact, the word ni'ih in (11) is not used to refer to any part of the ground, but is used to express the relationship between the figure and the ground, namely that the snake is under the car.

Figure 5. Scenario III: Snake Under Upside-Down Car

(11) N-u'u

bèe'elld ni'ih ca'rr. (SJGZ)

NEU-be.loc snake FOOT car

`The snake is under the car.'

76

5.3 Summary BP terms in locative constructions do not behave syntactically as nouns, as shown
in Section 4. Furthermore, in this section I have shown that BP terms in locative constructions have the semantics of prepositions: they refer to the relationship between the figure and the ground. In the Section 6 I will explore the relationship between BP prepositions and BP nouns.
6. Development of Body Part Prepositions The meanings of BP terms as both nouns and prepositions can be accounted for
through semantic change and syntactic reanalysis. BP locatives, though derived from purely lexical morphemes referring to concrete objects, have developed into functional morphemes through metaphoric and metonymic extensions and a syntactic reanalysis facilitated by word order and available analogy to non-body part prepositions already extant in the grammar of the language.
Following Hollenbach (1995), I categorize the meanings of BP terms into three types: basic meaning, meanings derived from metaphorical extension, and meanings derived through "projecting space" extension; these are described below. Hollenbach (1995) provides an extremely useful model, using these types of change to account for all of the nominal and prepositional meanings of BP terms in Mixtecan.
The "basic meaning" of all the BP terms in VZ languages seems to be the human body part, which seems most basic for two reasons: all the other meanings are explainable with the BP as the original source of the noun, and speakers define these terms (when presented in isolation) as body parts. (However, it may be the case that it is easier to define a noun out of context than it is a preposition, so perhaps the task of defining a word in isolation lends itself to receiving the noun definition.)
6.1 Metaphorical Extension of Noun Meaning Other nominal meanings for the BP terms have resulted from metaphorical
extension. The human body is projected onto inanimate objects, so that tables can have faces, feet, and mouths (Figure 6) and cars can have faces, backs, sides, and noses (Figure 7). This process accounts for all the nominal meanings of BP terms beyond the basic meaning.
77

Figure 6. Body Part Nouns Extended to Parts of Tables

loh me'es face of the table

ru'uh me'es mouth of the table

làa'iny me'es stomach of the table

ni'ih me'es foot of the table

Figure 7. Body Part Nouns Extended to Parts of Cars

zh:i'ih ca'rr `nose of the car'

guë'ëhcy ca'rr `head of the car'

loh ca'rr `face of the car'

cwe'eh ca'rr `side of the car'

zh:ààn ca'rr `buttocks of the car'

6.2 Metonymic Extension
The metonymic extensions of projecting space, as shown in Figure 8, account for most of the prepositional meanings of BP terms in these languages. This process, along with syntactic reanalysis, can be used to explain the development of the BP terms into grammatical prepositions. Projecting space extends the meaning of the terms from the part of the object to the area "projected" by that part of the object. This seems to be a metonymic extension: "the use of a word for something associated with its original meaning" (Hollenbach 171). For example, lohoh has a basic meaning of 'face'. Through a projecting space extension it could also come to mean the area of space in front of a

78

face; and lohoh 'face' could undergo a metaphorical extension to mean 'top (of a table)'; this meaning could then undergo a projecting space extension such that lohoh could also refer to the area above the top of the table, i.e. the area projected from the top of the table.
Figure 8. Projecting Space Exemplified by the Table
loh me'es `face of the table'

làa'iny me'es `stomach of the table'
6.3 Syntactic Reanalysis

The meaning changes described above are not sufficient to account for the development of prepositions. However, these types of change produce a situation that lends itself to syntactic reanalysis, especially since VZ languages are head initial. The syntactic reanalysis of a possessed-possessor phrase as a prepositional phrase seems especially likely given that they could be string identical to each other.
If the prepositional phrases were originally possessed noun phrases, it also seems likely that the verb carried some locative information and c-selected for an NP complement, as in (12) below. (I use << >> to enclose hypothetical sentences. These are forms that I am conjecturing may have existed at some previous stage of the language, but are not attested.)

(12) Stage 1

a. <<Bèe'ecw nu'uh

me'es.>>

dog be.loc.AT table

`The dog is by the table.'

b. <<Bèe'ecw nu'uh

ni'ih me'es.>>

dog be.loc.AT foot table.

`The dog is by the foot of the table.'

There are a few verbs in modern VZ languages that do this. For example rbèez `resides in' (SLQZ), which takes an NP complement (Munro, Lopez, et. al 1999). This verb cannot take a PP complement, and a potentially ambiguous phrase such as làa'iny Sann

79

Lu'uc, which out of context can either mean `in San Lucas' or `Saint Luke's stomach' will be interpreted as an NP when it is the complement of the verb rbèez even if the semantic context favors the PP, as in (13b) below.

(13) a. b.

Rbèez=a' Sann Lu'uc. (SLQZ) reside.in=1s San Lucas `I live in San Lucas.'
Rbèez=a' làa'iny Sann Lu'uc. (SLQZ) reside.in=1s stomach Saint Luke `I live in Saint Luke's stomach.' *'I live in San Lucas.'

However, with the syntactic reanalysis of the possessed nouns as prepositions, perhaps partially on analogy with non-BP prepositions such as cààan `around' (7), it seems likely that the locative information shifted from the verb to the newly available grammatical morpheme, and could then be analyzed as in (14), in which the BP locatives have been reanalyzed as prepositions, and the locative verbs c-select for PPs.

(14) Stage 2: Modern Language

a. *Bèe'ecw nu'uh me'es. (TMZ) dog be.loc table `The dog is by the table.'

b. Bèe'ecw nu'uh

ni'ih me'es. (TMZ)

dog be.loc under table.

`The dog is under the table.'

I summarize the stages of this possible syntactic development in Figure 9. In Stage 1, the semantically bleached locational preposition is part of the meaning of the verb, while in Stage 2, that functional locative head (AT) has been reanalyzed as a separate functional head and the BP noun reinterpreted as the prepositional head.

80

Figure 9. Syntactic Reanalysis Stage 1

Stage 2: Modern Language

<<Bèe'ecw nu'uh

ni'ih me'es.>>

dog be.loc.AT foot table.

`The dog is located by the foot of the table.'

Bèe'ecw nu'uh ni'ih me'es. dog be.loc under table. `The dog is under the table.'

VP

ru

V PP

| ro

nu'uh P

NP

be.loc.AT |

ro

AT+ni'ih N

PP

under |

ru

ni'ih P

NP

foot |

4

Ø me'es

table

7. Conclusions

In this paper I have argued that the BP terms used in locative constructions in VZ languages have been grammaticized as prepositions. I have shown that BP terms used in locative constructions function differently in the syntax than nouns, and that they function like other non-BP prepositions. BP terms in locative expressions also behave semantically as prepositions, referring to the relationship between the figure and the ground, and need not refer to a location on the ground. Furthermore, the path of syntactic and semantic change that would be necessary to develop this system can be accounted for using already existing and well established types of change such as metaphor and metonymic extension.

Notes
1 I appreciate the comments made by attendees of WAIL 2003 and of UCLA's Zapotistas Seminar and the American Indian Seminar; your feedback has been very helpful in the development of this paper. I owe sincere thanks to Nina Hyams and Carson Schütze, and special thanks to Pamela Munro for all of her support and encouragement on this project. All errors are, or course, my own. This research was partially funded by the UCLA Department of Linguistics, a Travel Grant from the UCLA Latin American Studies Center (Summer 2001) and a Summer Research Grant from the Linguistics

81

Department at UCLA (Summer 2001). This paper is closely based on my master's thesis (Lillehaugen 2003). 2 All of the TMZ data comes from my field notes. I owe Roberto Antonio, my TMZ language consultant, my gratitude for his patience and generosity in sharing his time and his beautiful language. Thanks also to Josefina Antonio, Florentino Jimenez, and other anonymous consultants I worked with in Tlacolula. 3 SLQZ has been described in a dictionary by Pamela Munro and Felipe Lopez (Munro, Lopez, et al. 1999), dissertations by Felicia Lee (1999) and Michael Galant (1998), a thesis by Olivia Méndez [Martínez] (2000), as well as many articles by Munro (1996, 1998, 2002). The SLQZ data in this paper come both from the dictionary and from Munro's and my unpublished field notes on this language. I appreciate the help of Felipe Lopez, Silvia Lopez, and Rodrigo Garcia for working as language consultants on this project. 4 The New Testament has been translated into SJGZ by Ted Jones (Liga Bíblica 1995) and he and his colleagues have written on its phonology (Jones and Knudson 1977) and pronoun system (Jones and Church 1985). Olivia Martínez is currently doing extensive fieldwork on this language (Martínez in progress). All of the SJGZ data in this thesis come from Martínez's, Munro's, and my unpublished field notes. Special thanks to Cecilia Lopez, our wonderful SJGZ consultant. 5 All of the VZ data is presented in orthographies based on the one developed for SLQZ by Munro and Lopez, et al. (1999). 6 All of the data is this paper is from TMZ unless otherwise stated. 7 Valley Zapotec language exhibit complex phonological alternations in verb and noun paradigms, of which this change is typical. I will not discuss these in this paper. 8 The following abbreviations are used in the glosses: 1s: first person singular; 3: third person; AT: semantically bleached locational preposition; dist: distal; HAB: habitual aspect; loc: located; NEU: neutral aspect; PROG: progressive aspect. 9 Ayoquesco Zapotec is spoken in "Santa María Ayoquesco de Aldama, District of Zimatlán, Oaxaca, Mexico... in the southern extreme of the Valley of Oaxaca" (MacLaury 1989, pg 119). This language is not a VZ language.
References
Galant, Michael R. 1998. Comparative Constructions in Spanish and San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec. Ph.D. Dissertation, UCLA.
Grimes, Barbara F., et al. 1996. Ethnologue. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics. www.sil.org/ethnologue/
Hollenbach, Barbara E. 1995. Semantic and Syntactic Extensions of Body Part terms in Mixtecan: The Case of 'Face' and 'Foot". International Journal of American Linguistics. 1995 Apr, 61:2, 168-190.
Jensen de López, Kristine. 1999. "The Acquisition of Zapotec Body Part Locatives: a Longitudinal Case Study." presented to The International Congress for the Study of Child Language. San Sebastian.
82

___. 2002. Baskets and Body-Parts: A Cross-cultural and Cross-linguistic investigation of Children's development of Spatial Cognition and Language. Ph.D. dissertation, Aarhus University.
Jones, Ted E. and Ann D. Church. 1985. "Personal pronouns in Guelavía Zapotec." S.I.L.-Mexico Workpapers 7:1-15.
Jones, Ted E. and Lyle M. Knudson. 1977. "Guelavía Zapotec Phonemes." Studies in Otomanguean Phonology, ed., William R. Merrifield, pp. 163-80. [Dallas/Arlington]: SIL/ University of Texas, Arlington.
Kaufman, Terrence. n.d. "The Phonology and Morphology of Zapotec Verbs". Ms. Lee, Felicia A. 1999. Antisymmetry and the Syntax of San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec. Ph.D.
dissertation, UCLA. Liga Bíblica, La [Jones, Ted, et al.]. 1995. Xtiidx Dios Cun Ditsa (El Nuevo Testamento
en el zapoteco de San Juan Guelavía y en español). n.p.: n.p. Lillehaugen, Brook Danielle. 2003. The Categorial Status of Body Part Prepositions in
Valley Zapotec. MA Thesis: UCLA. MacLaury, Robert E. 1989. Zapotec Body-Part Locatives: Prototypes and Metaphoric
Extensions. International Journal of American Linguistics. 1989 Apr, 55:2, 119-154. Méndez [Martínez], Olivia V. 2000. Code-Switching and the Matrix Language Model in
San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec. M.A. thesis, UCLA. Martínez, Olivia V. In progress. Creating the First San Juan Guelavía Zapotec
Dictionary. Ph.D. dissertation: UCLA/ Munro, Pamela. 1996. "Making a Zapotec Dictionary". Dictionaries 17: 131-55. ___. 1998. SLQZ Prepositions. American Indian Seminar, UCLA. Handout, September
1, 1998. ___. 2002. "Hierarchical Pronouns in Discourse: Third Person Pronouns in San Lucas
Quiaviní Zapotec Narratives". Southwest Journal of Linguistics 21: 37-66. Munro, Pamela and Felipe H. Lopez, with Olivia V. Méndez [Martínez], Rodrigo Garcia,
and Michael R. Galant. 1999. Di'csyonaary X:tèe'n Dìi'zh Sah Sann Lu'uc (San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec Dictionary / Diccionario Zapoteco de San Lucas Quiaviní). Los Angeles: (UCLA) Chicano Studies Research Center Publications. Stubblefield, Morris and Carol Miller de Stubblefield. 1991. Diccionario Zapoteco De Mitla, Oaxaca. México, D.F.: Instituto Lingüistico de Verano, A.C. ___. 1991. Mitla Zapotec Texts: Folklore Texts in Mexican Indian Languages 3 Dallas, Texas: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
83

