1266
orrespondence

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 5 , NO. 8, AUGUST 1996

An FFT-Based Technique for Translation, Rotation, and Scale-Invariant Image Registration
B. Srinivasa Reddy and B. N. Chatterji

that is an impulse; that is, it is approximately zero everywhere except at the displacement that is needed to optimally register the two images.

11. THEORY

Abstract- This correspondence discusses an extension of the wellknown phase correlation technique to cover translation, rotation, and scaling. Fourier scaling properties and Fourier rotational properties are used to find scale and rotational movement. The phase correlation technique determines the translational movement. This method shows excellent robustness against random noise.

In this section, we present the necessary theory to match images which are translated, rotated, and scaled with respect to each other using Fourier translation, rotation, and scaling properties.
A. Without Scale Change

I. INTRODUCTION
Image registration is a fundamental task in image processing to overlay two or more images used. Registration methods can be loosely divided into the following classes: algorithms that use image pixel values directly, e.g., correlation methods [ 11; algorithms that use the frequency domain, e.g., fast Fourier transform-based (FFTbased) methods [2]-[ 121; algorithms that use low-level features such as edges and corners, e.g., feature-based methods [ 131; and algorithms that use high-level features such as identified (parts of) objects, or relations between features, e.g., graph-theoretic methods [131.
The registration method presented here uses the Fourier domain approach to match images that are translated, rotated, and scaled with respect to one another. Translation, rotation, and scale all have their counterpart in the Fourier domain. Fourier methods differ from other registration strategies because they search for the optimal match according to information in the frequency domain [13].
In this correspondence, we present an extension of the phase correlation technique for automatic image registration, which is characterized by its insensitivity to translation, rotation, scaling, and noise as well as by its low computational cost.
This method sometimes relies on the translation property of the Fourier transform, which i s referred to as the Fourier shift theorem. Let f l and f 2 are the two images that differ only by a displacement ( L O ; YO) i.e.,

If f2(.r. y ) is a translated and rotated replica of f l ( z ,y ) with translation ( S O . yo) and rotation B O , then

fz(.r,y) =fl(rcosBo+ysiriBo-zo,
+- z sin BO y cos Bo - yo).

(4)

According to the Fourier translation property and the Fourier rotation property, transforms of f~ and f i are related by
F 2 ( <1, ))= c - 3 2 * ( < z O + V Y O )
x F I ( C C O S B+O~ s i n B o , - < s i n B ~ + q c o s B o ) .( 5 )

Let M I and - U 2 be the magnitudes of F1 and Fz.Therefore, from
( 5 ) we have
+ +J4(7<) .= -141((cos BO sin BO, -(sin BO 9 cos B O ) . (6)
If we consider the magnitudes of FI and F2, then from (6), it is easy to see that the magnitudes of both the spectra are the same, but one is a rotated replica of the other. Rotational movement without translation can be deduced in a similar manner using the phase correlation by representing the rotation as a translational displacement with polar coordinates. i.e., in polar representation

M 1 ( p , B ) = rw2(p,-BB o )

(7)

using phase correlation (Section I) angle Bo can be easily found out.

f 2 ( X , Y ) = fl(. - .o,y - Yo).

(1)

Their corresponding Fourier transforms F1 and F2 will be related by

Fz(<,?/) = e-' Z n ( f i l l f 7 Y O )

F, (<,
~

(2)

The cross-power spectrum of two images f and f ` with Fourier transforms F and F` is defined as

B. Wirh Scale Change
If fl is scaled replica of f 2 with scale factors ( a ,b ) for the horizontal and vertical directions then, according to the Fourier scale property, the Fourier transforms of f l and f i are related by

(3)
where F* is the complex conjugate of F , the shift theorem guarantees that the phase of the cross-power spectrum i s equivalent to the phase difference between the images. By taking inverse Fourier transform of the representation in the frequency domain, we will have a function
Manuscript received February 28, 1994; revised November 12, 1995. The associate editor coordinating the review of this correspondence and approving it for publication was Prof. John J. Weng.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, W.B. 721302 India.
Publisher Item Identifier S 1057-7149(96)04540-X.

By converting the axes to lagarithmic scale (this concept i s given in [SI), scaling can be reduced to a translational movement (ignoring the multiplication factor l / ( a b ) ) ,i.e.,

<F2(log 6. log 1)) = Fl (log - log n ,log 9 - log b )

(9)

i.e.,

where z = log[ y = logq e = loga d = logb.

1057-7149/96$05.00 0 1996 IEEE

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, AUGUST 1996

The translation (c,d ) can be found by the phase correlation technique and the scaling ( a ,b ) can be computed from the translation ( c ,d ) as

a = ec and b = ed

(12)

where e is the natural logarithm base. If (2,y) is scaled to ( x / a ,y / a ) , their polar representation will be

Pl

= .(

2

2
SY

)

1

/

2

(13)

8 1 = tan-l(y/z)

p2 =

+( y / a ) y

+= ( l / a ) ( z 2 y2) = p l / "

02 = tan'((z/a)/(y/a))

= tan' (z/y) = 6 1

(14) (15) (16)

i.e., if f l is translated, rotated, and scaled replica of f2 their Fourier magnitude spectra in polar representation are related by

e)MI( p , = Mz(p/a, 6 - Go) e eo)M I (log p, 8)= lW2 (logp - log a , -

(17) (18)

i.e.,

1261

where

Using the expressions (19) and (20) and the phase correlation technique, scale a and angle 80can be found out. Once the scale
and angle information are obtained, the image with the highest
resolution is scaled and rotated by amounts a and eo, respectively,
and the amount of translational movement is found out using phase
correlation technique.

17

111. IMPLEMENTATION Before presenting the complete matching algorithm, some important implementation issues are discussed in this section.
A. Cartesian to Polar Conversion Fourier log-magnitude spectra [SI is used instead of Fourier mag-
nitude spectra for the log-polar conversion. Only the upper two quadrants of the Fourier log-magnitude spectra of images are used to map them to polar plane. This is because of the fact that the Fourier spectrrum is conjugate symmetric for real sequences, as follows:

B. Highpass Filtering
The Fourier log-magnitude spectra are mapped to log-polar plane after multiplying them with a highpass emphasis filter transfer function. A simple highpass emphasis filter is used with transfer function

H(E,17) = (1.0 - X(E,7 ) ) * (2.0 - X(E,17))

(23)

where
X ( ( , V )= [ C O S ( T ~ )c o s ( m / ) ] and -0.5 5 E , 7 5 0.5.

(24)

C. Logarithmic Conversion
Logarithmic conversion of p-axis is done with base 1.044. This base value is chosen because 1ogy506q4 = 128, i.e., 256 rows will be

Fig. 1. Overview of the registration algorithm.

mapped to 128 rows in polar plane. Other values of base can also be used depending upon the required level of accuracy.

D. Image Transform
The image transform is implemented using bilinear interpolation from the original image.

E. Fourier Spectra Computation
Fourier spectra of both images can be computed using a single 2-D FFT by taking advantage of the fact that each image data matrix has only real values. This can be achieved by representing one image as the real part and the other image as imaginary part of a complex sequence. Their transforms can be separated from the transform of the complex sequence by "even-odd" separation.

F. Other Issues
We are considering images of size 256 x 256 and in the log-polar plane representation a size of 256 x 256. The conversion formulae needed for angle of rotation and scale are

scale = (1.044)'/2
angle :(180 * y)/256

(25) (26)

where (z,y) is the location of the peak of the inverse Fourier transform of the cross-power spectrum phase. A transformed image

1268 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 5 , NO. 8, AUGUST 1996

(C)
Fig. 2. Registration of translated, rotated, and scaled aerial images.

is obtained from the highest resolution image by using estimated scale and angle information as affine transformation parameters. The transformed image and low-resolution image are used to find the translation without requiring a priori information about the image resolution. From several experiments with a set of aerial images, we found out that the matching algorithm can work for scale changes up to 1.8. Corresponding equivalent amount of translation in log-polar domain will be 28. It is likely that the nonlinear complex operations have this limitation. Depending on the order in which the images are supplied to the algorithm, translation will be either .z or 236-.r, on the basis of which image has the highest resolution (this can be easily found out). In determining the angle there is a 180" ambiguity. This
can be resolved in the following manner. Let 80 be the computed angle. First, the translation is determined by rotating the spectrum of one of the images, say Image 2 by 0 0 . We then rotate the spectrum
+of Image 2 by (180" 0 0 ) and again compute the translation. If the
value of the peak of the IFFT of the cross-power spectrum phase is

greater when the angle is BO, then the true angle of rotation is B O ,
+otherwise (180" 0") is the true angle of rotation.
I v . EXPERIMENTARELSULTS AND COMPLEXlTY ANALYSIS
A. Experiments The performance of the matching algorithm developed is tested
on different sets of images. Different amounts of noise are also added to test the algorithm's robustness against noise. The following types of images are used: i) Images (a) and (b) of Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 of size 256 x 256 obtained from an aerial image of size 512 x 512 by applying some known transformations; and ii) cat images (Fig. 4) (size 256 x 256). Matches are considered valid only if the peak value of the IFFT of the phase difference is greater than 0.03. Theoretically, for exact matches this value should be equal to 1.0; however, the presence of dissimilar parts and the noise in

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, AUGUST 1996

1269

(c) Fig. 3. Registration of translated, rotated, and scaled noisy aerial images.

images reduce the peak value. It has been observed from several experiments that if the peak value is less than 0.03, the match would become unreliable. Results are shown in the following manner: (a) and (b) are test images; (c) shows the resultant image obtained by applying affine transformation on highest resolution image with the parameters computed by the matching algorithm. That is, it shows the matched portion o f the images; or, in other words, it shows the exact location of Image 2(b) in the Image l(a) (assuming Image 2 has the highest resolution). Tables 1-111 summarize the results. Column "original" shows the exact transformation parameters, column "estimated" shows the computed transformation parameters using the new matching algorithm, "rspeak" indicates the peak value, whose location gives the amount of rotation and scale in log-polar plane, and "tpeak" indicates the peak value, whose location gives the amount of translation. In Tables I and 11, matching parameters are listed for the images shown in Figs. 2 and 3. Figs. 2(c) and 3(c) show the registration of translated, rotated, and scaled images, without and

with added noise. Fig. 4 shows the Cat image registration. Here Cat 2 is the highest resolution image; exact transformation parameters are unknown. However, by observing some points in (a) and in (c) it was found (Table 111) that the estimated transformation parameter values were equal to the real parameter values, which were obtained manually by actual matching.
B. Complexity Anulysis
The proposed matching method requires computation of three FFT's (one to compute Fourier spectra for both images, one to compute Fourier spectra for log-polar converted magnitude spectra, and one to compute Fourier spectrum for the transformed image) and three IFFT's (one to compute rotation and scale, one to find translation, and one to resolve the 180" ambiguity in the angle of rotation). On a SUN SPARC Station 1, the proposed method has taken 82 seconds to compute matching parameters for the images of size 256 x 256. The main advantage of the proposed method is that it

1270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, AUGUST 1996

(C)
Fig. 4. Registration of Cat images

TABLE I MATCHINRGESULTOSF TRANSLATED, ROTATEDAN,D SCALEDAERIALIMAGE(FIG.2)

TABLE I1 MATCHINRGESULTSOF TRANSLATERDO, TATEADN,D SCALED
AERIALIMAGE (FIG.3); NOISEADDEDTO BOTHIMAGES

rot ation scale

0.076231

rot ation scale

0.061093

computes the matching parameters in fixed time for the fixed size of the images irrespective of amounts of translation, rotation, and scale.
De Castro and Morandi's method [SI on an average requires computation of 180 1FFT's.Moreover, for images of size 128 x 128, they have used the spectra of size 5 12 x 5 12 to minimize interpolation errors while rotating the spectrum for each angle, and the method

fails if scale change is present. Also, it cannot compute matching parameters in constant time.
V. CONCLUSION In this work, a FFT-based matching, which is an extension to phase correlation technique, was presented. The proposed algorithm

lEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 5 , NO. 8, AUGUST 1996

1271

TABLE I11 MATCHINRG~SULTOSF CAT IMAGE (FIG.4)

I original I estimated I

translation -,-

-26,37 rspeak =

rotation

0.0' 0.059670

scale

1.473346 tpeak =

0.204867

is characterized by its insensitivity to translation, rotation, scale, and
noise as well as by its low computational cost. For a given size of
images, it computes matching parameters in constant time irrespective
of the type of images and amounts of translation, rotation, and scale.
The matching is found to be exact except for scaling where it is
found to deviate in the third place of decimal probably due to the
nonlinear processing.
Existing FFT-based matching methods fail if scaling is present
between the images. Also, their computational cost is high. All these
difficulties are successfully suppressed in the proposed matching
method. In Section 1, on the basis of several experiments, we have found out
that the matches are valid if the peak value of the IFFT of the phase difference is greater than 0.03. In fact, one can study the effect of the
variation in the size of this peak on registration. One can probably
use the size of the peak to determine how good the match is.
REFERENCES
D. I. Bamea and H. F. Silverman, "A class of algorithms for fast digital registration," IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-21, pp. 179-186, 1972. C. D. Kuglin and D. C. Hines, "The phase correlation image alignment method," in Proc. IEEE 1975 Inf. Con$ Cybernet. Society,, New York, NY, pp. 163-165. J. L. Horner and P. D. Gianino, "Phase-only matched filtering," Appl. Opt., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 812-816, 1984. S. Allney and C. Morandi, "Digital image registration using projections," IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., vol. PAMI-8, pp. 222-233, Mar. 1986. E. De Castro and C. Morandi, "Registration of translated and rotated images using finite Fourier transforms," IEEE Truns. Pattern Anal. Muchine Intell., vol. PAMI-95, pp. 700-703, Sept. 1987. D. J. Lee, T. F. Kpile, and S. Mitra, "Digital registration techniques for sequential fundus images,'' in IEEE Proc. SPIE: Applic. Digilal Image Processing X , New York, 1987, vol. 829, pp. 293-300. A. Appicella, J. S. Kippenhan, and J. H. Nagel, "Fast multi-modality image matching," SPIE Med. Imaging 111: Image Processing, vol. 1092, pp. 252-263, 1989. D. Casasent and D. Psaltis, "Position oriented and scale invariant optical correlation," Appl. Opt., vol. 15, pp. 1793-1799, 1976. H. Wechsler, Compututiorzul Vision. New York: Academic, 1990, pp. 105-108. P. E. Zwicke and 1. Kiss, "A new implementation of the Mellin transform and its application to radar classification of ships," IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., vol. PAMI-5, pp. 191-198, 1983. Y. Sheng and J. Duvernoy, "Circular-Fourier-radial-Mellin descriptors for pattem recognition,''J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 885-887, 1986. Y. Sheng and H. H. Arsenault, "Experiments on pattem recognition using invariant Fourier-Mellin descriptors," J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A., vol. 3, no. 6 , pp. 771-776, 1986. L. G. Brown, "A survey of image registration techniques," ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 325-376, Dec. 1992.

A Comparison of Different Coding Formats for Digital Coding of Video Using MPEG-2
Gisle Bjentegaard, Karl Olav Lillevold, and Robert Danielsen
Abstruct- This correspondence adresses the problem of maximizing the subjective picture quality at given bit rates for coded video. Coding is carried out using different picture formats. The parameters involved are the number of pixels horizontally and vertically and interlacinghoninterlacing. The coding is done according to the MPEG-2 standard.
I. INTRODUCTION
The MPEG-I and MPEG-2 [l], [2] coding methods for video compression belong to a class of methods referred to as hybrid discrete cosine transform (DCT). The ITU H.261 and H.263 Recommendations also belong to this class. These methods are well documented elsewhere and will therefore not be introduced in detail here. We will focus only on the aspects of special importance for this work.
The MPEG methods are largely based on dividing the picture material into 16 x 16 blocks of picture material (macroblocks). For each of these blocks there is a prediction block, which is found in previously decoded pictures by using displacement vectors. In some cases the prediction is sufficient to represent the 16 x 16 pixels. However, most of the time a difference block has to be transmitted. For the 16 x 16 block, a difference block is produced by subtracting the prediction from the block to be coded. The difference block undergoes a two-dimensional 8 x 8 DCT. The transform coefficients are then quantized before being entered into a bitstream. The quantization parameter Q determines the level of quantization; we may view this as the "coarseness" of the resulting picture. The parameter Q referred to in this work is the actual divisor used for quantization. To a large extent the size of Q therefore determines the number of bits produced from a 16 x 16 block. The resulting number of bits can be considered to consist of two parts: i) motion vector data for prediction plus general overhead and ii) transform coefficients.
The transform coefficients usually account for the largest part. The number of bits used for transform coefficients is influenced by the size of Q and may therefore directly be controlled by the rate control mechanism employed. The rate control mechanism uses a buffer fullness measure to give feedback to the adjustment of Q.
In this correspondence, a format or picture format is defined by the horizontal and vertical pixels in a picture as well as the interlaced or progressive structure of pixels (see Figs. 1 , 2, and 3). We will talk about interlaced and progressive formats. We will also talk about lowresolution formats and high-resolution formats indicating whether a format has few or many pixels.
The MPEG standard does not give detailed rules of how pictures shall be coded. The standard is, rather, a protocol for the decoding procedure. Another way to see this is that MPEG provides a toolbox that may be used by the encoder to obtain good compression performance. This means that many choices are left for the encoder. The present paper examines the combination of three important
Manuscript received September 21, 1994; revised January 3, 1996. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Michael T. Orchard.
The authors are with Telenor Research and Development, N-2007 Kjeller, Norway.
Publisher Item Identifier S 1057-7149(96)05258-X.

1057-7149/96$05.00 0 1996 IEEE

