Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts 

av 

Per Ehn 
fil kand 

Institutionen for  Informationsbehandling 

Umeå  Universitet 

Avhandling som med tillstånd av Samhällsvetenskapliga 
fakultetsnämnden vid Umeå Universitet framläggs till offentlig 
granskning för avläggande  av filosofie  doktorsexamen, 

måndagen den 9 maj 1988 kl 13.15 
hörsal E, Humanisthuset 
Umeå  Universitet. 

Work-Oriented  Design  of  Computer  Artifacts 
by Pelle Ehn, Department ofinformation Processing, Umeå University, S-901 87 

Abstract:  This  thesis  is  an  inquiry into  the  human  activity  of  designing 
computer artifacts that  are useful  to people  in their daily  activity at work. 
The emphasis  is on opportunities  and  constraints  for  industrial  democracy 
and quality of work. 

First, the  philosophical foundation  of design of computer artifacts  is con­

sidered. The need  for a more  fundamental understanding of design than  the 
one  offered  by  rationalistic  systems  thinking  is  argued.  The  alternative 
design  philosophy  suggested  is  based  on  pragmatic  interpretations  of  the 
philosophies  of existential  phenomenology,  emancipatory  practice,  and  or­
dinary language.  Design  is seen  as a  concerned  social  and creative  activity 
founded  in our  traditions, but  aiming at  transcending them  by anticipation 
and construction  of alternative futures. 

Second,  it  is  argued  that  the  existing disciplinary  boundaries  between 
natural  sciences,  social  sciences and  humanities are  dysfunctional  for  the 
subject  matter  of  designing  computer  artifacts.  An  alternative  under­
standing of  the  subject matter  and  a  curriculum  for  its study  is discussed. 
The alternative  emphasizes social  systems design  methods, a  new theoreti­
cal  foundation  of  design,  and  the  new  potential  for  design  in  the  use  of 
prototyping  software  and  hardware.  The  alternative  also emphasizes  the 
need  to  learn  from  other  more  mature  design disciplines  such  as architec­
tural  design. 

Towards  this  background,  and  based  on  the  practical  research  in  two 
projects (DEMOS  and UTOPIA),  a view on work-oriented  design  of  computer 
artifacts is  presented. 

This concerns,  thirdly,  the collective  resource approach to  design of com­
puter artifacts -  an attempt to widen the design  process to also include trade 
union activities, and  the explicit goal  of industrial  democracy in design and 
use.  It is argued  that a  participative approach  to the  design process  is not 
sufficient in  the context of democratization.  However, it  is suggested that it 
is technically possible  to design computer artifacts  based on criteria  such as 
skill  and  democracy at  work, and  a  trade  union investigation  and  negotia­
tion  strategy  is  argued  for  as  a  democratic  and  workable  complement  to 
traditional design  activities. 

Finally, a  tŒil  perspective -  the ideal  of skilled  workers and  designers in 
coopération designing  computer artifacts  as tools  for skilled  work  is consid­
ered. It  is concluded  that  computer artifacts can  be designed  with the ideal 
of c rail tools  for a  specific profession,  utilizing interactive  hardware devices 
and  the  computer's  capacity  for  symbol  manipulation  to  create  this 
resemblance,  and  that a  tool  perspective,  used  with  care,  can  be  a  useful 
design ideal.  However,  the  ideological  use of  a tool  metaphor is  also taken 
into account,  as is the  instrumental blindness a  tool  perspective may create 
towards the  importance of social  interaction competence at work. 

Key  words: design,  computer,  work,  industrial  democracy,  skill, tool, 
process,  language-game,  Scandinavia. 

labor 

ISBN 91-86158-45-7, 492 pages, Arbetslivscentrum, Stockholm 1988 

Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts 

Pelle Ehn 
Work-Oriented Design 
of Computer Artifacts 

Arbetslivscentrum 
Stockholm 1988 

© Pelle Ehn & Arbetslivscentrum 

Graphic  design: 
Gary Newman  & Nini Tjäder 
Cover illustration: 
Elisabeth Slote 
Typeface: 
New Century Schoolbook & 
ITC Galliard (cover) from 
Adobe Systems Inc. 
Paper: 
Munken Book & Tre Kronor (cover) 
Printed by: 
Gummessons, Falköping,  Sweden 1988 

International  distribution: 
Almqvist & Wiksell International 
ISBN 91-86158-45-7 
ISBN 91-22-01231-1 

To My Daughter Malin 

Contents 

Acknowledgements 

Prologue 
From DEMOS and UTOPIA to work-oriented design  3 

PART I 
Design Philosophy -
on Practice and Reflection 
Introduction  39 
Detached reflection and practical skill 40 * Structure of part 143 

CHAPTER 1 
Mirror, mirror on the wall... -
the Cartesian approach and beyond  46 
Three examples 46  * Systems, dualism and rationalistic 
reasoning 50 * The invisibility of skill and subjectivity 54 

CHAPTER 2 
Existential phenomenology -
a Heideggerian alternative 63 
Being-in-the-world 63  • Acquisition of skill 69  *  Research, design 
and use 76 • Summary 81 

CHAPTER 3 
Emancipatory practice - a Marxist alternative  82 
Practice 85 • Marxist epistemology 87  • Emancipatory practice 92 
• Design and use as labor processes 96 * Summary 101 

vii 

CHAPTER4 
Language-games - a Wittgensteinian alternative  103 
Language-games 105  • The language-games of design and 
use 108 • Design-by-doing - new 'rules of the game' 116 • 
The language-game of design research 121  • Summary 122 

CHAPTER 5 
With alternative glasses -
conclusions on design philosophy 123 
Beyond systems thinking 123 * Some consequences 126 • Design 
knowledge - three illustrations 131 

PART  II 
The Art and Science of Designing 
Computer Artifacts 
Introduction  145 
Disciplinary boundaries 145 * Knowledge and interest 149 • 
Structure of part II151 

CHAPTER 6 
From systems design to design of computer artifacts 153 
'Systems design' 153 • Design 157 • Computer artifacts 161 • 
Norms, rules and design artifacts 166 • Summary 171 

CHAPTER 7 
"The science of design' -
a note on Herbert Simon's program  173 
The program for a rationalistic science of design 175 

CHAPTER 8 
Other ways of seeing and doing I — 
internal alternatives 184 
Social system design methods 184 • The systems approach 185 * 
Participation and consensus 188 • 'Soft' systems thinking 192 • 
Computers and understanding 195 • Software engineering and 
prototyping 201 • Summary 207 

CHAPTER 9 
Other ways of seeing and doing II -
external alternatives  208 
The design methodology movement 209 • Architectural design 216 
• A 'catalogue' of paradigm examples 223  • Summary 231 

viii 

CHAPTER 10 
Conclusions - a subject matter 
and a tentative program  233 
The subject matter 233 • Program in design 235 * A disciplinary 
base for an interdisciplinary subject matter 239 

PART  III 
Designing for Democracy at Work 
Introduction  247 
Industrial democracy 248  • The Scandinavian setting 254 • 
Structure of part III 258 

CHAPTER 11 
From socio-technical satisfaction 
to collective resources  259 
The socio-technical approach 260  • The collective resource 
approach 272 

CHAPTER 12 
Case I: the DEMOS project  281 
Research method 282  • Theoretical perspective 287  • Example 1: 
the locomotive engine repair shop 292 • Example 2: the news­
paper 302 • Towards a more democratic rationality 310  • 
Rationalization strategies for capital accumulation 311  • 
Rationality of the oppressed 314  • Dissemination of the results 
and further directions 324 

CHAPTER 13 
Case II: the UTOPIA project  327 
The strategy 328  • Research approach and theoretical 
perspective 331  • The research and design process 332 • 
Example 1: work organization in the borderland 342  • 
Example 2: research and development for a more democratic 
rationality 348 • Dissemination of the results 350 

CHAPTER 14 
Reminders on designing for democracy at work  359 
Reminders 360 • Beyond DEMOS and UTOPIA 364 

ix 

PART IV 
Designing for Skill 
Introduction  367 
Craftsmanship as design ideal 369 • Structure of part IV 373 

CHAPTER 15 
The 'tool perspective - an example  375 
The design process - 'design-by-doing' 376  • A tool  perspective 
use model for page make-up 379 • Summary 388 

CHAPTER 16 
Tools  390 
The computer is a tool 391 • The computer is not a tool 404 • 
Computers and computer artifacts as media 410  • Summary 415 

CHAPTER 17 
The 'toolness' of computer artifacts 417 
Computer-based tools - state of the art 419 • From design visions 
to technical reality 422 • Prototypical examples of computer-based 
tools 426 • 'Directness* 431  • Metaphors, use models, and syste­
matic domains 437  • From concrete experience to abstract 
formalisms to concrete experience 443 

CHAPTER 18 
Skills and the tool perspective  445 
Tacit knowledge 445 • Not just instrumental skill 453 • 
Qualifications and new technology 456 

Epilogue 
Postmodern reflections on work-oriented design of 
computer artifacts  471 

Bibliography  480 

Acknowledgements 

The research for this book on design of computer artifacts 
for skill and democracy at work started some fifteen years 
ago. Hence, my gratitude is spread far and  wide, and  it 
seems difficult, if not impossible, to do justice to the intel­
lectual, practical and emotional support from all 'co-au­
thors' whose  names will  not appear on the cover of  the 
book. 

My colleagues and personal friends for many years in 

the DEMOS  and UTOPIA  projects - 'scholars'  and  'ordi­
nary  workers' — definitely  speak  in  these  lines  I  have 
written. I can  never  adequately  discharge  my  debts  to 
them: without them there would not have been a book. It is 
that simple. To list and thank each of them individually 
would have been  most appropriate, but given the risk of 
unintentionally forgetting some of  them I have  avoided 
this temptation.  However, a  few  names  must  be  men­
tioned. My many years of collaboration  with Åke Sand-
berg during and after the DEMOS project have intellectu­
ally had  an immeasurable impact on my research views 
on  democracy  at  work.  My  years of  collaboration  with 
Morten Kyng before, during, and after the UTOPIA project 
have  had  a similar  influence on  my  views on design  of 
computer artifacts. The workers and trade unionists par­
ticipating in these research  projects have meant just as 
much  to  me  personally  and  intellectually.  Nils  Bivall, 
Gunnar  Kokaas,  Bernt  Eriksson,  Malte  Eriksson,  and 
many others out there in  the practical struggles for in­
dustrial democracy taught me most of what I know of the 
politics and morals of work-oriented design. The remain­
der of my debt to friends from DEMOS and UTOPIA I have 
tried to discharge by references in the pages that follow. 

xi 

As to the actual writing of this book many people have 
read several chapters of earlier drafts and provided inci­
sive and extremely valuable criticism. The list of people to 
whom  I am  especially  grateful includes  Liam  Bannon, 
Gro  Bjerknes,  Niels-Ole  Finneman,  Joan  Greenbaum, 
Jens Kaasb0ll, Jerker Lundeqvist, Kim Halskov Madsen, 
Lars Mathiassen, Hans-Erik Nissen, Ole Skovsmose and 
Pål S0rgaard. 

However,  two  colleagues  have helped  me  far  beyond 
what can be expected from colleagues and friends. Kristo 
Ivanov  played  the,  sometimes  unpleasant,  role  of  the 
'devil's advocate'. His criticism, with detailed comments 
and suggestions on virtually every page of the manuscript 
in preparation, made me spend an extra year in clarifying 
my position; any remaining unclarity is definitely not his 
fault. Susanne B0dker played the just as demanding role 
of 'the one  who cares'. Not only did she read the whole 
manuscript more than once,  providing most  useful com­
ments, and many late night discussions, she also helped in 
a thousand other ways, and encouraged me to go on when 
I despaired. 

Kristen Nygaard was neither directly involved in our 
research that led to this book, nor in my actual writing of 
it. Nevertheless, without his visions of a new kind of coop­
eration between researchers and trade unions in the field 
of work-oriented design of computer artifacts, without his 
pioneering work, or his criticism and loyal support during 
many years of collaboration the book could not have been 
written. 

More formally, I am indebted to the Swedish Center for 
Working Life in Stockholm — this unique research center 
for  democratization  of  working  life - where  I  had  the 
pleasure of  working when we carried  out most of the re­
search on which this book is based. I am also in debt to the 
Department  of  Computer  Science  at  the  University  of 
Aarhus, where on  a grant I spent the first  year writing 
this book, and to the Department of Information and Me­
dia Science at the same university, where I was given the 
time needed to finish  off the work. 

xii 

This book is a 'desktop publishing* product, which does 
not at all mean that I as the author am without debts to 
others in preparing the manuscript for print. Gary New­
man designed layout and  typography,  and  Nini  Tjäder 
helped  'implement'  the  typographic  design.  These  new 
computer-based  tools  in  desktop  publishing  have  won­
derful facilities for spelling control, something that has 
been most  useful to me. However, there is more to lan­
guage than spelling, as any one who has tried to express 
himself  or  herself  in  a  foreign  language  knows.  David 
Minugh had to work hard to make the text more readable 
in English. 

It goes  without saying that none of  the persons  men­
tioned is to be held responsible for the remaining obscuri­
ties, for controversial opinions I may have expressed, or 
for defects of any kind contained in the book. 

Pelle Ehn 
Århus, Denmark 
March, 1988 

Prologue 

Thus worthy  work  carries with it 
the hope of pleasure in rest, 
the hope of pleasure in our using what it makes, 
and the hope of pleasure in our daily creative skill. 
All other work but this is worthless; it is slaves' work -
mere toiling to live, that we may live to toil. 
Therefore, since we have, as it were, 
a  pair of  scales in  which to  weigh the  work  now done in 
the world, let us use them. 
Let us estimate the worthiness of the work  we do, 
after so many thousand years of toil, 
so many promises of hope deferred, 
such boundless exultation over the progress of civilization 
and the gain of liberty.' 

William Morris in Useful Work  versus Useless Toil 

Prologue 
From DEMOS and UTOPIA 
to Work-Oriented Design 

Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts 
Computers and coffee machines are perhaps the two most 
striking artifacts of a Scandinavian workplace today. To 
understand  these artifacts we  have to  understand  how 
people at work use them. For example the coffee machine 
is not just used to produce a stimulating drink; more im­
portantly it offers an opportunity for people to meet, for 
communication in the  workplace.1  Similarly, computers 
are not just instrumental means of production: they also 
condition and mediate social relations at work. 

Both computers and coffee  machines are artifacts in 
the  sense  that  they  are  human  creations,  created  as 
means to an end. They are designed. However, in design­
ing artifacts we do not merely design the artifacts them­
selves: deliberately or  not, we also design conditions for 
their  human  use.  Neck  strain or  isolation  from  fellow 
workers are just as important results of the design process 
as  the  instrumental functionality  of  an  artifact.  Con­
ditions for human development such as learning of  new 
qualifications and  democratic participation and commu­
nication are designed, just as well as the technical aspects 
of an artifact. Sometimes a *bad' or a 'good' use situation 

1  For the importance of the coffee machine see Weinberg, G.M.: 
The  Psychology  of  Computer  Programming, Van Nostrand Rein-
holt, New York 1971. 

4 

Prologue 

has been considered and anticipated in the design process, 
on other occasions the designers have simply not been able 
to anticipate the consequences. 

This book is an inquiry into the human activity of  de­

signing computer artifacts that are useful  to  people in 
their daily activity at work. The background is my expe­
rience with design and use of computer artifacts in Scan­
dinavian  working  life  since  the  early 1970s,  and  my 
commitment to two design ideals: 

The first  is industrial democracy, the attempt to extend 

political  democracy  by  also  democratizing  the  work­
place - the social life of production inside the factory gates 
and office walls. 

The second is quality of work and  product, the attempt 

to design skill-enhancing tools for skilled workers to pro­
duce highly useful quality products and services. 

My reflections on these design ideals and their realiza­

tion in the Scandinavian social and  political setting are 
what I will  refer to as work-oriented  design of  computer 
artifacts. 

A Scandinavian Challenge 
The  Scandinavian  countries  are  often  seen  as  states 
somewhere in between  capitalism and  socialism, or as a 
bit of both. Opinions differ, but there should be no doubt 
that in these countries the labor movement and especially 
the trade unions have played a major role in the struggle 
for democracy and quality of work. 

Certainly trade unions, as most  large organizations, 

exhibit contradictions in  terms of  their internal  democ­
racy, and with regard to oppression of weaker groups and 
minorities, etc. However, in a historic perspective, there is 
strong evidence  that the only  real social  'carrier' of  the 
ideals of  work-oriented  design is the  trade unions. Em­
ployers and their organizations may from time to time be 
interested in skilled workers and in participation, but their 
attempts to stop democracy at the factory gate, or  to re­
place workers and their skill by machinery and  detailed 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

5 

division of labor is far too well-known to be ignored. Hence, 
it is hard to see how an approach to work-oriented design 
of computer artifacts could have any real practical impli­
cations if not based on strong trade union support and in­
volvement. Practice along the lines of such an approach 
has developed in Scandinavia  during the last 15 years. 
This book reflects part of that practice and outlines some 
of its theoretical implications - a Scandinavian work-ori-
ented challenge to design and use of computer artifacts. 
This approach is a challenge to rethink traditional un­

derstanding of the process of design and its relation to the 
use of computers in working life. However, work-oriented 
design of computer artifacts is, as I see it, not only a stra­
tegy to include users and their trade union activities in the 
design process, but more fundamentally to include a cul­
tural and  anthropological  understanding of  human  de­
sign and use of artifacts, to rethink the dominating objec-
tivistic and rationalistic conception of design. At least in 
this sense, the work-oriented design of computer artifacts 
espoused in this book reaches beyond the borders of Scan­
dinavia. 

Theory and Practice 
My inquiry in  this book  is truly interdisciplinary in the 
sense that I claim importance for the social sciences and 
the humanities as well as the natural sciences in the de­
sign of computer artifacts. However, neither the perspec­
tive of natural sciences (which understands 'social effects' 
as consequences for other sciences to deal  with) nor  the 
perspective  of  the  social  sciences  and  the  humanities 
(often taking a purely observing, interpretative, critical or 
analytic approach  to technology) is accepted. There are 
disciplinary boundaries to overcome in work-oriented de­
sign of computer artifacts. 

There is also the boundary between theory and practice 
to overcome. The limits for work-oriented design are not 
only theoretical. They do not solely depend on the domi­
nating 'scientistic' perspective in computer science or on 

6 

Prologue 

the 'academic' approach taken by most social scientists. As 
I see it, work-oriented design of computer artifacts has to 
be not only theory but also practice for social and technical 
change.  The  approach  I  advocate  is  not  only  inter­
disciplinary but also action oriented. In research as well as 
in design, it includes the working people that ultimately 
will be exposed to its results. 

This kind of politically significant, interdisciplinary and 

action oriented  research dealing with resources and con­
trol  in  the labor  processes  of  design  and  use  has  con­
tributed  to  what is abroad  often  seen  as a specifically 
Scandinavian approach  to  the design of  computer arti­
facts. 

However, the political reason for involving end users in 

the design  process, and for  emphasizing their qualifica­
tions and participation as resources for democratic control 
and changes, is only one side of the coin. The other is the 
role of skill and participation in design as a creative and 
communicative process. 

This complementary  concern in work-oriented design 
of computer artifacts has grown out of  my dissatisfaction 
with traditional theories and methods for systems design, 
not only with how systems design has been politically ap­
plied to deskill workers, but more fundamentally with the 
theoretical reduction of skills to what can be formally de­
scribed. Hence, one can say that the critique of the political 
rationality of the design process points to a critique of the 
scientific rationality of methods for systems description. 

In  this book  I do  not  argue for  a  reinvention  of  the 
wheel: the instrumental  power  of  systems  thinking for 
purposive rational action is beyond doubt, and many of the 
computer applications that function well today could  not 
have been designed without rationalistic design methods. 
Instead I suggest a reinterpretation of design methods to 
take us beyond the so strongly embedded Cartesian mind-
body dualism and the limits of formalization, towards an 
understanding that hopefully can support  more creative 
designer ways of thinking and doing design as cooperative 
work, involving the skills of both users and designers. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

7 

Hence, the work-oriented design approach I outline is 
an attempt to include subjectivity in a double sense. I claim 
the importance of rethinking the design process to include 
structures through which ordinary people at their work­
place more democratically can  promote their own inter­
ests. I also claim the importance of rethinking the use of 
descriptions  in  design,  and  of  developing  new  design 
methods that enable  users of  new or changed computer 
artifacts to anticipate their future use situation, and to ex­
press all their  practical  competence  in designing their 
future. 

The dialectics of  tradition and, transcendence - that is 

what design is all about. 

How I Came to Write This Book 
As mentioned above, my perspective in this book is not re­
ally truthful to the division of scientific labor between the 
the natural sciences, the social sciences, and the humani­
ties. This can be illustrated in terms of the academic or­
ganizations I have  belonged  to.  I started  my  research 
work in the social sciences at a department of information 
processing. I went  on  to an interdisciplinary and  trade 
union oriented research center. The next stop was a com­
puter  science  department  of  a  natural science  faculty. 
Now  I work at a  department of  information and  media 
science in the humanities faculty. Hence, I think it may 
help the reader if I tell my own story about how I acquired 
my perspective on  work-oriented design of  computer ar­
tifacts. 

After a few  years of  practice as a computer program­

mer and systems designer I started as a PhD student at 
the Department  of  Information Processing at the  Uni­
versity of  Stockholm. This was in the early seventies, a 
politically turbulent period in society in general, as well as 
at the universities. Influenced  by this political 'climate', 
and by my limited practical experience my field of interest 
was systems design and democratization. The infological 
approach to systems design, developed by Börje Langefors 

8 

Prologue 

and  his  colleagues,2  offered  an  environment  for  this 
interest. This approach,  which  did  not  reduce systems 
design problems to producing correct specifications for a 
piece of  code, but really addressed questions of  practical 
use of  information systems and  computer technology in 
organizations, seemed  most  useful. I think  I learned  a 
great deal, and  I am grateful  to those  who  taught  me. 
However, as a research assistant in the ISAC  (Informa­
tion Systems for Administrative Control) project I came to 
view  this approach in  practice  as theoretically  and  po­
litically too management oriented to be a base for my re­
search interests. When I decided to reframe the questions 
of  systems design and democratization in a sociological 
context I was encouraged to do so. (This was  not excep­
tional. Such openness to alternative approaches was typi­
cal  for  the  department  Börje  Langefors  had  created. 
Kristo Ivanov3 was for example supported in developing a 
view  based  on  the system  approach  by  the  pragmatist 
philosopher C. West Churchman, and Hans-Erik Nissen4 
developed  inspired  by  phenomenology  an  new  view  on 
computer  applications.  Their  work  was  an  important 
ingredient in the environment at the department.) 

Two years later I summarized my new understanding 
in Bidrag till ett kritiskt socialt perspektiv på utvecklingen 
av datorbaserade informationssystem (A Contribution to a 
Critical  Social  Perspective  on  the  Development  of 
Computer-based  Information  Systems),5  whose  truly 
academic title stressed its scientific claims. I proposed an 

2 See e.g. Langefors, B.: Theoretical  Analysis ofinformation Sys­
tems, Studentlitteratur, Lund 1966, and Lundeberg, M.: Some 
Propositions Concerning  Analysis and  Design of  Information 
Systems, TRITA—IBADB—4080, Royal Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm 1976 (dissertation). 
3 Ivanov, K.: Quality Control  of Information, Royal Institute of 
Technology, NTIS no PB219297, Stockholm 1972 (dissertation). 
4 Nissen, H.E.: On Interpreting  Services Rendered  by Specific 
Computer Applications, Go tab, Stockholm 1976 (dissertation). 
5 Ehn P.: Bidrag till ett kritiskt social  perspektiv  på datorbaserade 
informationssystem, TRITA—IBADB—1020, Stockholm 1973. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

9 

interdisciplinary  perspective  for  research  into  systems 
design and democratization. The research approach I ad­
vocated was action research together with trade unions, 
and here I was strongly influenced by Paulo Freire and 
his  'pedagogy  of  the  oppressed'6  as well as by  Kristen 
Nygaard  and  the work  he was doing together with the 
Norwegian Metal Workers' Union.7  The report put me in 
contact  with other  researchers in  Scandinavia  thinking 
along similar lines. This in turn led to full time work on 
practical  research  projects  in  cooperation  with  trade 
unions for the next decade. 

DEMOS 

The  first  project  we8  set up was DEMOS  (Democratic 
Planning and Control in Working Life - on  Computers, 
Industrial  Democracy  and  Trade  Unions)9. Among  the 
original members of  the group  were the sociologist  Åke 
Sandberg,10  who had done work on the theory of demo­

6 See e.g. Paulo Freire's Pedagogy of the Oppressed,  Herder & 
Herder, New York 1971. 
7  See e.g. Nygaard, K. and Bergo, O.T.: The Trade Unions - new 
users of  research in Personal Review 4, no 2,1975. 
8 I prefer to refer to activities in the DEMOS project, and later on in 
the UTOPIA project, in the we-form, since these projects were de­
liberately designed as interdisciplinary, collective and cooperative 
efforts. However, in this book I will only elaborate on research ac­
tivities in which I personally have been actively involved. Fur­
thermore, the we-form should not be taken as an evasion of my 
occasional responsibility as project leader. 
9 The ideas behind the DEMOS  project are described in Carlson, J., 
Ehn, P. Erlander, B., Perby, M-L., and Sandberg,  Å.: 'Planning 
and Control from the Perspective of Labour: A Short Presentation 
of the Demos Project' in Accounting Organizations and  Society, 
vol 3, no 3/4,1978. 
10 In the beginning of the project Åke was finishing  his PhD dis­
sertation: Sandberg, Å.: The  Limits to  Democratic Planning -
knowledge,  power and  methods in the struggle  for the  future, 
Liber, Stockholm 1976. After the DEMOS project he has among 
other projects been leading several more reflective and compara­
tive trade union oriented research projects, including the Meth-

10 

Prologue 

cratic planning, the mathematician Bo  Göranzon,11  who 
had worked as an operations researcher and with a com­
puter  manufacturer,  and  the  engineer  Maja-Lisa 
Perby,12  who had some experience from study circles on 
new technology together with trade unions. My main in­
terest was systems design and design methods. This was 
in 1975, the time when new laws on working life democ­
racy were being enacted in Sweden. The use of computers 
became an issue of codetermination and  negotiation bet­
ween employers and trade unions. Which resources were 
needed for local trade union participation in planning and 
use of  new technology, and how could they be developed? 
Together with a more theoretical understanding of the li­
mits and  possibilities of  democratic planning in working 
life, these were the questions we set out to work with. 

ods Project on action research in working life, documented in 
Sandberg, Å.  (ed.): Forskning för  Förändring - om  metoder och 
förutsättningar för  handlingsinriktad  forskning i  arbetslivet, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1981, and the FRONT 
project on trade union strategies on new technology and work, 
documented in Sandberg, Å.  (ed.): Framtidsfrågor  på arbetsplat­
sen, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1984. He is now 
leading new trade union oriented projects  on managerial strate­
gies, new technology, work organization, qualifications, etc. See 
e.g. Sandberg, Å.  (ed.): Ledning för  alla - Om  perspektivbryt­
ningar i  företagsledning, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1987. 
11 Bo left the DEMOS project at an early stage to set up the PAAS 
project (a Swedish acronym for Perspective  on Analysis, Tools 
and Working Methods in Systems Development) documented in 
Göranzon, B. et al.: Datorn som verktyg, Studentlitteratur, Lund 
1983, and Göranzon, B.  (ed): Datautvecklingens  filosofi, Carlsson 
& Jönsson, Malmö 1984. In the PAAS project and later on in the 
program on Education-Work-Technology he has complemented 
the trade union approach with a focus on skill, extending into a 
dialogue with the arts. 
12 After the DEMOS project Maja-Lisa has continued to work  with 
the questions of skill and computers. See e.g. Perby, M-L.: 
'Computerization and the Skill in Local  Weather Forecasting' in 
Bjerknes, G. et al.: Computers  and  Democracy - A  Scandinavian 
Challenge y  Avebury, 1987. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

11 

In doing this we were facing a double problem: Work­

ers and trade unions had neither very much experience in 
influencing  design  and  use of  new  technology,  nor  ex­
perience from encouraging research to support their in­
terests. As we saw it, there was a need for research which 
differed from the traditional commission-directed variety, 
where investigations are made by experts at the request of 
management. The  results of  such  traditional  work-ori-
ented research are normally used as a basis for decisions 
by the management  of an organization, and they are in 
practice exclusively used by  management rather than by 
those who are ultimately affected. The  workers often do 
not have the means available to judge the results produced 
by  the  experts.  In  our  opinion,  this  type  of  research 
method  thus worked  against  the  workers' struggle for 
democracy at work. 

The work-oriented action research  method we applied 
in the DEMOS project meant that local unions themselves, 
through the use of 'investigation groups', made inquiries 
into the conditions in their 'own' enterprises. As  resear­
chers we took part in the investigation groups as 'resource 
persons' - our  academic  knowledge  and  our  research 
time were at the groups' disposal. However, the starting 
point in the groups was the workers' own experience and 
competence. 

Investigation groups were established at four different 
enterprises: a repair shop, a newspaper, a metal factory, 
and a  department store. Being a 'resource person' at the 
repair  shop  and  at  the  newspaper  meant  the  work  in 
these investigation groups formed my working life for se­
veral years. 

In the repair shop the investigation group researched 
and  developed  alternatives  concerning computer-based 
production planning. The group rejected a system  based 
on detailed division of labor, and suggested a system that 
could support group work and developments of skills. We 

12 

Prologue 

also developed and tried out a systems design model based 
on negotiations.13 

At the newspaper the investigation group worked with 
the introduction  of  'new  technology',  i.e.  the transition 
from lead composing to  computer based  text processing 
and phototypesetting. The focus was on changes in  con­
tent of  work,  and  in  the cooperation  between  different 
groups of  workers. This meant intervention into mana­
gerial  and  technical  plans for  manning,  education,  in­
vestments, etc. The systems design 'negotiation  model' 
was further developed here.14 For me, personally, the in­
volvement in the investigation  group at the  newspaper 
also meant the beginning of a decade-long involvement in 
the design of  new technology in the newspaper industry 
and  cooperation  with  graphic  workers'  unions  all  over 
Scandinavia. 

As a  'dialectic' complement to the activities in the in­

vestigation groups  we in the  research group conducted 
more traditional academic studies of  preconditions and 
restrictions on the development of skill and democratiza­
tion in working life. Marxist labor process theories and the 
practical experience of the investigation groups together 
formed the basis for  this theoretical activity. To  us this 
theoretical side of  the project  was of  great importance, 
since very little theory  on organizational planning, sys­
tems design,  and  use of  computers had  a workers' per­
spective.  After all, though  the socio-technical  approach 
had  begun  to  have  some  influence  on  Scandinavian 
workplace  design,  the  dominant  perspective  was  still 
'scientific management', the method for fragmentation of 
work  and  control  of  the  worker  that  the  engineer 
Fredrick Taylor  developed  at the beginning of  this cen­
tury.16 

13 Ehn, P. and Erlander, B.: Vi vägrar låta detaljstyra oss, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1978. 
14 Ehn, P., Perby, M-L., Sandberg, Å.: Brytningstid, Swedish 
Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1984. 
15 Taylor, F.Vf .'.Principles of  Scientific Management, 1911. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

13 

In  summary,  our  action  research  method  aimed  at 
building up knowledge in the investigation groups, a kind 
of  knowledge which elucidates and  widens the range of 
possible action. In a dialectical relation with these practi­
cal investigations traditional theoretical studies were car­
ried out. This interplay between practical interventionistic 
investigations  (as  opposed  to  gathering  of  data)  and 
parallel  theoretical  reflection  (as  opposed  to  detached 
theoretical  reflections  a  posteriori), this is  what we at 
times have referred to as practice research. 

It was a central idea and integrated aspect of the pro­

ject that we would share the experiences and results with 
workers at other places. This was carried out via  educa­
tion and the central trade unions. Hence, besides writing 
local  reports together with the investigation groups, we 
spent much time and really worked hard on developing a 
textbook and other educational material on planning and 
use of  computer artifacts from a work  perspective to be 
used by workers. 

The extensive use that trade union courses made of the 

textbook  Företagsstyrning  and  Löntagarmakt16  (Orga­
nizational Control and  Labor  Power) that I wrote toge­
ther with  Åke Sandberg was  more  than reward for our 
pains. I still see that book as a good example of  the pos­
sibility  of  breaking  the  barrier  between  the  academic 
world  and  ordinary  working  people,  and - as the  most 
important book  I have  contributed  to — as  my  practical 
dissertation. Nor do i regard the fact that it also became 
used at many universities all over Scandinavia as in any 
way undermining this position. 

Despite  our  heterogeneous  disciplinary  background 
when the DEMOS  project started its organizational base 
was  the  Department  of  Information  Processing at  the 
University  of  Stockholm. However,  when  the  work  life 
reform in Sweden led to the establishment of the Swedish 
Center for Working Life as an interdisciplinary research 

16 Ehn, P. and Sandberg,  Å.: Företagsstyrning och  löntagarmakt, 
Prisma, Stockholm 1979. 

14 

Prologue 

institute to support democracy in working life, it was nat­
ural  for  us  to  move  the  project  there. This  important 
environmental  change for  the  project happened  late in 
1976. 

At the end of the 1970s and of the DEMOS project plans 
for a new project were growing. In the DEMOS project we 
had done considerable  work on participatory and  demo­
cratic aspects in the design of computer artifacts. How­
ever, given the situation in Swedish working life we had 
basically developed a reactive approach. It was a strategy 
to make clear the harmful effect on work, that division of 
labor and use of new technology had in a capitalistic econ­
omy, and to reduce it, rather than a strategy for exploring 
organizational  and  technical  alternatives.  As  good 
Marxists we  knew  that  this  was  not  our  business: we 
knew that the design of the future workplace was the task 
of the working class, and not a question of Utopian ideas. 
However, more and  more people started  to ask for good 
worker  oriented  alternatives, and  I must  admit  I very 
much myself  wanted to participate  in a  more  proactive 
approach, I wanted to participate in a project that really 
explored and designed technical and organizational alter­
natives. 

We first  approached  the office  workers' unions, since 
there were many signs that the office was the next place 
in line for rationalization and massive use of computers. 
However, at that time the office  workers unions' found 
the idea of  researchers, systems designers and  workers 
designing the future office too Utopian.17 

17 When in 1986 we subsequently suggested a Utopian proactive 
project on new technology and work organization in the office, the 
trade union skepticism had turned into strong support of the idea. 
The KNUT project is now a network connecting trade union 
experiences with research at the Swedish Center for Working 
Life, and external competence on ergonomics and systems design 
with users. 

From DEMOS and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

15 

UTOPIA 

Instead  the  UTOPIA  project  (in  the  Scandinavian  lan­
guages UTOPIA  is an acronym for Training, Technology, 
and  Products  from  the  Quality  of  Work  Perspective) 
came  to be  carried out in cooperation  with  the graphic 
workers' unions. This was due to our earlier cooperation 
in the DEMOS project, and more importantly to the prob­
lematic situation in the printing industry. Strategically 
the graphic workers could  not just say 'no' to  new tech­
nology. To defend their craft they also had to come up with 
alternatives. The UTOPIA project offered such a possibility. 
Our own  motives for a complementary  research  em­
phasis and a shift from reactive work based on investiga­
tion groups as in the DEMOS project, to the proactive work 
in the UTOPIA  research and development project can be 
found in the research program from 1980.18 

Trade  union  practice  and  our  own  research  in  the 
1970s into the ability to influence new technology and the 
organization of work at local levels highlighted a number 
of  problems. One fundamental experience  was that the 
'degrees of  freedom' available  to design the content and 
organization of work with existing technology often were 
considerably less than those required to meet trade unions 
demands.  Or,  as  we  expressed  it: Existing  production 
technology  more  and  more  often  constitutes  an insur­
mountable  barrier  preventing  the  realization  of  trade 
union demands for the quality of work and a meaningful 
job. 

Our focus was still at the workplace, but as we saw it, in 

order to support the local unions in their struggle for in­
fluence on technology, training and organization of work, 

18 See Ehn, P., Kyng, M. and Sundblad, Y.: Training, Technology, 
and  Product  from the Quality of Work  Perspective, A Scandi­
navian research project on union based development of and train­
ing in computer technology and work organization, especially text 
and image processing in the graphics industry. (Research 
program of UTOPIA), Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1981. 

16 

Prologue 

an offensive, long-term strategy conducted by the central 
unions was needed. The trade unions at the central level 
had to assume responsibility for working towards collec­
tive solutions to the local demands in the areas of training, 
technology and organization of work, in addition to giving 
central support for actions taken at the local level. 

To conduct a  trade union  technological research and 
development project was seen as one contribution to such 
a strategy. The UTOPIA project could hopefully contribute 
to changing the trade union's range of possible actions at 
the local level: Instead  of  defending the status quo, an 
offensive strategy was to be developed for another type of 
technology and improved products. 

The  practical overall objective of  the UTOPIA  project 
was to contribute to the development of powerful skill-en-
hancing tools for graphic workers. Thus, not only the de­
velopment of  technology,  but also human qualifications 
and training were stressed. Quality of  work and  product 
was very important. The labor processes of page make-up 
and  image  processing  in  integrated  computer-based 
newspaper production were the key issue. 

The organization of such a  research and development 

project had to differ from that of the DEMOS project. 

The Swedish Center for Working Life was still a good 
base both because of  its trade union orientation and be­
cause of its interdisciplinary environment, but it had to be 
complemented with computer science design skills if  we 
really were to design  alternative systems in accordance 
with our objectives. Yngve Sundblad and his colleagues at 
the Computer Science Department at The Royal Institute 
of Technology in Stockholm  had  done some research on 
computer-based  text processing and  computer graphics, 
and were interested in participation in the project, as were 
Morten  Kyng and  his colleagues  at  the Department  of 
Computer Science at the University of Århus, Denmark. 
The DUE  project, a Danish sister  project to DEMOS,  had 
given them experiences similar to ours, and a similar wish 
to participate in the design of skill-based alternatives. This 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

17 

became the interdisciplinary and Scandinavian academic 
environment for the project. 

But the project web would have been most incomplete, 
and  the research strategy  most  unsatisfactory, if  there 
had not been active roles for the ultimate users in the re­
search team. Since  much of  the design  work  had  to be 
carried  out  in  a  research  and  development  laboratory 
rather than at a specific workplace this was a real prob­
lem. Our organizational solution was to have skilled gra­
phic workers with trade union experience participate di­
rectly in  the design  team. This was organized  as a  part 
time engagement, to allow the graphic workers to 'bridge' 
experiences between the UTOPIA project and the ordinary 
work practice at their workplaces. Besides graphic wor­
kers working directly  in  the project group, the Scandi­
navian graphic  workers' unions followed  and supported 
the project through a group consisting of representatives 
from  Sweden,  Denmark,  Finland  and  Norway,  all  ap­
pointed  by  the  Nordic  Graphic  Workers'  Union.  This 
Nordic trade union base for the UTOPIA project was due to 
the Nordic  Graphic  Workers'  Union's  wish  to  create a 
closer  cooperation  between  the  Nordic  countries and  a 
common proactive approach to new technology to prevent 
the loss of skill and jobs in the printing industry. 

As project leader, and the only full time employee, one 

of  my  main  tasks  was  to  facilitate  a  common  under­
standing between  people  who  spoke so  many  different 
'languages'. The  difference  between  national languages 
was only a minor problem: we all pretty quickly learned to 
speak 'Scandinavian'. The real challenge was to establish 
the  project  as a  language-game  where  all  participants 
could make vise of their professional language. This meant 
developing  a  research  and  design  approach  where  re­
searchers  with  as  different  backgrounds  as  computer 
science  and  systems  design,  ergonomics,  organization 
theory, sociology, and history could  not only  speak with 
each other, but - just as importantly - with the users in 
the design  team, i.e. skilled  typesetters, page  make-up 
persons, graphic artists, and experienced trade unionists. 

18 

Prologue 

(When we later on established cooperation with a vendor 
who was willing to try to implement our UTOPIAn speci­
fications,  the project as language-game  also had  to take 
into account the specific technical and financial  language 
of a commercial producer. Finally, when we came to 'test 
site' implementation, the language at that workplace, as 
used not only by  the local graphic workers,  but also by 
journalists and management, also affected our UTOPIAn 
language). 

From a design point of view the challenge  was to de­
velop  really  participative design  methods  that  allowed 
both professional  users and  professional designers to be 
creative in the design process. To this end we came to fo­
cus on  what we  called  <design-by-doing' methods, using 
simulations like prototypes, mock-ups, and organizational 
games, which allowed  the graphic  workers to articulate 
their demands and wishes in a concrete way by  actually 
doing page  make-up  or  picture-processing  work  in  the 
simulated future environment. 

The UTOPIA  project as a  'demonstration  example' of 
conditions for designing new technology as tools for skilled 
workers, and as part of a strategy for democratization of 
working life, has doubtless contributed to the debate on 
alternative designs. Examples include a film  made by an 
American  movie  team  on  this  new  Scandinavian  ap­
proach,19 an educational television program on computers 
in the workplace,20  articles in the international press on 
UTOPIA,  where  workers craft  new technology,21  and all 
the invitations we still get to tell the story of UTOPIA. 

It was certainly stimulating for  us, and a  deliberate 
practical aim of the project, to participate in the debate on 

19 The movie Computers in Context by Larry Daressa of California 
Newsreel and Jim Mayers of Ideas in Motion, 1986. 
20 The Danish television program Ny Teknologi - UTOPIA by Ulla 
R0nnow, 1984. 
21  See e.g. Howard, B.: 'UTOPIA — Where Workers Craft New 
Technology1 in Technological  Review, vol 88 no 3, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 1985. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented, Design 

19 

new  technology  and  industrial  democracy.  However,  a 
more  fundamental  communication  problem  for  us  was 
the dialogue with Scandinavian graphic workers, and the 
diffusion of project experiences in that context. The ways 
we handled this had great impact on the reporting from 
the UTOPIA project. 

To  make the project and our activities well  known at 
Scandinavian  graphic  workplaces  we  created  a  (typo­
graphically well  designed) magazine  called Graffiti that 
was distributed  via the trade  unions. Our purpose with 
this publication was to report on the ongoing research, on 
problems and ideas, and to give background for our acti­
vities, while the project  was still work in  progress. Fur­
thermore, we  wanted to do this in a form that could  en­
courage  initiatives  from  graphic  workers  outside  the 
research team.  When the summary report UTOPIA - al­
ternatives in text and  images22  was published as Graffiti 
no  7, UTOPIA  was already well  known at many graphic 
workplaces. 

With Graffiti we could contribute to an open debate and 
provide some basic information on conditions for technical 
and organizational alternatives in newspaper production. 
But since the enhancement of professional graphic skills 
was one of the main ideas of the project, this was far from 
enough.  Hence,  the  final  UTOPIA  reports  on  computer 
based  page  make-up,23  image  processing24,  work 
organization25  and work  environment26  were written as 

22 The UTOPIA project group: An Alternative in Text and 
Images, Graffiti no  7, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1985. 
23 Ehn, P. et al.: Datorstödd Ombrytning, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 
24 Frenckner, K. and Romberger, S.: Datorstödd  Bildbehandling, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 
25  Dilschmann, A. and Ehn, P.: Gränslandet, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, 1985. 
26 Gunnarson, E.: Arbetsmiljökrav, Swedish Center for Working 
Life, Stockholm 1985. 

20 

Prologue 

textbooks to be used in graphic trade schools rather than 
as traditional research reports.27 

We could certainly have done better with both Graffiti 
and the textbooks, but to me the effort to 'bridge' the gap 
between research and the ultimate users is fundamental 
to research that aims at supporting industrial democracy 
and quality of work and products. 

ACADEMIA 

My working life seems to be divided into five year periods. 
The second half of the 1970s I spent in DEMOS, the first five 
years of  the 1980s I lived  in UTOPIA,  and  now  I  have 
moved to ACADEMIA (which is not another acronym but 
the land of theoretical reflection). This book is a prelimi­
nary report from that place. 

But  although  in  ACADEMIA  I  have  not  completely 
managed  to keep away from  practical  research.  It  has 
been only all too tempting to join new projects, and I could 
not resist participating in the DIALOG project on human-
computer  interaction,28  and in the establishment  of  a 
UTOPIA-like project on the office of  the future,29  and in 
developing our  new interdisciplinary research  program 
on computer support for cooperative design and  commu­
nication.30 But there has also been time for reflection. And 

27  However, several articles for research conferences and scien­
tific  publications as well as a Master's and a PhD thesis have been 
published based on the project. 
28 See e.g. DIALOG project group: Årsrapport för 1984, Department 
of Computer Science, Royal  Institute of Technology, Stockholm 
1985. 
29 The KNUT project or network is described in the first  issue of 
the project newsletter Bakom Knuten, Swedish Center for Work­
ing Life, Stockholm, September 1987. 
30 Our program and the first  projects are outlined in Andersen, 
P.B. et al.: Research Programme  on Computer Support  for Coop­
erative  Design and  Communication, Department of Information 
Science and Department of Computer Science, University of 
Aarhus 1987. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented, Design 

2L 

I have moved from the interdisciplinary and trade union 
oriented environment at the Swedish Center for Working 
Life  to a university environment. First I moved  to the 
Computer Science Department at the University of Århus 
in Denmark, where several colleagues from the UTOPIA 
project  already  were  working,  and  later  on  to  the 
Department  of  Information  and  Media  Science  at  the 
same university. 

My  reasons for moving to  ACADEMIA  were  not  only 

scientific, but also personal and political. 

Personally I really felt a need to step back and reflect 
upon a decade of practical research work that had been so 
intensive and involving that it was more like one long day. 
I needed some distance, and I wanted time to dig deeper 
into the question of design of computer artifacts, and es­
pecially I wanted  to explore  why 'design-by-doing* wor­
ked so well in practice and also to find out more about the 
meaning of regarding computer artifacts as tools. It was 
also hurting my personal ego that the work we had been 
doing in DEMOS  and UTOPIA  was  looked  upon  by  the 
academic world as interesting, but often more as politics 
than as 'real science' or good research. We were invited to 
give speeches at universities all over the world, but did not 
really seem to belong anywhere. Hence, I both wanted to 
reflect upon our experiences and to defend our approach 
as good research. 

Politically it has for most of us at all times been impor­
tant  to  do  good  research.  However,  the  ways  we  have 
moved  have  often  carried  us  away  from  the  academic 
main stream, the reason being that this is not where our 
research subjects live.  Our focus  on democracy at work 
and  quality of  work  and  products has 'forced'  us to  use 
highly participative and interventionistic research meth­
ods and  structures (instead of  just objective  observing), 
and to apply research perspectives on work and techno­
logy  that highlight conditions for emancipatory  change 
(instead of staying politically neutral). I find the academic 
legitimization of sudi research politically important. 

22 

Prologue 

Finally, a complementary scientific reason for entering 
ACADEMIA  had to do with a feeling that something was 
fundamentally 'wrong* in rationalistic systems thinking. 
There simply had to be theoretical alternatives. 

One of my first  activities in the academic world was to 

participate in the organization of an international confe­
rence  on  the  'development  and  use  of  computer-based 
systems and  tools in  the context  of  democratization  of 
work'. 

The  conference  was  organized  at the Department  of 
Computer Science at the University of Århus, and was an 
anniversary celebration  of  the first Scandinavian confe­
rence on the same  theme ten years earlier at the same 
place.  That  earlier  conference  was  the first  organized 
meeting between  researchers and  trade unionists inter­
ested in discussing computers and industrial democracy. 
It was an important step in the development of coopera­
tion between researchers and trade unionists in the field, 
and in the development  of a research strategy based on 
this cooperation. 

Our purpose with the new conference was to open up 
an  international  dialogue  with  researchers  concerned 
about the theme. We wanted to share our Scandinavian 
experiences and perspective, which we named the collec­
tive  resource  approach, with other  researchers, and  we 
wanted to listen to other researchers applying other per­
spectives and  possessing other experiences. I  think that 
Computers  and  Democracy - A  Scandinavian  Chal­
lenge, 31 our anthology from the conference, gives a  good 
international overview of research in the field. I also think 
it was a well chosen  act of  honor to dedicate the book  to 
Kristen Nygaard. He  not only  organized the first  confe­
rence, but has also been a main contributor to the collec­
tive resource research strategy, and  the most important 
person for 'bridging' the gap between the academic world 

31  Bjerknes, G., Ehn, P., Kyng,  M.: Computers  and  Democracy -
A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

From DEMOS and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented, Design 

23 

of computer science and the practical world of these arti­
facts in working life - in Scandinavia and internationally. 
The  main  organizer  of  the  conference  was  Morten 
Kyng. It was to work with him and to jointly write a book 
on  work-oriented  design  of  computer  artifacts  that  I 
moved to the Computer Science Department at the Uni­
versity of Århus. The conference was a good start for us. 
Other joint activities that gave us opportunities to reflect 
on our experiences, and forced  us to read more, were de­
partmental courses which  we  developed  and  taught on 
'computers  and  tools',  'computers  and  cognition'  and 
'computers and democracy'. However, as matters fell out 
I came to be the only author of this book. But it is much 
more than a  polite gesture, when I state that especially 
Morten,  but  also  many  of  my  other  colleagues,  re­
searchers and  practitioners that participated in DEMOS 
and UTOPIA, also speak from these lines. It has all been a 
cooperative effort. I only wish the lonely process of writing 
this academic book on work-oriented design of computer 
artifacts also could have been more cooperative. 

Position on the Map 
Before surveying the content of  this book  I will spend a 
few  words  on  tentatively  placing  DEMOS, UTOPIA  and 
work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts in the atlas of 
research. 

To place our work in DEMOS and UTOPIA  on the Scan­

dinavian systems design research map is a relatively easy 
task, since this map recently has been drawn by  J0rgen 
Bansler iri his Ph.D. dissertation on the theory and history 
of Scandinavian systems design research.32  Bansler dis­
tinguishes three influential research traditions from  the 
late 1960s until today: the infological approach, the socio-
technical  approach,  and  the  collective  resource  ap­

32 Bansler, J.: Systemudvikling - teori  og  historié  i  skandinavisk 
perspektiv, Studentlitteratur, Lund 1987. 

24 

Prologue 

proach.33 All three traditions are concerned with practical 
systems design in organizations. However,  the different 
knowledge interests that motivate these traditions lead to 
different theoretical perspectives, focus on different prob­
lems, and result in the development of different methods. 
The infological approach focuses on information flows 
in organizations understood as information systems. Good 
systems become a question of efficient use of information. 
The socio-technical approach focuses on the 'fit' between 
the technical and  the social  system  of  an organization. 
Organizations  will  be  more  efficient  if  'human  factors' 
and  worker  satisfaction  are  considered  in  the  design. 
Neither this harmony view of organizations nor the focus 
on efficiency is shared by the collective resource tradition. 
Here focus is on the conflicting interests within an orga­
nization. Good systems design becomes a question of  de­
mocratization of  working life, of influential participation 
by workers and their trade unions. According to Bansler 
there  are  especially  four  research  projects  that  have 
formed  the collective recourse approach. Besides DEMOS 
and UTOPIA  they are NJMF,  the initial trade union ori­
ented  Norwegian  project on  planning, control  and  data 
processing, and DUE, the Danish sister project of DEMOS. I 
think the contributions from the PAAS  project and its fol­
lowers,34  with their complementary focus on skill forma­
tion, definitely also should be situated as important places 
within the collective resource approach. 

To elaborate a little more on  the Scandinavian map I 

would as a fourth  approach like to add professional  sys­
tems design.35 This approach grew out of the collective re­
source  tradition, shares many  of  its research  methods, 

33  Bansler calls them 'informationsteoretiske', 'socio-tekniske', 
and 'fagpolitiske'. 
34 See e.g. Göranzon, B. et al.: Datorn som verktyg, Studentlitter­
atur, Lund 1983, and Göranzon, B. (ed.): Datautvecklingens 
filosofi, Carlsson & Jönsson, Malmö 1984. 
35  Andersen N.E. et al.: Professionel  Systemudvikling, Teknisk 
Forlag, Copenhagen 1986. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

25 

and overall theoretical perspective, but focuses on the in­
terests of the systems designers and their working life. 

Bansler  concludes  that  all  three  (I  would  say four) 
systems design approaches today are well established at 
Scandinavian universities, both as research traditions and 
as types of education, but that there is very little commu­
nication  between  them.  This  book  may  hopefully  con­
tribute to a more open dialogue. 

However,  if  we  take  a  interdisciplinary  look  at the 
Scandinavian map the collective  resource approach has 
many connections. Especially architects36  but also engi­
neers37  have  developed  similar  research  projects,  me­
thods, and theoretical perspectives, and we have had close 
cooperation with these research groups. 

To  place  the collective  resource  approach  and  work-
oriented  design of  computer artifacts on an international 
map is more difficult. 

As a political commitment our tradition shares many of 
the values and ideas of the alternative production move­
ment; we have especially been influenced by the strategy 
of quality of work and product developed by workers and 
engineers at Lucas Aerospace in Britain.38 

The best known of  them, Mike  Cooley, has also  been 
most  influential in establishing a  research strategy for 
human  centered  design, the  design  of  new  technology 
based on the skill and qualitative judgements of workers 
and designers, and influential trade union participation. 
He is now coordinating an EEC  project on  a human cen­
tered computer integrated manufacturing system. Other 

36 E.g. the Dairy Project, which  was conducted by architects, but 
used methods and a perspective similar to the DEMOS and DUE 
projects, See e.g. Steen, J. and Ullmark, P.: De  anställdas Mejeri, 
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1982. 
37 E.g. the Carpentry Shop project, which worked with methods 
and a design perspective similar to the UTOPIA project but within 
a 'low tech' area. See Sjögren, D. (ed.): Nyhetsblad  från Snicke-
riprojektet, Swedish Center for Working Life, 1979-83. 
38 See e.g. Cooley, M.: Architect or  bee?- The Human/technology 
Relationship, Langley Technical Service, Slough 1980. 

26 

Prologue 

early contributions  to human centered  design were the 
designs  by  Harold  Rosenbrock39  and  his team at the 
Manchester Institute of Technology in Britain, both in the 
area of computer aided design and in the development of 
human centered lathes. In addition to the British tradi­
tion,  there  have  been  corresponding  research  develop­
ments in  Germany.  Peter Brödner,40  in particular, has 
elaborated  on  the  human centered  production  concept, 
and  helped  bring it out into actual design of  computer-
based systems, in  cooperation  with  the  metal  workers' 
•union. 

The  collective  research approach  comes  close  to  the 
central ideas of  human centered design, and it was  my 
intention to call the book human centered  design of com­
puter artifacts, since I essentially see it eis theoretical re­
flections within that tradition. However, as friends have 
pointed out to me, there is more to human life than work, 
and since I only reflect upon computers in the workplace, 
I have restricted the title to work-oriented design of  com­
puter artifacts. 

To place this book on the map of recent developments in 
theory of design in Information and Computer Science we 
have to go to the land where language is action. This is 
where many of our basic concepts in design of computer 
systems are rethought. 

Geographically this place can be found at the American 
west coast, literally in the heart of 'Silicon Valley'. As the 
reader  will soon  discover,  I find  the  new  philosophical 
foundation  in  the  tradition  of  hermeneutics  and  phe­
nomenology proposed by Terry Winograd41 and Hubert L. 

39 See e.g. Rosenbrock, H.: Social  and Engineering Design of  an 
FMS, CAPE 83, Amsterdam 1983. 
40 See e.g. Brödner, P.: Fabrik 2000 -Alternative Entwicklungs­
pfade in die Zukunft der Fabrik, Sigma Rainer Bohn Verlag, 
Berlin 1985. 
41  Winograd, T. and Flores, F.: Understanding  Computers and 
Cognition-a new  foundation  for design, Ablex, Norwood 1986. 

From DEMOS and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented. Design 

27 

Dreyfus42 a most challenging place  to visit. Neither do I 
mind learning more about the technical and artistic ways 
of designing human-computer  interaction referred to as 
user centered  system design43 that also take place in this 
geographical environment. The  land  where language is 
action can also be  found in Germany, and  I am  just as 
pleased to follow Christiane Floyd into the  new process 
oriented  paradigm in software engineering she is propo­
sing.44  Restricting myself to the Scandinavian  region, I 
feel  at home  with dissertations like the ones based  on 
human  activity  theory  by  Susanne  B0dker*5, or  Jens 
Kaasb0ll's rethinking of the information concept.** 

With the hope that the reader now has both an idea of 
the  research lands of  DEMOS and UTOPIA  that I  come 
from, and a sense of where on the research map I try to 
place myself, I will now turn to an outline of this book on 
work-oriented design of computer artifacts. 

Survey of Contents 
This book is divided into four parts, in addition to this pro­
logue and an epilogue with 'postmodern' reflections. Each 

42  Dreyfus, H. L.: What Computers Can't  Do-A Critique of  Arti­
ficial  Reason, Harper & Row, New York 1972, and Dreyfus, H. L. 
and Dreyfus, S. D.: Mind  over Machine - the  power of  human 
intuition and  expertise in the era of  the computer, Basil 
Blackwell, Glasgow 1986. 
43 See e.g. Norman, D. & Draper, S. (eds.): User Centered  System 
Design, Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986. 
44 See e.g. Floyd, C.: 'Outline of a Paradigm Change in Software 
Engineering' in Bjerknes, et. al (eds.): Computers  and  Democ­
racy -A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 
45  B0dker,  S.:Through the  Interface -A Human Activity  Ap­
proach to User Interface Design, DAIMI PB-224, Department of 
Computer Science, University of Aarhus, 1987(dissertation). 
46 Kaasb0ll, J.: A Theoretical and Empirical  Study of  the Use of 
Language  and  Computers, Institute of Informatics, University of 
Oslo, forthcoming (dissertation). 

28 

Prologue 

part begins with an introduction. In the four parts I reflect 
upon: philosophical foundations of design; perspectives on 
design  as  art  and  as  science;  design  strategies  and 
democratization of  work; and  skill based design of  com­
puter artifacts. Taken together, these four parts give my 
scholary views  of  work-oriented  design  of  computer  ar­
tifacts. 

Part I. Design Philosophy - On Practice and  Reflection 
This part concerns the philosophical foundation of design 
for computer artifacts. I argue the need for a  more fun­
damental understanding of design than the one offered by 
the dominating  rationalistic systems thinking based  on 
the Cartesian dualism of the objective and the subjective, 
of body and  mind. This  need concerns knowledge in the 
design process, as well as knowledge in doing design re­
search, and knowledge in theories of design. The direction 
outlined for theory and practice in work-oriented design is 
towards practical understanding of the games people play 
in  design  and  use  of  computer  artifacts.  I  argue  that 
human  practice  and  understanding  in  everyday  life 
should  be  taken as the  ontological  and  epistemological 
point of departure in inquiries into design and use of com­
puter artifacts. Design becomes a concerned creative ac­
tivity founded in our traditions, but aiming at transcend­
ing them by anticipation and  construction of  alternative 
futures. 

The alternative design philosophy suggested is based on 

pragmatic 'interpretations' of the philosophies of existen­
tial  phenomenology,  emancipatory  practice,  and  use  of 
ordinary language. The approaches are here labeled Hei­
degger ian, Marxist, and Wittgensteinian. Skill and de­
mocracy are at the core of my 'interpretations'. 

With a Heideggerian approach focus is on  how people 

use computer artifacts. The  fundamental difference  be­
tween  involved  practical  understanding  and  detached 
theoretical reflection is stressed. 

Emancipatory  practice is emphasized  in the Marxist 
approach.  In  addition  to  the cultural  understanding of 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented Design 

29 

design  and  use of  computer artifacts offered  by a Hei-
deggerian approach, this is a social or political interpreta­
tion. The emancipatory focus is on social relations, on the 
transcendence of conditions that prevent humanization of 
the world - theoretically and in practice. 

The Wittgensteinian approach gives an 'untheoretical' 
way of  understanding the practice of design and  use of 
computer artifacts. Knowledge is understood in much the 
same way as in the earlier approaches, but with emphasis 
on competence as having learned to follow rules in prac­
tice. The suggestion is to think of design and use activities 
as  language-games  that people  play in ordinary use of 
language. 

Part II. The Art and Science of 
Designing Computer Artifacts 
This part concerns the academic activities of research and 
teaching in the field  of  designing computer  artifacts. I 
start out with a critique of the academic division of labor, 
arguing that the disciplinary boundaries between natural 
science,  social  science and  humanities are  dysfunctional 
when we want to understand the subject matter. I relate 
this institutional critique to a priori interests of knowledge, 
arguing that not only the  knowledge interest of  technical 
control  but  also  of  intersubjective  communication  and 
emancipation  are  fundamental  to the subject  matter in 
design of computer artifacts. 

In arguing a shift from the dominant rationalistic en­
gineering systems  approach  towards  work-oriented  de­
sign I begin with some tentative qualifications of the sub­
ject matter. What are we really concerned about in a sci­
ence of 'systems development' or an art of designing com­
puter artifacts? 

I then turn to a critique of the science of  design of  the 
artificial by Herbert A. Simon. His influence on psychology 
and organization theory, especially the interpretation of 
these disciplines into the context of computer science, has 
had  far-reaching consequences for  an interdisciplinary 
comprehension of 'systems development'. It goes without 

30 

Prologue 

saying that this engineering approach to design with focus 
on formal methods for the analysis of complex systems fits 
badly with the kind of design philosophy that I advocated 
in the previous part. 

The following chapters in this part are a search for al­
ternative paradigm cases for a science or art of designing 
computer artifacts. 

I first  look for 'internal alternatives', internal  in the 
sense  that  they  either emanate  from  within  computer 
science, or are more concerned  with the development  of 
systems thinking than  with taking a  non-system view. 
And there are alternatives. What I find  is social  system 
design methods that we can use right away. I also find  a 
new  foundation  for design, and a new potential  for design 
in the use prototyping software and hardware. 

However, there are many other disciplines that are oc­
cupied with design  of artifacts. Architectural and indus­
trial design are the examples I use in an inquiry into the 
ways that other disciplines see and do in design. 

Compared  with  information  and  computer  science, 
architecture is  a  mature art searching for its scientific 
identity. Considerations that have been important to ar­
chitectural design should be worth reflecting upon for a 
science or art of  designing computer artifacts. After  all, 
houses and  'computer systems' are both social artifacts 
that play an important role in many people's lives. A com­
parison gives insight into the social and political aspects of 
design. It also sheds light on the creative sides of design, 
and leads me to argue that design of computer artifacts is 
just as much a craft or an art as a science. The question of 
style becomes just as important as that of scientific theory 
and method. 

Architectural and  industrial design  also play an im­
portant role in transdisciplinary attempts to establish a 
discipline of design methodology. I argue that a discipline 
for design of  computer artifacts can gain a great deal of 
inspiration  from  reflections  on  'generations'  of  design 
methodology. Why  did for example eminent researchers 
and  designers like the architect Christopher Alexander 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented. Design 

31 

and  the industrial designer Christopher Jones, though 
starting very  much  with just as rational approaches as 
Simon, develop their thinking about design in quite differ­
ent directions? 

In the concluding chapter of this part an alternative to 

Simon's approach in the field  of design of computer arti­
facts is outlined. An alternative understanding of the sub­
ject matter and a curriculum for its study is discussed. 

This is based  on the supporting arguments that any 
discipline which deals with the subject matter of design of 
computer  artifacts should  be  able  to  theoretically and 
methodologically  treat design  as including aspects like 
interventions into  practice, as communication  between 
users and  professional designers, as  a creative process, 
and as a concerned human activity. Any discipline dealing 
with  such  aspects  of  design  will  have  to  transcend  a 
natural science foundation, no matter whether the disci­
pline is called computer science, informatics or informa­
tion science. The domain of the subject matter outlined is 
not primarily a theory of  physical events or logical infer­
ences  in  a  machine,  but  of  concerned  human  activity 
within a  background of tradition and conventions , in de­
signing and using these artifacts. 

I find  this subject matter truly interdisciplinary, with 

relations not only to aspects of  traditional computer sci­
ence, but also to theories and  methods from  social and 
human sciences such as sociology, psychology, anthropol­
ogy, linguistics and business administration. However, I 
also wish to take seriously the indications that what pro­
fessional designers really do is more art than science. 

Part III. Designing  for Democracy at Work 
This part concerns the collective resource  approach to de­
sign  of  computer  artifacts - our  attempt  to  widen  the 
design process to also include trade union activities, and 
the explicit goal of industrial democracy in design and use. 
This is the democracy aspect of work-oriented design. 

The main features of  the collective resource approach 
are trade union activities. They occur locally, influencing 

32 

Prologue 

new  technology  introduced  at the  workplace,  and  cen­
trally improving the conditions for  local  work  through 
national  agreements,  improved  education,  and  design 
projects which  aim at broadening the scope of available 
technical solutions. 

As a background for understanding the role played by 
trade  unions in  relation  to  the  collective  resource  ap­
proach some  characteristic features of Scandinavian in­
dustrial relations are sketched. Then the origin and de­
velopment of the collective resource approach is outlined. I 
start in  the dominant  research  tradition in  relation  to 
industrial democracy in Scandinavia in the late 1960s and 
the  beginning of  the seventies:  the  socio-technical  re­
search  tradition. The  negative strategic implications  of 
this  tradition,  in  terms  of  no  real  worker  influence, 
formed an important part of the challenge to develop an 
alternative research approach for participation, work or­
ganization, and democracy in design and use of computer 
artifacts. Then  I continue, focusing on  the original  Nor­
wegian  Iron and  Metal  Workers' Union  project, by  de­
scribing some  of  the major  projects in the collective re­
source tradition. 

Next, I go into details of the DEMOS and UTOPIA  pro­

jects,  discussing  them  in  the  context  of  designing for 
democracy.  As  background,  the  history  and  research 
strategy of the projects are given. The interplay between 
Marxist  labor  process  theory  and  our  understanding  of 
concrete  design is also highlighted.  I then exemplify its 
results in terms of strategies and  methods  for democrati­
zation of design and use of computer artifacts. 

In  the concluding chapter  of  this  part I summarize 
some reminders on design for democratization based on 
experiences from  the collective  resource tradition. They 
include: 

A participative  approach to the  design  process  is not 

sufficient in the context of democratization. 

The union investigation  and  negotiation  strategy is a 
democratic and  workable  complement to traditional  de-

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented. Design 

33 

sign strategies. But  it is  very resource-consuming  for the 
local unions. 

Local  trade  union  design  efforts  have  to  be  supple­

mented by central union design activities. 

It  is technically  possible  to design  computer artifacts 

based on criteria such as skill and democracy at work. 

I claim that the practical impact on democratization of 
working life that fifteen  years of research in the collective 
resource tradition in Scandinavia has resulted in has been 
considerable, also reaching beyond the borders of Scandi­
navia. This is important, since participating in changes for 
democracy  and  skill is a  key  aspect  of  this kind  of  re­
search. However,  there has not only been  progress. Re­
treats from gained positions form a considerable threat in 
times of  recession and a new political conservatism.  Not 
only has the  role of  the unions in  reshaping technology 
and  work been questioned, but also the very idea of  in­
dustrial democracy. 

I also claim that the theoretical perspective of collective 

resource projects has contributed to a better understand­
ing of and  methods for designing for democracy at work. 
However,  theoretically  the  approach  is  an  even  more 
fragile plant than it is in  practice. The  theoretical  per­
spective is interdisciplinary, and  the methods used are 
unorthodox. Much still has to  be researched, rethought 
and developed. 

Part IV. Designing for Skill 
In this part I consider opportunities for and constraints on 
the ideal of designing computer artifacts as tools for skilled 
work. This is the quality of  work and product aspect  of 
work-oriented design. 

I start with a revisit to UTOPIA.  I outline our tool  per­

spective - the ideal of skilled  workers and  designers in 
cooperation designing computer artifacts as 'craft' tools 
for skilled work. 

Then I investigate in what sense we can understand 
computers as tools. I discuss the human use of tools, what 
craft tools are, and  how  they differ from machines and 

34 

Prologue 

computer artifacts. I also look into different kinds of cri­
tiques of understanding computer artifacts as tools, as well 
as  into  alternative  suggestions,  such  as  a  media  per­
spective emphasizing communication, and a 'postmodern' 
perspective emphasizing pleasurable engagement. I also 
discuss the tool aspects of computer artifacts in terms of 
existing hardware and software, and  in terms of  design 
principles like direct manipulation and  the use of  meta­
phors. The inquiry  concerns whether properties of  craft 
tools and their use should be seen as essential aspects in 
designing computer artifacts, and to what extent we can 
realize such an ideal. 

My conclusion is that computer artifacts in the general 
sense of being deliberately designed means to an end are 
tools', but that they on a more concrete level are machines, 
in the sense that once started they perform automatic ac­
tion, and hence they are different  from simple hand  tools; 
that they,  however, are  machines that can  be  designed 
with the  ideal  of  craft  tools for a specific craft or  profes­
sion, utilizing interactive  hardware devices and  the ca­
pacity of symbol manipulation to create this resemblance. 
I find  the tool  perspective, used  with care, to be  one 
useful design ideal for work-oriented design of  computer 
artifacts. This is not to neglect the importance of other de­
sign views like a media perspective or a play perspective, 
nor is it blindness to the prevailing situation in industry 
today, where computer artifacts more often are designed 
as machines, in the sense  that  they  take control  away 
from the user and automate skill. 

Associated  with the  ideal of craft tools is the ideal  of 
craftsmanship. The consequences of such a skill ideal in a 
tool perspective are discussed, especially the problematic 
character of tacit knowledge, as is the difference between 
the skills of individual instrumental activity and of social 
interaction. I suggest that our UTOPIAn tool perspective as 
design ideal needs to be supplemented by ideals that help 
focus on cooperative aspects in general and especially on 
the tacit knowledge performed as social interaction com­
petence at work. 

From DEMOS  and UTOPIA to Work-Oriented, Design 

35 

Finally I investigate the ideal of computer artifacts as 
tools for skilled work from a sociological perspective. I try 
to position the tool perspective on design of computer ar­
tifacts in relation to empirical studies on changes of quali­
fications  in working life.  What comes  out is a  scattered 
picture of  qualification, dequalificatwn, polarization,  re-
qualification, and segmentation. I find support for a design 
ideal based on craft skills, but it is a support with many 
question marks. 

Epilogue 
The epilogue  to this book contains some  concluding  re­
marks on the future of work-oriented design of computer 
artifacts. This includes a possible contradiction between 
the tradition-based ideal of  skill, and  the modern  ratio­
nalistic ideal of democracy. The ideal of designing for skill 
and democracy at work is revisited in the light of the con­
temporary 'postmodern' condition. 

Part I 
Design Philosophy — 
on Practice and Reflection 

All social life is essentially practical. 
All the mysteries which lead  theory 
towards mysticism find their rational solution 
in human practice and 
in the comprehension of that practice.' 

Karl Marx in Theses on 

Introduction 

We live in a world of systems. This is absolutely natural to 
us. Nevertheless, my point in this part on Design Philoso­
phy is that it is exactly this fact which must be made a 
problem for a science of design and use of computer arti­
facts.  Neither existing systems nor systems thinking as 
such should be taken for granted. 

Computer  and  information science,  and  systems  de­
sign, are based on an often implicit philosophical founda­
tion that may have been adequate when the field of study 
was  restricted  to  understanding  computers  as  formal 
systems. Today computer artifacts have to be understood 
in a much wider sense — as social phenomena playing an 
increasingly dominant role in our everyday life. This leads 
to a questioning of the philosophical foundation of  a sci­
ence of design and use of the artifacts we call computers. 

In a science of design and use of computer artifacts we 
have  to be concerned  with a technical  interest, i.e.  the 
purposive rational design of  systems, and  the technical 
functionality of these systems. This is at the core of such a 
science. However, the design and use of computer based 
systems are historical and social processes. As such they 
have to be  understood  with the research interest  of  the 
human  and  the social sciences. According  to  the  well-
known categorization by Jürgen Habermas in Erkenntnis 
und  Interesse this means a practical  and an emancipa­
toryresearch interest.1 The practical research interest is 
directed  towards interpretation,  human  understanding 
and communication, towards  the establishment  and ex-

1  Habermas, J.: Erkenntnis  und  Interesse, Suhrkamp,  Frankfurt 
1968. 

40 

Design  Philosophy 

pansion  of  action oriented  understanding. The emanci­
patory research interest is directed towards emancipation 
from hypostatized forces  of history and  society, the goal 
being the contribution to conditions for independent indi­
viduals in a society of free  cooperation and communica­
tion. 

The point I want to make is that these interests should 
be integrated into a science of design and use of computer 
artifacts. Design processes as a social and historical phe­
nomenon have characteristics that in research should be 
guided not only by the technical research interest, but also 
by the practical and emancipatorial research interest. 

This cannot be abandoned to a posteriori studies by the 

human sciences and the social sciences, because  the de­
sign process is 'where  the action is'. Critique  may  help 
change the conditions for design and use, but not until in­
tegrated into theory and methods of design can these in­
terests have any real impact on how people design and use 
computer artifacts. This integration is a theoretical chal­
lenge  to  Work-Oriented  Design  of  Computer  Artifacts. 
Hence this inquiry into the philosophical foundations of 
design in this part of the book. 

Detached Reflection and Practical Skill 
We ask philosophical questions because they give clues to 
what and how we can know, and  how we have acquired 
the knowledge  that we  claim  to  possess. These are the 
kind of questions I will discuss in this part. It will be ar­
gued that there is more to a science of design and  use of 
computer artifacts than can be understood  with  mathe­
matics and logic, especially if we are concerned about skill 
and democracy. 

A distinction between two kinds of  knowledge  is im­
portant to  the argumentation. The first  is the  practical 
skill of professional designers and professional users. This 
is knowledge  in everyday  practice and in ordinary lan­
guage use. The second is detached reflection about design. 

Introduction to Part  I 

4L 

This is propositional, often theoretical or scientific know­
ledge. 

What I am doing in this book, for example, is detached 
reflection  about  design.  I  take  a  step  back  and  look 
'objectively'  at the  research and  design  practice I have 
been involved in for the last fifteen  years. How does this 
kind of knowledge relate to design skill? This is a philo­
sophical inquiry to which one can try to find  epistemologi­
ca! and ontological answers. Some of  them will be consi­
dered below. 

My point is that computer science and systems design 
has to a large degree been unsuccessful in relating design 
knowledge as detached reflection to design knowledge as 
practical skill. The latter has been made invisible. The sci­
entific way of thinking and doing has been seen as supe­
rior to, and actually the norm for, practical design activi­
ties and  use of  computers. Hence, formal  description is 
almost another label for computer science,  and systems 
the epitome of design. 

The foundation for this understanding is a rationalistic 

philosophy of  mirror-images of  objective  reality. Admit­
tedly, it is a gross generalization to suggest, as I do, that 
most  contemporary  theories and  methods for  design  of 
computer artifacts, as well as theories  and  methods for 
research in the area, belong to a tradition of dualism and 
rationalistic reasoning - what I will label a Cartesian ap­
proach. It should, however,  not be taken as a strict classi­
fication:  the outline is much  too sketchy for such  a pur­
pose. However, in order to include not only a technical in­
terest in design, but also practical and emancipatory de­
sign interests, this rationalistic foundation is questioned 
here. 

The alternative position  argued is that there is much 
more  knowledge in the practice of  design  and  use than 
can ever be formally described or reflected as systems de­
scriptions. Theoretical reflective knowledge is seen as im­
portant in design, but more as a supplement  to practical 
understanding than as a substitute for it. Hence, in the 
detached reflections below on design and use of computer 

42 

Design Philosophy 

artifacts, I will focus upon the importance of knowledge as 
practice, everyday understanding and  ordinary language. 
This is done in search of a philosophical foundation for de­
sign theory and methods that can enhance the capabilities 
of  designers and  users to  develop  their practical know­
ledge. What  I am  looking for  is theoretical  knowledge 
about everyday understanding in and about design. 

Over the years, three philosophical traditions have es­

pecially influenced my understanding of, and research in, 
design of computer artifacts, and focused it on the impor­
tance  of  everyday  practice.  They  are  existential  phe­
nomenology , emancipatory  practice, and  language-
games philosophy. 

From  West  Churchman's  philosophical  investigation 
into The Design of Inquiring Systems ,2 I have adopted the 
idea of interpreting philosophical ideas to a form  which 
fits a discussion  about design.  However,  my  concern  is 
with  interpretations  of  Heidegger,  Marx  and  Wittgen­
stein, rather than with their predecessors Leibniz, Locke, 
Kant and Hegel, all of  whom  Churchman introduced  to 
design  philosophy.3 The alternative design approaches I 

2  Churchman, C.W.: The  Design of  Inquiring  Systems - basic 
concepts of  systems and  organization, Basic Books, New York 
1971. 
3  Kristo Ivanov 'traces' in Systemutveckling och  ADB-ämnets ut­
veckling', Department of Computer and Information Science, Lin­
köping University, Linköping 1984, the philosophical roots of con­
temporary schools of computer  science and systems design in 
Sweden. Some of his philosophical labels' for different 'schools' 
are  summarized below: The 'infological  approach* (professor 
Börje Langefors) he finds inspired by the logical  empiricists and, 
going backwards, Carnap, Martin* Bar-Hillel - 'the first' 
Wittgenstein (analytical  philosophy) - Russell, Frege (logicism), 
Bretano (psychologism) - Mill (empiricism). The 'database and 
artificial intelligence approach' (Professor Janis Bubenko) is 
described as having  similar roots. The 'pragmatic approach' 
(Professor Kristo Ivanov) is via Churchman, Singer (empirical 
idealism), Dewey, James and Peirce (pragmatism) traced back to 
Hegel (idealism), Kant, Mill (empiricism) and Bain. Still another 
tradition is the 'phenomenological  approach' (Professor  Hans-
Erik  Nissen): among its inspirations are Habermas, Heidegger 

Introduction to Part I 

43 

suggest  are  probably  best  placed  as  successors  of  his 
Hegelian  Inquiring  Systems, even  if  the  philosophical 
roots constitute a complicated tangle. 

Structure of Part I 
In chapters 2,3 and 4,. respectively, I outline basic features 
of  design and  use of  computer artifacts according to an 
Existential Phenomenology - a Heideggerian  alternative, 
Emancipatory  Practice  - a  Marxist  alternative, and 
Language-Games - a Wittgensteinian alternative. 

In chapter 5, With Alternative Glasses - conclusions on 
design  philosophy, I summarize and  exemplify  what  I 
understand as the  common implications for theory and 
practice of Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts. 

However, to begin the philosophical journey I will have 
to characterize the philosophical tradition of dualism and 
rational reasoning, on which most computer science and 
systems  design  theory  is based. So  as in  Churchman's 
dialectical Hegelian Inquiring System I start with a brief 
discussion of  the 'deadliest enemy* to a practice oriented 
design philosophy, the Cartesian approach to systems de­
sign. This  is done  in chapter 1, Mirror,  mirror  on  the 
wall... - the Cartesian approach and beyond. 

The critique  I present and  the alternatives outlined 
may seem odd to a reader who for the first time is exposed 
to them. However, they are not all that unique. When a 
few years ago I started to look around for an alternative 

(existentialism), Husserl (phenomenology), Dilthey (Geisteswis­
senschaften), Kant and Hegel (idealism); another path back to 
Dilthey goes via Berger/Luckmann, Schütz, Scheler and Weber, 
while still another one indicates a relation backwards to 'the first' 
Wittgenstein (analytical philosophy), Peirce (pragmatism) and 
Mill (empiricism). The 'path' I will follow in this book comes clo­
sest to that of the 'phenomenological approach', but it will also in­
clude Marxist successors (dialectical materialism) to Hegel like 
Lukàcs, Marco vie', Freire,  Kosik and Israel. Habermas will also 
be seen in this connection. Emphasis will also be on the influence 
from the ordinary language school originating from 'the second' 
Wittgenstein. 

44 

Design  Philosophy 

philosophical foundation for design of  computer artifacts 
that  was more in line with our research experiences from 
DEMOS and UTOPIA  I was lucky enough to get hold of a 
manuscript  by  Terry  Winograd  and  Fernando  Flores.4 
From inside computer science a critique of the rationalis­
tic Cartesian approach was formulated, and alternatives 
in the direction suggested  here were  presented.5 Later I 
have seen several  examples in the same  direction.  Re­
cently  I  met  with  Ragnar  Rommetveit.  Discussing the 
philosophical foundation of cognition he  referred to a pa­
per he  just had  written on  convergent trends in current 
social-scientific research.6 What he suggests in that paper 
is that we are today witnessing a clear trend in research 
on cognition  and  communication away from  the Carte­
sian analytical-rationalist  model and towards a conver­
gent  hermeneutic-dialectical  view,  including  elements 
from a  Heideggerian, a  Marxist and  a  Wittgensteinian 
approach.  As  I  was  making  the final  version  of  this 
manuscript I received  from Markku  Nurminen a floppy 
disk  containing a  book  on  perspectives for information 
systems pointing in the same direction.7 To me these ex­
amples, both inside and outside computer and information 
science, are an important philosophical legitimization for 
beginning to look  for new and  perhaps most important 
aspects of design of computer artifacts. 

4 The manuscript was later published as Winograd, T. and Flo-
res: Understanding Computers and  Cognition - a new  foundation 
for design, Ablex, Norwood 1986. 
5 An indication of the challenge the book has been to the establis­
hed computer science society is that the well known journal Arti­
ficial  Intelligence, no 31,1987, pp. 213-261, published no less than 
four reviews of the book and a reply from the authors. 
6  Rommetveit, R.: 'Meaning, Context, and Control - Convergent 
Trends and Controversial Issues in Current Social-scientific Re­
search on Human Cognition and  Communication', in  Inquiry, 
no 30,1987. 
7  Nurminen, M.: Three  Perspectives  to Information  Systems, 
Studentlitteratur, (forthcoming). 

Introduction to Part  I 

45 

To the reader  who already knows  what the design  of 
computer artifacts is all about, and who needs no philoso­
phy to reflect about this, I pass on as a challenge my fa­
vorite quotation from Ludwig Wittgenstein: 

The aspects of things that are most important to us are 
hidden because of their simplicity and familiarity. (One 
is unable  to notice something - because it is always 
before one's eyes.) The real foundations of his enquiry 
do not strike man at all. Unless that fact has at some 
time struck him. - And this means: we fail to be struck 
by what, once seen, is most striking and most powerful.8 

This is what I have been struck by. 

8 Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical  Investigations, Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford (1953) 1963, § 129. 

Chapter 1 
Mirror, Mirror on the Wall. .  . 
— the Cartesian Approach and 
Beyond 

When designing computer artifacts we are to a large ex­
tent occupied  with  descriptions,  often  formal  ones.  We 
make systems  descriptions of  computer  based  systems 
and of the surrounding organizations. We write programs 
to  run on computers. We  make  models of  machine con­
figurations,  etc. And as researchers in the field  we make 
theoretical models that mirror and  explain this reality. 
What we reflect about in  systems design and in research 
are real systems in an outer world of natural and artificial 
objects. Our descriptions are models of these objects and 
their relations. Based on our  maps or  mirror-images of 
the world  we  reason about  the world  and  draw conclu­
sions. We try to make the maps or mirror-images as cor­
rect as possible, and our reasoning as rational as we can. 

Here  are three  typical  examples  that  I  am  familiar 

with. 

Three Examples 
Theory of  Science 
The first  one  concerns  descriptions  and  models  in  re­
search. As a Ph.D. student in computer science I attended 
a course on theory of science given by my professor Börje 

Mirror, Mirror on the Wall. 

47 

Langefors. We  were  taught the relation between model 
and reality.1 This is, in short, the idea: 

One can make observations in the object field (i.e. rea­

lity). A model is a  map or a mirror-image of some part of 
this reality. It is based on observations in the object field. All 
models are 

'system models' in the sense that they are designed as a 
system of components in such a  way that this system 
can be expected to have properties that mirror some of 
the properties of the object field.  (...) When we want to 
make models that are not physically or  geometrically 
identical with the object field  we have to define system 
components with properties that for our study are sim­
ilar  to  the  corresponding components  in  the  objects 
field, and that are related in a way that is similar to the 
corresponding relations in the object field.2 

Models can than be used for forecasts and explanations of 
relations and properties of the object field. 

By simulations with a model we get model experiences 
that can be formulated as hypotheses about the properties 
of the model.  When tested in the model these model  hy­
potheses can be formulated as hypotheses about the object 
field. To be verified they have to be tested in the object field. 
If  the model is theoretical,  then we can deduce theo­

rems (propositions about properties of the model) from its 
axioms and logical structure. The model together with the 
theorems  forms  a  theory. The  theorems  can  be  formu­
lated as hypotheses about properties of the object field. 

This  was  an  example  of  a  view  of  reality,  systems, 
models  and  theory  in  the field  of  theory  of  science  in 
computer and information science. 

1  Langefors, B.: Samband  mellan modell  och verklighet, IB-ADB 
66, no 1, (rewritten 1971-11-02). 
2  Ibid., p.  2 (my translation). 

48 

Design Philosophy 

System Description  Languages 
My next example comes from the field of  system descrip­
tion  languages in computer and information science.  It 
concerns  the  view  of  Kristen  Nygaard,  my  mentor  for 
many  years,  and  one  of  the  best  known  computer 
scientists  in  Scandinavia  in  the field  of  programming 
languages  as  well  as  in  social  rethinking  of  systems 
design to include the interest of trade unions. In his view 
a system is a  part of the world, which we  choose to  re­
gard  as a  whole, separated from the rest of  the world 
during some period of consideration, a whole  which we 
choose to consider  as containing a collection of  compo­
nents, each characterized by a selected set of associated 
data items and patterns, and by actions which may in­
volve itself and other components.3 

In short: A system exists in the real world as objects with 
specific relations, but it is a human choice to consider this 
part of the world as a system. 

Furthermore, we have to distinguish between two types 
of systems, mental and manifest systems. The former are 
those existing in our minds as a  result of our thought 
processes. Systems existing in the human mind, physi­
cally materialized as states of the cells of our brains, are 
called  mental  systems. Systems  external  to  human 
minds are called manifest systems.4 

The system studied is called the considered system. 

Our understanding of a considered system, manifest or 
mental (in some  other  person's mind) will always be 
based upon mental systems which we create and ma­
nipulate within our own  minds, and  which we  try to 
make similar to the considered system in some sense. 
(...) We have to select a subset of  the properties of the 

3  Holbaek-Hansen E., Håndlykken, P. and Nygaard,  K.: System-
Description and  the DELTA Language, Norsk Regnesentral, Oslo 
1975, p. 15. 
4 Ibid., p. 18. 

Mirror, Mirror  on the Wall. 

system  for  incorporation  in  our  mental  system  por­
traying the considered system. The reason for  this is 
that any considered system possesses too many proper­
ties. (...) The mental system created in this way, in order 
to  portray  a  selected  set  of  the  considered  system's 
properties, is called a mental model system (...) a model 
(mental or  manifest) is always itself  a system. When 
we say that some system is a model, it is being related to 
another system - the considered system.5 

When information about a system is communicated in a 
language the information passed on may be said to be a 
system description. An example of a transient system de­
scription is a spoken description. Examples of permanent 
system  descriptions are descriptions written on  a black­
board or  printed in a book.  When receiving a system de­
scription we create a  mental model system of  the consi­
dered system to which the system description refers.6 

Practical Guidelines 
My third example is less sophisticated.  Nevertheless, it 
may  well  be the most important one. It comes from the 
field  of  practical  guidelines  in systems design. Edward 
Yourdon is an internationally well-known systems design 
consultant, and one of the most successful writers in this 
field. Here is a hint of his view from a textbook on systems 
design methods. 

A methodology, as we will use the term in this book, is a 
formal specification of the system for building systems. 
It defines the pieces, or components, of the system for 
building software systems - that is, the phases or activ­
ities that one finds in a software project; it also defines 
the interfaces  between those components. You'll also 
find that this book makes a distinction between a tech­

5 Ibid., pp. 19-21. 
6 Ibid., p. 23. 

so 

Design Philosophy 

nical  model of  the system for building systems and  a 
managerial model.7 

Furthermore, for the methods to work there is an impor­
tant assumption: 

Virtually everything in this book assumes that you are 
a rational manager; that you  have  rational program­
mers and analysts working for you; that you deal with 
rational  users and  customers; and  that the environ­
ment  in  which  you  determine  your  schedules  and 
manpower  estimates  is  not  only  rational,  but  also 
friendly and supportive.8 

Systems, Dualism 
and Rationalistic Reasoning 
Though different, all three examples are similar in at least 
two aspects. They all share an understanding of the world 
in terms of  systems, models and descriptions of reality, i.e. 
of  systems  thinking for  purposive  rational  action.  And 
they have all been most successful in their respective fields 
of design of  computer artifacts. The instrumental power 
of systems thinking for purposive rational action seems to 
be beyond doubt. 

The use of 'the scientific method' (logical empiricism), 
as in the case of Langefors, has generated new knowledge 
for design of  more effective  computer-based information 
systems.  New  powerful  object-oriented  programming 
languages are  the result of  systems thinking, as in the 
case of  Nygaard. And  many of  the computer based sys­
tems designed today could not have been created without 
rational systems design methods like the ones by Yourdon. 

7  Yourdon, E.: Managing  the  System Life  Cycle, Yourdon  Press, 
New York 1982, p. ix. 
8  Ibid., p. xi. 

Mirror, Mirror on the Wall. 

51 

With success stories like the above, why would anyone 
worry about systems thinking? For me, the reason was a 
feeling that: 
•  systems  thinking  has  helped  produce  hierarchical 

computer based systems with increased division of la­
bor and less planning as part of  the job,  rather than 
more democratic labor processes of design and use; 

•  systems  design  has  helped  reduce  the  job  of  many 

workers  to  algorithmic  procedures,  rather  than  en­
hanced their skill; 

•  objectifications and formalizations in systems descrip­

tions have to a great extent locked the users out of the 
design process, rather than supported creative partici­
pative communication between professional users and 
professional designers.9 

What if these 'anomalies' to some extent are inherent in 
contemporary systems thinking as exemplified above? 

What if  traditional theories and  methods for systems 
design  not only  have been  politically  applied  to deskill 
users, but more fundamentally, theoretically reduce the 
skills of users to what can be formally described? Then a 
critique of  the  political  rationality of  the design process, 
points at  a critique of the scientific rationality of methods 
for systems design and description. It becomes important 
to reflect about the philosophical foundations of systems 
thinking, and the foundations of research in the field. 

The Cartesian Approach 
Returning  to  the  three  examples  of  systems  thinking 
above, one can say that they share the philosophical as­
sumptions of rationalistic reasoning as epistemology, and 
that dualism as ontology is taken for granted. This is not 
exceptional.  These  are  philosophical  assumptions  that 

9 This is further developed in Ehn, P. and Kyng, M.: A Tool Per­
spective on Design of  Interactive Computer Support  for Skilled 
Workers in Proceedings of the Seventh Scandinavian Research 
Seminar on Systemeering, Helsinki, 1984. 

52 

Design  Philosophy 

have proved to  work well, and the ideas have a long his­
tory in Western tradition. Philosophers will tell us that the 
roots go back at least to Plato, and that science and tech­
nology are to a great extent based on the version of ratio­
nalism given by René Descartes.10 

Descartes  had  a  background  in  the  humanities,  but 
found himself embarrassed with all the doubts and errors 
that he found. To find true knowledge he turned to math­
ematics  and  was  delighted  with  the  certainty  of  its 
demonstrations and  the evidence  of  its reasoning. True 
knowledge  was to be found in arithmetic and  geometry 
because they alone were free from any taint of falsity and 
uncertainty. The objective is rational reason emancipated 
from bodily feelings and emotions. Craft, artistry, passion, 
love, and  care became the subjective and  unreliable as­
pects that have to be sacrificed in search for the truth. 

The  prototypical  Cartesian  scientist  or  systems  de­

signer is an observer. He does not participate in the world 
he is studying, but goes home to find the truth about it by 
deduction from the objective facts that he has gathered. 
The  truth is found  in detached  reflection  by  use of  the 
method of rationalistic reasoning. Simple objects are or­
ganized into more  and  more complex systems which ex­
pand our knowledge of the world. 

The Cartesian philosophy is an epistemology and on­

tology  of  an inner  world  of  experiences (mind) and  an 
outer world of objects: Our body being perhaps the most 
significant object, and language our way of mirroring this 
outer world of real objects. 

To  make  this  philosophy  somewhat  more  concrete, 
think of  a person driving a  nail with a hammer. In the 
outer objective world there is the person (body), the nail 
and the hammer, all with their given properties. With our 
language we can name all these objects, so we know what 
they  are. The  person's inner  world  (mind)  reflects  the 
outer  world. He  perceives the hammer, the nail etc. To 

10 Descartes, R.: A Discourse on  Method  and  Selected Writings, 
(1637) J.M. Dent and Sons, London 1912. 

Mirror, Mirror on the Wall 

53 

drive the nail rationally he examines the properties of the 
hammer, the nail, and of other objects that  might be of 
importance to the hammering. From this inspection and 
his former knowledge about these objects he determines 
how to drive the nail. When he has made this rational de­
cision in his mind, the mind  causes his body to grip the 
hammer and drive the nail the right way.11 

This  understanding of  hammering  corresponds  well 
with the systems thinking in the examples above. I  will 
refer to it as the Cartesian approach to systems design. 
Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores have summarized 
it in the following way: 

• characterize the situation in terms of identifiable ob­
jects with well defined properties 
• find  general rules that apply to situations in terms of 
these objects and properties 
• apply the rules logically to the situation of  concern, 
drawing conclusions about what should be done.12 

This is the epistemological  assumption  of  rationalistic 
reasoning. With  this goes  the ontological  dualism  as­
sumption, that is: 

• We are inhabitants of  a 'real world' made up of  ob­
jects bearing properties. Our actions take place in that 
world. 
• There are 'objective facts' about the world that do not 
depend on the interpretation (or even presence) of any 
person. 

11  The hammering example is chosen by reason Of its popularity. 
It is used as a paradigm example by many of the authors I will 
refer to for other ontological or epistemological positions. It is also 
a good example because it facilitates reasoning about designing 
computer artifacts as tools for skilled work, which is one of the 
main purposes of this book. 
12 Winograd, T.  and Flores, F.: Understanding  Computers  and 
Cognition - a new  foundation  for design, Ablex, Norwood 1986, 
p.15. 

54 

Design  Philosophy 

• Perception is a process by which facts about the world 
are  (sometimes  inaccurately)  registered  in  our 
thoughts and feelings. 
• Thoughts and intentions about action somehow cause 
physical (hence real world) motion of our bodies.13 

Systems design is not a social and creative enterprise, but 
a process of rational decision-making. We need only make 
correct descriptions of the world; the rest is simply logic. 
The computer systems that are designed are not artifacts 
like  hammers,  but  logical  machines  like  our  minds. 
Cartesian mind-body dualism paradoxically suggests that 
there is 'a ghost in the machine' 14(the ghost that artificial 
intelligence  today  wants  to  place  in  the  artifacts  we 
design). 

The Invisibility of Skill and Subjectivity 
In spite of all the merits of  the Cartesian approach and 
systems thinking, there also seems to be reason to be criti­
cal of  these philosophical foundations. Given my interest 
in  work-oriented  design,  the shortcomings  I find  most 
striking are that practical skills and  subjectivity are ren­
dered  invisible  — that the social  construction of  reality is 
hidden in the background. 

What if we reject Cartesian dualism, i.e. that what we 
know about the world  is a  reflection or mirror image of 
that outer world of objects? What if we rather assume that 
we socially construct the world? 

is Ibid., p. 30. 
14 An expression used about the Cartesian mind-body dualism by 
Ryle, G.: The Concept of  Mind, Penguin Books 1949. 

Mirror, Mirror  on the Wall. 

55 

If we instead, as Wittgenstein, assume that:18 
What I see in the dawning of an aspect is not an  at­
tribute of the object, but an internal relation between it 
and other objects. 

Then it does not become necessary to make assumptions 
of  individual  mental  representations  of  an  external 
Cartesian world  independent of language. Aspects of ob­
jects,  as  opposed  to  attributes,  become,  as  Ragnar 
Rommetveit  has  argued,  theoretically  anchored  in  the 
constructivist  assumption.16 The 'dawning of  an aspect' 
takes place as situated cognition and  communication by 
which we actively make sense of the world and 'bring it to 
language'. There is a shift from language as description 
towards  language  as action.  And  furthermore,  for  the 
sense I make  of  the world  to  be  accepted  by  others as 
intersubjectively valid it must to some extent be a matter 
of social control  and negotiation. The following chapters 
on design knowledge will be based on this constructivist 
assumption, rather than the dualism assumption. 

Now  to the invisibility  of  skills in the Cartesian ap­

proach. What are the consequences of giving priority  to 
reflective purposive rationalistic thinking? After all, as the 
philosopher Peter Winch, has put it:17 

a cook is not a man who first has a vision of a pie and 
then tries to make it, he is a man skilled in cookery, and 
both his projects and his achievements spring from that 
skill. 

16  Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical  Investigations, Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford (1953) 1963, p.212. 
16  Rommetveit, R.: 'Meaning, Context, and Control - Convergent 
Trends and Controversial Issues in Current Social-scientific Re­
search on  Human Cognition  and Communication',  in Inquiry, 
no. 30,1987, p.85. 
17 Winch, P.: The Idea of a Social  Science and  its Relation to Phi­
losophy, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1958, p. 55 (quoted after 
Oakeshoot). 

56 

Design  Philosophy 

And  when the cook  reflects-in-action, as Donald  Schön 
has labeled the professional skill of being a researcher in a 
practical situation, 

he does not keep means and ends separate, but defines 
them interactively as he frames a  problematic situa­
tion. He does not separate thinking from doing, ratioci­
nating his way to a decision which  he must later con­
vert to action. Because his experimenting is a kind of 
action, implementation is built into his inquiry.18 

Nevertheless, the Cartesian view of the cook is similar to 
the rationalistic assumption of a professional designer as a 
person who in advance makes detailed explicit plans of all 
future steps, and a user as someone whose skill can be re­
duced to and described as algorithmic procedures. 

Or to continue  Winch's argument,19  what would even 

the best Cartesian mathematician be without the practi­
cal skill of doing something? Can he make sense of a logi­
cal  formula,  an  expression  of  objective  knowledge  (i.e. 
something encoded in a written language) without having 
learnt a  socially shared  way of  making special kinds of 
marks on paper, and understanding how to use them  in 
inferring conclusions from a set of premises? Does not ra­
tionalistic reasoning lack  all significance, without such 
practical skills which we  come  to embody  when  we  be­
come socialized into a certain culture? 

If this is the case, do we not need a philosophy of design 
that does not, as the Cartesian approach does, reduce the 
practical skill of designers and users to what can be for­
mally described  and  understood as rationalistic reason­
ing? The following chapters on design knowledge will fo­
cus  on  the  role  of  practical  knowledge  of  users  and 

18 Schön D. A: The  Reflective  Practitioner - How  Professionals 
Think in Action, Basic Books, New York 1983, p. 68. 
19  Ibid., p. 57, and further developed in Shotter, J.: 'Conscious­
ness, Self-consciousness,  Inner Games,  and Alternative 
Realities', in Underwood,  G.  (ed.): Aspects  of  Consciousness, vol 
3, Academic Press, London 1983. 

Mirror, Mirror  on the Wall 

SI 

designers.  They  will  be  based  on  the assumption  that 
practical  skill  is more  fundamental  than theoretical  ra­
tionalistic thinking. 

In rejecting Cartesian dualism, the  relations between 
objectivity and subjectivity must also be rethought. It is not 
by accident that especially female philosophers have fo­
cused  on  the  need  for  such  a  rethinking.  Evelyn  Fox 
Keller argues that the division of the world in the knower 
(mind) and the knowable (nature), as well as rationalistic 
or objective reasoning as a relation between the two, is a 
genderized philosophy of the world. She writes:20 

Not only are mind and  nature assigned gender, but in 
characterizing scientific and objective thought as mas­
culine, the very activity by which  the knower  can ac­
quire knowledge is also genderized. The relation speci­
fied  between knower and known is one of distance and 
separation. It is that between a subject and an object 
radically divided, which is to say  no worldly relation. 
Simply put  nature is objectified. (...) Concurrent with 
the division of the world into subject and object is, ac­
cordingly,  a  division  of  the forms  of  knowledge into 
'subjective' and  'objective'. The scientific  mind  is set 
apart from what is to be known, that is, from nature, 
and its autonomy - and hence the reciprocal autonomy 
of the object - is guaranteed (or so it had traditionally 
been assumed) by setting apart its modes of knowing 
from those in which that dichotomy is threatened. In 
this process, the characterization of both the scientific 
mind and its modes of access to knowledge as mascu­
line is indeed significant. Masculine here connotes, as it 
so often does, autonomy, separation, and distance. It 
connotes  a  radical  rejection  of  any  commingling  of 

20 Fox Keller, E.: Reflections on Gender and  Science, Yale Uni­
versity Press, New Haven 1985, p. 79. For an application of Fox 
Keller's gender analysis on systems design see Greenbaum, J: 
The Head  and the Heart - using gender analysis to study the  so­
cial  construction of  computer systems, Computer Science De­
partment, Aarhus University, Denmark 1987. 

58 

Design Philosophy 

subject and object, which are, it now appears, quite con­
sistently identified as male and female. 

Instead of rendering the bodily emotional subjective actors 
in design and science invisible, in the name of objectivity, 
why not participate in the practice of the concerned sub­
jects and  this way construct reality as objectively as we 
can? At  the same  time we can, as Ragnar Rommetveit 
has suggested, ask as a critique of the Cartesian ideology 
and the unequal distribution of knowledge and  power in 
society:21 

What is it that characterizes those persons who in our 
society thus manage to have their subjectivity endorsed 
by others and hence, in a way, accepted as 'objectivity'? 
Can we, by systematic investigation of  such asymme­
tries, perhaps start unravelling institutionalized  pat­
terns of dependencies and 'meaning monopolies' in so­
ciety at large? 

The following chapters will  be based on the assumption 
that subjectivity is a valuable source in design and design 
research, not a factor that necessarily should be kept un­
der control or reduced to a minimum. Under all circum­
stances subjectivity should be made visible. 

Beyond  Cartesianismi 
The fundamental question to be discussed in the following 
chapters is if and how we can do better in design of com­
puter artifacts, and in research about them, without the 
Cartesian ontological and epistemological assumptions. 

To speak of my own design experiences in the DEMOS 
and UTOPIA research projects: Could  other philosophical 
positions help us understand our own shortcomings in the 
use of traditional system description tools in design with 
professional  users? Could  they shed  some  light  on  the 
comparatively good  results of  applying 'design-by-doing' 
methods like  prototyping, experimental systems design, 

21  Rommetveit, op. cit., p.98. 

Mirror, Mirror  on  the Wall. 

59 

the use of mock-ups, scenarios, etc., in design work with 
skilled users?22 

In the languages of the coming sections: What new un­
derstanding is possible if we break down our readiness-to-
hand of the Cartesian approach to design and use of com­
puter artifacts? What are the consequences if design and 
design research are understood as emancipatory practice 
in an integrated social and historical context that is not 
taken for granted? And what if the Cartesian approach is 
just one  out of  many possible language-games?  What if 
systems,  instrumental  rationality  and  dualism  are  no 
more than the historically and socially produced and in-
tersubjectivély accepted conventional rules of the game -
no  more  real  than any other  rules  produced  this way? 
What other language-games can we then play in design 
and use of computer artifacts? 

So far this may sound like odd ideas presented in alien 
languages.  It is  my  hope,  however,  that  the  following 
chapters written in  these languages will suggest to the 
reader sonie  new and  useful  aspects  on  understanding 
design and use of computer artifacts. 

Anyhow it should be worth mentioning that we are en­

couraged  to a critique of  the Cartesian approach by the 
author of the perhaps strongest contemporary arguments 
for it.23 

22 Ehn and Kyng, op. cit. and B0dker, S. et al.: 'A Utopian Experi­
ence' in Bjerknes et al. (eds): Computers  and  Democracy - A 
Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 
23 Ludwig Wittgenstein was not only the author of Philosophical 
Investigations, but also of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Kegan 
Paul, 1923. Tractatus was a major contribution to the 'Cartesian 
approach' taken by the logical empiricists of the influential 
Vienna Circle.  Philosophical  Investigations may be seen as the 
mature Wittgenstein's critique of the position taken by the young 
Wittgenstein. This view will be referred to in a later chapter as the 
strongest support for the proposed understanding of design and 
use of computer artifacts. 

œ 

Design  Philosophy 

Practice as Reality - the Alternative Point  of  Departure 
In the following inquiry into design and use of computer 
artifacts I suggest as an alternative point of departure an 
ontological and epistemological position that focuses  on 
human practice to replace the dualist mirror-image  the­
ory of reality. In short, this is what I understand as prac­
tice: 

Practice is our everyday  practical  activity. Practice  is 
ontological. It is the human form of life. To be in-the-world 
is  more  fundamental  than  subject-object  relations.  In 
practice  we  produce the  world, both  the world  of  objects 
and our knowledge about this world. Practice  is both ac­
tion and reflection. But practice is also a social activity. As 
such it is being produced cooperatively with others being-
in-the-world. To  share  practice is  also to  share  under­
standing of  the world  with others. However, this  produc­
tion of the world and our understanding of it takes place in 
an  already  existing  world.  It  is  the  product  of  former 
practice. Hence, as part of  practice, knowledge  has to be 
understood  socially - as producing  or reproducing  social 
processes and  structures as  well  as being  the  product  of 
them.24 

In the following chapters of this part I will elaborate on 
the position that is taken and its consequences for work-
oriented design of computer artifacts. 

As  mentioned  in  the introduction  to  this  part  three 
philosophical traditions in particular have, over the years, 
influenced my understanding of, and  research in, design 
of computer artifacts, and focussed it on the importance of 
everyday practice. They are the  philosophies of  Martin 
Heidegger,  Karl  Marx  and  Ludwig  Wittgenstein.  This 
should not be taken literally. 

By a Heideggerian approach, I do not mean a compre­

hensive account of Sein und Zeit  (1927)25, but rather an 

24 The background for this view of practice can be found among 
the many philosophers mentioned in footnote 28, below. 
25  In fact I have not really managed to read Heidegger, M.: Being 
and. Time, Harper & Row, New York 1962. 

Mirror, Mirror  on the Wall., 

61 

interpretation of some ideas I find of interest to design in 
the wide tradition of existential phenomenology. 

Neither is the discussion  of  the Marxist  approach a 
thorough treatise on the theory of the capitalist mode of 
production in the  three volumes  of  Das Kapital  (1867, 
1885, 1895)26  or the philosophical writings of  the young 
Marx, nor is it an account of the many different and con­
flicting 'Marxist'  approaches to  both  epistemology  and 
society. It is a reflection of some thoughts I find useful in 
understanding design and use of computer artifacts. 

The Wittgensteinian approach is based on different in­

terpretations of Philosophical Investigations  (1953)27, but 
is in no way an attempt to discuss the many sides of this 
'untheoretical' philosopher, nor of  the ordinary language 
school's position today. 

Looking into the philosophical debate, the above men­
tioned philosophical positions are often seen as contradic­
tory.  However,  there  are  also  attempts  made  towards 
syntheses. Below, I will try to elucidate why these different 
traditions to me seem to converge and supplement each 
other  in  a  useful  interpretation  and  understanding  of 
design and use of computer artifacts. In doing this I will be 
as truthful as I can to the different traditions. However, 
the context for the inquiries is a science of design and use 
of computer artifacts, not philosophy.28 

26 Marx, K: Capital -A Critical  Analysis of Capitalist  Produc­
tion, vol. I-IH, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1953-1971 (first pub­
lished 1867,1885,1895). This is the tradition in which I have my 
background. Hence,  I am familiar with a great portion of 
•Marxist' literature. However, in a two year study circle at the 
Swedish Center for Working Life we did not come much further 
than the first volume of Capital. 
27 Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical  Investigations. Not until a few 
years ago I did really read Wittgenstein. Since then Philosophical 
Investigations had more or less been my philosophical Bible, as 
the reader will soon find  out. 
28 I am not thinking of any definite syntheses, but rather of in­
spiring examples of rethinking the different traditions. The 
Hegelian heritage shared by Marxists (M) and existential phe-
nomenologists (P) is one obvious source for this transcendence. 

62 

Design  Philosophy 

The way the world  comes into language in these ap­

proaches is  quite different from  the Cartesian  world  of 
rationality, objectivity, planning, decision-making, etc. 

The background for integrating the 'second' Wittgenstein (W) 
seems more difficult to point at, perhaps as a dialectical tran­
scendence of the analytic 'first* Wittgenstein. By mentioning some 
names I  will indicate the kind of syntheses I have in mind. 
Among the 'classic' Marxists we find Georg Luka'cs (M, P) who 
was inspired by Edmund Husserl (P). The Frankfurt School have 
also been most important,  from Max  Horkheimer, Theodor 
Adorno and Herbert Marcuse to Jürgen Habermas (M+P+(W)). 
There is also the somewhat more  pragmatic Jugoslav  Praxis 
group, e.g. Mihailo Marcovic'(M+P). Paul Freire's liberating pe­
dagogy (M+P) and Jean-Paul Sartre's existentialism (P+M) are 
truly transcendental  to both traditions. Among contemporary 
Marxists Karel Kosik's work is one of the most influential (M+P). 
Influential existential phenomenologists with relations to Marx­
ism are Maurice Merleau-Ponty (P+(M)) and, in the field  of soci­
ology of knowledge, Peter Berger (P+(M)+(W)). The computer sci­
entist Terry Winograd (P+(W)) and the philosopher Hubert Drey­
fus (P+(W)) have both given most important contributions to a new 
understanding of design and of computers.  In the contemporary 
Scandinavian setting I especially want to mention the sociologist 
Joachim Israel (M+W+P) and the psychologist Ragnar Romme-
tveit (M+W+P),  who have suggested challenging eclectic con­
tributions, the philosopher Tore Nordenstam (W+P+(M)),  who 
has integrated philosophical investigations into case studies in 
the field  of computer science and systems design, and the 
architect Jerker Lundeqvist (W+M), who has contributed to a new 
comprehension of design knowledge. Finally in the Scandinavian 
context of computer science and systems design, I also want to 
mention the work by Bo Göranzon and Ingela Josefsson 
(W+P+(M)). Many other names could have been mentioned, as 
well as the intergroup conflicts on e.g. idealism-materialism or 
politics. However, this footnote hopefully give the philosophical 
reader an indication of the direction of my inquiry. 

Chapter 2 
Existential Phenomenology — 
A Heideggerian Alternative 

In a Heideggerian approach we are thrown into a human 
world that exists before subject, objects, systems, and de­
tached rational reflections. 

Again, consider a carpenter driving a nail with a ham­

mer.  In  his  hammering  activity  the  hammer  does  not 
exist for him as an object with given properties. It is part of 
the carpenter's world, but it is explicitly recognized just as 
little as the arm he holds the hammer with. 

Being-in-the-world 

Background - Ready-to-hand 
According to a Heideggerian approach, an interpretation 
along the lines of existential phenomenology , the hammer 
belongs to the background, it is ready-to-hand  ('zuhan­
den') without reflection in the carpenter's world. It must 
primarily be  understood  as a  practical  artifact  ('ZeugO 
that he uses in his everyday life, not as a thing or an object 
external to him. The carpenter's world is not Descartes' 
world of objects given by nature. Nor is his mind a sub­
jective reflection of it.1 

1  The basic inspiration for this section on a Heideggerian app­
roach is Winograd, T.  and Flores, F.: Understanding  Computers 
and  Cognition - a new  foundation  for design, Ablex, Norwood 
1986 and Dreyfus, H. L. and Dreyfus, S. D.: Mind over Machine  -
the  power of  human intuition and expertise  in the era of  the 
computer, Basil Blackwell, Glasgow 1986. Another source that 
should be mentioned is an undated manuscript on Heidegger by 

64 

Design  Philosophy 

According  to a  Heideggerian  approach,  human  exis­

tence is more fundamental than subject-object  dualism. 
Human beings  do not primarily come  to an understand­
ing of the world through philosophical, scientific or theo­
retical reflections. Humans beings, including researchers 
and scientists, are already in-the-world. Human existence 
is Being-in-the-world ('Dasein'). The subjective is already 
Being-in-the-world  beforehand, before  there can  be  any 
reflections about relations between subject and  object or 
between  objects.  All  these  detached  reflections  are se­
condary. Rather than to say with Descartes that 'I think', 
we can with Heidegger say 'it thinks me', because human 
existence is a manifestation of Dasein. 

Being-in-the-world is thrownness. We are always Be-
ing-in-the-world, in a situation, where we have to act one 
way or another. But Being-in-the-world  is also a  projec­
tive activity of understanding. We are always on our way 
towards understanding the situations we are thrown into. 

Boje Katzenelson that we used in a seminar on computers and 
psychology. I can also clearly see the influence from the PAAS 
project at the Swedish Center for Working Life (Bo Göranzon, 
Ingela Josefsson and Tore Nordenstam). Of course  the writings of 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Jean-Paul Sartre, Jürgen Habermas, 
Dag Österberg, Georg Herbert Mead, Peter Berger and Thomas 
Luckmann also belong in the background. 
In addition I would like to make a comment on Heidegger and 
practice. Heidegger's world is the world of human beings-in-the-
world. However,  to Heidegger human beings are Beings for their 
own sake, always caring about this Being. Their possibilities are 
once and for all given in this Being. This aspect is certainly in 
contrast to the understanding of human practice as a possibility to 
historically and socially transcend the given world. However, 
contemporary 'philosophers' inspired by existential phenomeno­
logy like Jean-Paul Sartre, Peter Berger and Jürgen Habermas 
have demonstrated possibilities to overcome Heidegger's conser­
vatism and replace it with a dialectical understanding of practice 
as the social construction of reality. In these interpretations not 
only the understanding of conditions for skill, but also for demo­
cracy, can be seen as fundamental. It is such 'interpretations' I 
have in mind in this chapter. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

65 

This understanding is  not  detached  contemplation,  but 
pre-reflective activity. 

To use  the hammer, our carpenter  must in this sense 
understand  what it is meant to be  used for. Our use of 
artifacts  is  what  they  mean  to  us.  They  only  have 
meaning within  a social and historical background. The 
hammer  can  only  exist  within  a  background  of  e.g. 
'hammering' or  'carpentering*. 

This is  the humanized  and  understood  world  that is 
ready-to-hand for us. The ready-to-hand  matters are the 
artifacts  we  use in  concerned  activity. In the  words  of 
Winograd and Flores: 

In driving a nail with a hammer (as opposed  to think­
ing about a hammer),  I need  not make use of  any ex­
plicit representation of it. My ability to act comes from 
an understanding of hammering, not of a hammer.2 

As a  designer I might understand the artifact as a com­
plex system, but that is not the meaning in use within the 
profession the artifact is designed for. Can I design useful 
artifacts  without  understanding  use  within  the  users' 
professional domain? 

Breakdown  - Present-at-hand 
However, as in the Cartesian approach, we also relate as 
subjects in detached  reflection to a  world of objects and 
their relations., but now understood  äs a secondary phe­
nomenon as compared to involved ready-to-hand use. For 
our  carpenter,  the  hammer  exists  as  a  hammer  only 
when it does not  work or is not there - when it becomes 
unready-to-hand.  Reflective,  investigative,  theoretical 
knowledge requires an unreadiness-to-hand  of what be­
fore was ready-to-hand. A world of objects becomes pre­
sent-at-hand  ('vorhanden').  The  present-at-hand  are 
things as given by nature, what they are when they are 
not understood. This process of change from readiness-to-
hand to present-at-hand is referred to as breakdown. 

2 Winograd and Flores, op. cit., p. 33. 

66 

Design Philosophy 

This breakdown can only occur when for example our 
carpenter  in  practice  has already  understood  'hamme­
ring'. Again in the words of Winograd and Flores: 

The hammer presents itself  as a  hammer only  when 
there is some kind of breaking down or unreadiness-to-
hand.  Its Tiammerness'  emerges if  it breaks or slips 
from grasp or mars the wood, or if there is a nail to be 
driven and  the hammer cannot be found. (...) As  ob­
servers, we may talk about the hammer and reflect on 
its  properties,  but  for  the  person  engaged  in  the 
thrownness  of  unhampered  hammering, it does  not 
exist as an entity.3 

Hence, a  main  concern  in design  of  computer  artifacts 
must be to design for future situations of 'thrownness of 
unhampered' use. We should then aim at designing com­
puter artifacts that are  ready-to-hand  for the  users in 
their ordinary use situations. 

However,  the  concept  of  breakdown  is  also  funda­

mental to the design process. Breakdown is both desirable 
and undesirable. 

On the one hand it is necessary to break down the ev­

eryday understanding and use within a specific tradition 
to create new knowledge and new designs. 

On the other hand designs that are not based on the 
understanding  and  use  within  a  tradition - the  users' 
practical skills - are likely  to fail. Breakdown of under­
standing of a well known situation is at the same time the 
opening  to  new  knowledge  and  eventually  an  under­
standing of something new. The ability to deal with this 
contradiction  between  understanding  of  the  ready-to-
hand  and detached  reflection  of  the present-at-hand  is 
fundamental to design. I shall later refer to this as the di­
alectics of tradition and transcendence in design. 

3 Ibid., p.36. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

67 

Intentions 
I have said that, in a Heideggerian approach, vise and un­
derstanding are different aspects of the same activity by 
the user of an artifact. The same is the case with the users' 
intentions with that activity. Intentions or goals are not -
as  in  the  rationalistic  tradition - prior  to  action.  Of 
course, we make explicit plans and try to carry them out. 
However, the point to be made is that detached planning is 
not what we fundamentally do in everyday thrown situa­
tions of  use of  artifacts, nor is this how expert designers 
perform. 

We have intentions, but the plan takes form during the 
activity. The intention determines the activity, but is also 
determined by it. There is no causal relation between in­
tention and  activity in thrown  and  projective everyday 
situations, because they are at this point not yet separate 
phenomena.  It is not until afterwards, when reflectively 
looking back on the activity, that one can separate inten­
tion  from  execution  and  see  them  as  different  pheno­
mena.4 

This  is  also  fundamental  to  design.  Nevertheless  it 
seems that reflections on design practice today, as part of 
the rationality of the Cartesian tradition, are based on the 
assumption that we can always separate plan and execu­
tion. Systems descriptions as well as the idea of formal re­
quirement specifications are based on this assumption. It 
may  be  argued  that this has proved  to  work  well.  The 
counter-argument is that this may  be because  design so 
far has mostly been for  routine work. Or perhaps more 
accurately: it may be so because design of computer arti­
facts has meant routinization of  work. This is 'Scientific 
Management' from  the early principles of  separation of 
planning  and  execution  by  Fredric  Taylor  to  modern 

4  In österberg, D.: Metasociologisk  essä, Verdandi, Stockholm 
1971, pp. 17-18, this aspect is discussed, as based on Sartre's 
Critique de la Raison Dialectique, Librairie Gallimard, 1960. 

68 

Design  Philosophy 

computer  based  planning  and  control  systems.5  The 
political critique against the dehumanization that accom­
panies these principles has at all times been strong. The 
philosophical  argument given  by  the Heideggerian  ap­
proach is that this separation is impossible, at least if we 
want to design computer artifacts for skilled work. 

Understanding the Others 
So far I have discussed the use and understanding of ar­
tifacts. What about human beings in a Heideggerian ap­
proach? Are they different from  the artifacts? Yes  they 
are, because an I  can only be thought of  in relation to a 
You. When I use artifacts the others are there, because the 
artifacts and  the background  within  which they have a 
meaning to me are produced and communicated by them. 
Hence, being-in-the-world  is  always  being-in-the-world 
together  with  other  beings-in-the-world.  My  under­
standing of  my self  is my understanding of  'the others', 
and vice versa.6 

Communication,  in  a  Heideggerian  approach, is  not 
understood  as conveying  of  information from  me to the 
other. It is an act of interpretation. The interpretation that 
the other triggers off  in  me  has a  meaning to  me  only 
within  my  background  of  understanding.  This  back­
ground  is social  and  historical.  Only  when  this  back­
ground is shared can we understand each other.7 

Language, according  to  a Heideggerian  approach, is 
not only a medium to share understanding of the world. It 

5  Fredrick Taylor's  principles of separation of planning and 
execution at work, as a means for managerial control over wor­
kers, were formulated in 1903.1 will in detail discuss this kind of 
division of labor in the later part: Designing for  Democracy at 
Work. 
6 See Mead, G.H.: Mind, Self and Society, University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago 1934. 
7 Social division of labor and the possibility of planning according 
to common  goals is not emphasized in a Heideggerian approach. 
This aspect will be discussed under the Marxist approach in the 
next chapter. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

69 

also  in  itself  contains  implicit  assumptions  about  it -
language is in itself as social and historical as other arti­
facts.  Imagine  the  professional  language that our  car­
penter  uses  when  communicating  with  his apprentice. 
There is a world of 'hammering' that is taken for granted. 
However, even more important: In using language we 
do not describe the world, we create it. Just as we do with 
other artifacts. The carpenters' world is continuously re­
produced in ready-to-hand  use of language, and  eventu­
ally recreated in situations of breakdown. 

Certainly the understanding that, language as action is 
more fundamental than language as description, takes us 
far away from the Cartesian approach and  the world  of 
systems. The consequences are fundamental to design and 
to the use of descriptions in design - the thrown and pro­
jective  ready-to-hand  everyday  practice  and  ordinary 
language  of  the  users come into  focus, not  detached  re­
flection of  present-at-hand systems of related objects. 

Acquisition of Skill 
So far the discussion of a Heideggerian approach to design 
and use of  computer artifacts has focused on the the im­
portance of  understanding the fundamental character of 
everyday  use  and  understanding. But  how  do  humans 
acquire practical skills? For an elucidation I will turn to 
an interpretation given in Mind over Machine by Hubert 
and Stewart Dreyfus.8 In their critique of artificial intelli­
gence they develop a five stage categorization of skills ac­
quisition, to facilitate an understand of what humans can 
do, while computers cannot. Their categorization is based 
on  observations  of  everyday  practice  in  professional 
learning and  interpreted  along  the lines of  existential 
phenomenology.9  Here I relate the categorization to the 
question of design. 

8 Dreyfus and Dreyfus, op. cit. chapter 1. 
9 In fact the approach to design taken by Winograd and Flores is 
in its existential phenomenological aspects influenced by Hubert 

70 

Design Philosophy 

Dreyfus and Dreyfus see two basic procedures for skill 
acquisition. Especially during childhood we acquire skill 
through trial and error, often guided by imitation of those 
that are more experienced. But we also acquire skill by 
written or verbal instructions. Both are important in pro­
fessional  training or  education  when  we  learn  a  craft. 
This latter categorization is, however, limited to situations 
of learning by instructions. 

The five stages are: novice, advanced beginner, compe­

tence, proficiency and expertise. I will illustrate them with 
examples from the activities of car driving and relate this 
to design and  use of  computer artifacts, and  research in 
the field. 

Novice 
In learning new skills by instructions we do not start out 
as novices,  but as experts. In a  Heideggerian approach, 
this is not a paradox. We always start from a situation of 
expert understanding of thrown and  projective activities 
in  our  everyday  life.  Learning  by  instructions  means 
breakdown of this understanding, but also an opening for 
new expert understanding. However, there may be a long 
way  to go from detached  novice  reflection to expert un­
derstanding. 

What  we  do  as  novices,  according  to  Dreyfus  and 
Dreyfus, is to apply context-free  rules  to objective facts 
and  features in  a  relevant  domain.  This is theoretical 
knowledge based on detached  reflection that others can 
write down for us to follow. 

The novice car driver operating a shift-stick car shifts 

gears at speeds he has been told (a context-free  rule), ig­
noring context like a steep hill or the sound of the engine. 
He does not know when to violate these rules. In fact, to 
the  novice  improvement  is  a  question  of  how  well  he 
manages to follow the learned rules. 

Dreyfus' interpretation of these aspects. The approach taken by 
Dreyfus and Dreyfus is also related to the Wittgensteinian app­
roach which I will take a closer look at later in this part. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

71 

These are the kind of rules we see in most textbooks on 
design.10 The novice designer follows these rules in trying 
to master a specific description tool, a sequence of design 
phases, a way of organizing the project work, etc. But fol­
lowing these rules he will never be able to professionally 
design  computer artifacts.  Not surprisingly, skilled  de­
signers do not follow them. 

What you can learn this way is theoretical knowledge, 

but this do not make you professional. 

An inexperienced design researcher can conduct a good 
experiment according to the 'method book', but that does 
not make him or her a professional researcher. 

Advanced  Beginner 
However,  our  performance  improves  when  we  get  con­
siderable practical experience coping with real situations. 
This is not only due to the fact that we get better in using 
the learned  rules, and  that we  also learn  to  use  more 
complicated ones. The advanced  beginner starts through 
practical  experience  to  be  able  to  recognize  important 
context dependent situational elements that cannot be de­
fined  by others as  explicit and  context-free  rules. This 
knowledge is practical. He begins to understand the new 
situation. 

The  advanced  beginner  car  driver  not  only  judges 
when  to shift gear from  the car's speed, but also from 
situational elements like the sound of the engine. The ad­
vanced beginner does not know when to violate rules, but 
from  experience  with earlier cases or  examples he can 
also act according to situational elements. 

This is probably the level where we find designers that 
have a  few  projects behind  them. They  begin  to have a 
'feeling' for different design situations. This is likely to be 
the level  of  design  skill  of  many  computer  science  re­
searchers, too. If this is true, then practical designers have 
a reason for skepticism towards design advice from  re­

10 See e.g. Yourdon, E.: Managing the System  Life Cycle, 
Yourdon Press, New York 1982. 

72 

Design Philosophy 

search. An advanced beginner car driver might be a good 
teacher in the theory  of  driving,  but  most  of  us  would 
probably prefer to take advice from a somewhat more ex­
perienced driver. 

Competent  Performance 
Competent  performance is the next level of  skill acquisi­
tion. The competent performer knows in  practical situa­
tions  how  to  deal  with  the  overwhelmingly  increased 
number  of  both  context-free  rules  and  situational  ele­
ments he can distinguish. He improves and simplifies his 
performance by  knowing how  to choose  and  organize  a 
plan, which makes it possible for  him to concentrate on 
the set of factors he has learned are the most important 
ones. He also learns the outcome of chosen plans, an expe­
rience that is different from that of recognizing situational 
elements. 

The competent car  driver may choose  and organize a 
plan  to drive a  certain distance as quickly as possible. 
Given this plan, he will concentrate on the most important 
context-free rules and situational elements, like the con­
dition of the car and the traffic situation at that time of the 
day. And  he may certainly, if  necessary, violate  rules to 
fulfill the plan. 

One can think of competent designers and researchers 

with a similar characterization. 

Proficient and  Expert  Performance 
Performance on  the proficient  and  expert levels is cha­
racterized by involved, rapid, fluid, intuitive performance 
rather  than  the  more  detached,  reflective,  deliberative 
and sometimes agonizing following of rules and selection 
among alternatives that has been considered at the earlier 
levels. Though complex, the situation  remains ready-to-
hand for the expert. There are no regular breakdowns of 
his understanding. Breakdowns occur, but afterwards as 
a deliberate means for detached  reflection and  improve­
ment. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

73 

Proficient  and  expert  performance is far  from  extra­

ordinary. Acquisition of skill is more like an expanding 
circle than as a ladder. Think for example of the experi­
ence most of  us have from situations in our everyday life 
where we are experts. When we talk and walk we seldom 
'choose our words' or 'place our feet'. From long practical 
experience we simply know how to do it. The point is not 
that we cannot reflect when we act as experts, but that we 
do it only when the spell of involvement is broken, and this 
is secondary to the expertness. 

However, some design experts have, as Donald Schön 
has noticed, in addition to their involved and fluid ready-
to-hand  performance,  the competence  of  a  complemen­
tary reflective conversation with the situation, developing 
on-the-spot theory. Schön calls this reflection-in-action.n 

Proficient  or  expert  performance is arational  rather 

than rational, but it is not irrational. It is neither a per­
formance contrary to logic or reason, nor is it an analytic 
decomposition and recombination of objects to a whole, as 
in the Cartesian approach. As Dreyfus and Dreyfus put it: 
In general,  when everything is normal, experts  don't 
solve problems and  they do  not  make decisions: they 
simply do what works.12 

I have  pointed  out that expertness is something we all 
possess in our everyday practice in some domains. Here 
the emphasis is on everyday practice in  professional do­
mains. We can nevertheless still say that every designer 
and user is an expert on his or her life, and that it is this 
expertness that breaks down in the design process. 

There is also expertness in use and  understanding of 

artifacts - for example a systems description  tool in de­
sign of computer artifacts or a word processor in typing. 

However, by professional expertise we more often think 
of  really experienced  understanding of  the whole situa-

II Schön D. A: The  Reflective  Practitioner - How  Professionals 
Think in Action, Basic Books, New York 1983. 
12 Dreyfus and Dreyfus, op. cit. p.30. 

74 

Design Philosophy 

tion - be it car driving, design of computer artifacts or re­
search. In this view expertness in a professional domain is 
something that  may  require a  lifetime  to  acquire,  and 
many of us still would not reach that level of skill. 

Proficiency and expertness are the skill levels of a pro­
fessional car driver. He drives without effort and  under­
stands without reflection when and how to perform an act 
like slowing down, and he will not have to evaluate and 
compare  alternatives.  But  of  course  this  pre-reflective 
understanding breaks down if  the conditions for the ex­
pertness changes.  Many skilled  drivers in Sweden were 
for some time transformed into non-experts in 1967 when 
there was a shift from driving on the left to the right side 
of the road. 

Related Skills 
Using Dreyfus and Dreyfus's skill categorization we can 
make some interesting reflections about relations between 
user skills, designer skills, and research skills in the field of 
design of computer artifacts. 

Suppose a designer wants to use Cartesian systems de­
scriptions methods to describe user skills as a basis for a 
new  computer-based  system.  This  may  in  principle  be 
possible  according  to  the  categorization  as  long  as  he 
designs  for  users  on  the  levels  below  proficiency  and 
expertness. Their  skills can in principle be described as 
algorithmic  procedures  and  routinized  (though  most 
professions contain skills on the proficient or expert level, 
skills that will then be lost).13 

However, the designer runs into problems as soon as he 
tries to capture the rules an expert follows. He can make 
algorithmic descriptions,  but  these descriptions  will  be 
something different  than  the  rules  of  an  expert, since 
what counts as expertness is exactly the competence to 

13 Here I am not discussing the political impact involved. That 
will be done in the part on Designing for  Democracy at Work. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

75 

break rules in creative ways or to follow rules in unfore­
seen, yet correct ways.14 

Are we doomed  to design to replace unskilled work or 
just  to support  skilled  work  with  artifacts for  routine 
work? Principally, there seems to be two ways out of  the 
dilemma. 

By  acquiring proficiency  or expertness in the domain 
we are designing for we may be able to understand how to 
design computer artifacts as skill enhancing tools for the 
experts, without having to make the skill explicit, forma­
lized  and  routinized. The  designer becomes involved in 
thrown ready-to-hand activity both as design and as use. 

The  complementary  way  to  surpass  breakdown  by 
formal descriptions may be to create conditions for skilled 
users to utilize their professional skills in the design pro­
cess. The proficiency and expertness we are looking for in 
design may be  mastery of  methods that let the user par­
ticipate in design as if it was his or her thrown ready-to-
hand use activity.15 

Finally, the categorization can shed some light on our 

knowledge as design researchers. 

We can certainly develop theories about design and use 

of computer artifacts without knowing  much about  prac­
tical design and  use of  computer artifacts. As  unskilled 
designers and  users, but skilled researchers we can still 
create  systematic  breakdowns  in  users' and  designers' 
traditional knowledge. As  theoretical knowledge we can 
propose to users and designers that the tradition they have 
taken for granted is problematic and suggest other ways 
of seeing. This is an important critical function of design 
research that can support better design and vise. 

But if we as researchers also want to creatively support 
the development  of  better  designs  and  a  better  design 

14 This will be further developed in chapter 18, Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 
15 The philosophical foundation for such 'design-by-doing* 
methods will be  discussed in chapter 4, Language-Games  - A 
Wittgensteininan  Approach. 

76 

Design  Philosophy 

practice we seem to be in the same dilemma as the practi­
cal designer, and to have at our disposal similar ways out 
of it. 

If we acquire proficiency or expertness as designers we 

should be able to understand design and use without ha­
ving to make the skills of designers and users explicit, for­
malized and  routinized. The researcher becomes involved 
in thrown ready-to-hand activity as research, design and 
use. If we look at design research fields  other than com­
puter science, like architecture, we find  that really skilled 
researchers often also are excellent designers.16 

As in the designer  case, a  complementary alternative 
might be to create conditions allowing skilled  users and 
designers to utilize their professional skills in the research 
process. To  master such methods and  let users and  de­
signers participate in research as if it were their thrown 
ready-to-hand use activity might well be the proficiency 
and expertness we are looking for in research.17 

Research, Design and Use 

Research 
A science  of  design  and  use of  computer artifacts must 
according to a Heideggerian approach, be able to deal with 
everydayness, with  the practical  understanding and  use 
of  ready-to-hand  artifacts as concernful  activity  in  the 
world. 

This is not to say that practical understanding is supe­
rior  to  detached  theoretical  knowledge.  However,  the 
point that has been  made is that  thrown and  projective 
understanding is prior to detached  theoretical reflection. 
It is also what is typical of skilled activity in use as well as 
in design. 

16 This will be developed in chapter 9, Other Ways of Seeing and 
Doing  — External  Alternatives. 
17  Actions research and psychoanalysis seem to be good prototy­
pical  examples. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

77 

Theoretical reflective research about design can be il­
luminating of  what is not  understood - make the  ready-
to-hand  present-at-hand. This is the process of breaking 
down.  However there is also  a need  to gain  knowledge 
about how to design artifacts that can be understood and 
ready-to-hand to the users in thrown use activity. 

To acquire knowledge about this it seems that we as re­
searchers  have  to  understand  the everydayness  of  the 
specific activities that we research. After all, what we can 
reflect upon is what we already have understood and been 
able to use. 

Design 
A Heideggerian approach also creates openings for a new 
understanding of the process of designing computer arti­
facts. What we want to design is computer artifacts that 
are ready-to-hand for the users in their everyday activity. 
To do  this we  must have technical design qualifications. 
But  we  also  must  be  able  to  deal  with  the  following 
contradiction: 

On the one hand, to design so as not to breakdown or 
make obsolete the understanding and  readiness-to-hand 
the users have acquired in the use of the already existing 
artifacts. The new artifacts should be ready-to-hand in an 
already existing practice. 

On the other hand, to break down the understanding of 
the  already  existing situation  and  make  it  present-at-
hand, is to make reflection about it possible, and hence to 
create openings for a new understanding and alternative 
designs. 

This is the contradiction  between tradition and tran­

scendence in design and use of artifacts that will be a main 
theme in my further discussions about design in this book. 
Here I relate it to breakdown and readiness-to-hand. 

78 

Design Philosophy 

This  may  be  exemplified  with  what  Kim  Halskov 
Madsen18  calls literal  versus  metaphorical  design.  He 
gives an illustrative example from a library. 

In the first  case the  users' normal understanding of a 
library is taken for granted. The design aims at support­
ing the circulation department's lending and retrieval of 
books etc. The  library is a  place from  which  books  are 
supplied. This emphasis is on how to find  books quickly, 
their retrieval, registration of lending, etc. This may be the 
way it always has been understood. 

In the alternative approach a metaphor is used sug­

gesting that the library staff should see the library as a 
meeting place for people interested in conversations about 
books and other subjects related to books. This creates a 
breakdown of the library staffs traditional understanding 
of  their  library  work,  but  may  provoke  a  new  under­
standing, and  some very fruitful  designs, e.g. for better 
communication  between  borrowers, and  between  borro­
wers and the library staff. 

Ideally it seems  that we  should  be  aiming  at  design 
processes  that  primarily  make  it  possible  for  the  users 
(and  the designers) to  utilize their  practical  understand­
ing, in design of the new situation. But the design process 
should  also incorporate  breakdowns  as a  means  for  de­
tached  reflections on  what  is already  understood  among 
the users as well as among the designers. 

A design process which does not break down the user's 

understanding and readiness-to-hand in the given situa­
tion requires that the designer also understand the situa­
tion and/or that he or she has access to design  methods 
that  help  avoid  undesirable  breakdowns.  To  share  the 
users' practice for a long time and to use 'design by doing' 
methods like prototyping, experimental systems design, 
mock-ups etc., seems to be a way to overcome some of the 

18 Madsen, K.H.: 'Breakthrough by Breakdown — Metaphors and 
Structured Domains' in Klein, H. and Kumar, K. (eds.): 
Information  Systems Development  for Human Progress  in Or­
ganizations, North-Holland  (forthcoming). 

Existential  Phenomenology 

79 

constraints.19 It goes without saying that it helps if design­
ers and users are the same persons or share background 
for understanding - if they have a shared practice. 

The other aspect, i.e. to create breakdown, is at least at 
first  glance much easier.  It may be argued  that it is an 
advantage if the designer is not too familiar with the ev-
erydayness of the situation and the users' understanding 
of  it. He may then be able to  come up with some  really 
creative  new  alternatives.  However,  since  he  only  has 
limited understanding of the users' situation he will have 
to deal with this situation as objects for rationalistic re­
flection. In this way he cannot possibly understand  the 
skills of professional users. His new designs may be ever so 
clever, but they will lack the quality that comes from un­
derstanding the  users' profession.  Fundamental  know­
ledge is lost in such a design. 

How should he be able to design the computer artifacts 
ready-to-hand for the users, when he does not understand 
the  profession?  Here  he  may  create  most  undesirable 
breakdowns. 

In a similar way it can be understood why traditional 
systems descriptions do not work in communication with 
users. The users cannot understand the systems descrip­
tions  because  their  ready-to-hand  situation  has  been 
made present-at-hand. The descriptions may be useful for 
the designer's detached reflection, but they are not mirror 
images of  the users' situation. All they represent to the 
users is breakdown of traditional understanding. 

However, if we do not look upon them as descriptions, 
but as pragmatic methods for  breaking down  everyday 
understanding of  a given situation, as artifacts to con­
tribute to new and richer designs they may be very useful 
also to the users. A good example is the systems approach 
by West Churchman.20 

19 This will be developed in the part on Designing for Skill. 
20  Churchman, C. Vf.iThe  Systems Approach,  Delta, New York 
1968. 

80 

Design  Philosophy 

In forcing us to  think about  a  situation, not  only  in 
terms of  related components (as most systems methods 
do), it also draws our attention to teleological  , environ­
mental,  control,  and  not  least  resource  aspects.  This 
breaks down  the everydayness of  our carpenter's ham­
mering, but might also help him find  out new aspects of 
driving nails,  perhaps  without  hammers,  or  even  with 
computers.  It might  also suggest  that  hammering and 
driving nails are  not at all appropriate activities in  the 
kind of building activity he is involved in. But Churchman 
is fully aware of the conditions for progress in this enter­
prise. 

The designers are everyone - in the ideal. Progress can 
be measured in terms of the degree to which the client, 
decision maker, and designer are the same.21 

And this brings us back to the Heideggerian approach and 
the importance of shared background for understanding. 

Use of  Computer Artifacts 
In design of computer artifacts we also have to anticipate 
future breakdowns in relation to the artifact itself. 

Most obvious is the support for the user in situations of 
software  or  hardware  mal-functions.  A  ready-to-hand 
computer artifact understood as a word  processor should 
not suddenly become present-at-hand and  only possible 
for the user to understand as metal and plastic. 

However, as in  the discussion  of  the design  process, 
there is also the other side of the coin. When the user gets 
more and more experienced with the artifact, breakdown 
of its readiness-to-hand might well  be desired. The word 
processor above  might  to begin  with function  well as a 
computer-based  typewriter.  However,  without  a  break­
down in the understanding of it as a typewriter, the user 
will never have the possibility to fully utilize its word pro­
cessing capabilities. Hence, this is a reverse, but just as 
important aspect of the artifact to anticipate in the design. 

21 Ibid., p. 201. 

Existential  Phenomenology 

81 

Summary 
In summary, I think that a Heideggerian approach pro­
vides us with some  admittedly unconventional concepts 
hard to digest, concepts that at the same time greatly en­
rich our understanding of design and vise of computer ar­
tifacts. These are concepts that help focus on the impor­
tance of everydayness of  use as fundamental to  design. 
They are also concepts that provide a philosophical base 
for dealing with  human  understanding and  use of  arti­
facts. Practical skills of users and designers, and computer 
artifacts understood as their use become the key, rather 
than detached reflections and logic machines. 

What we have to be concerned about in design of com­

puter artifacts is a world  of  human practice, a practice 
that in essence is pre-reflective involved everyday use and 
understanding of artifacts. This may seem obvious, but it 
carries us far away from Cartesian systems thinking. 

With this in mind let us now turn our attention to the 

next approach to design  knowledge - the Marxist  alter­
native of emancipatory  practice. 

Chapter 3 

Emancipatory Practice — 
A Marxist Alternative 

In the discussion  of  a Heideggerian approach emphasis 
has been placed on how via thrown and projective every­
day  practice  we  understand  our  world.  In  particular  I 
have considered what kind of skills are essential in design 
and use of artifacts. These aspects will also be essential in 
the following discussion of a Marxist approach. However, 
this time emphasis will rather be on the social and histori­
cal conditions for our creation of the world. So rather than 
to introduce the Marxist approach as one being in com­
plete opposition I will introduce it as basically comple­
mentary, and in addition illuminative of the power aspect 
of design. Hence, it will hopefully be possible to theoreti­
cally reflect not only on the skills aspect but also on the 
democracy  aspect  of  design - the other  basic  aspect  of 
Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts. 

Let us once  more consider our carpenter: The activity 
of 'hammering' or 'carpentering' is still understood as in 
the Heideggerian approach. But which are the social and 
historical conditions for this activity? How is labor divided 
between the journeyman and the apprentice? And why is 
it so? Which commodities do  they craft  and  why? What 
are the conditions for changing this practice, and for their 
reflection on this everyday practice in a way that make it 
possible for them to change it? If we see design as a process 
of changing practice, these questions are important too in 
understanding the design process. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

83 

A Marxist approach to design and use of computer ar­
tifacts can be seen as an attempt to understand the condi­
tions for  social and  technical change. In contrast  to the 
Heideggerian approach emphasis is not on individual un­
derstanding  but  on  social  critique  and  emancipation. 
However, everyday life and  practice, especially labor ac­
tivity is just as much emphasized as before. 

Philosophy  in  a  Marxist  approach  is  not  merely  a 
question  of  knowledge,  but  just  as  much  a  question  of 
practical change.  As  Marx  expressed  it in  the famous 
thesis on Feuerbach:1 

The  philosophers have only  interpreted  the world  in 
different ways; the point is to change it. 

The  focus  of  this transcendence, both  in theory  and  in 
practice, is on those conditions that constrain humans so­
cially and individually to form a free cooperation of equal 
men and women. In a Marxist approach this includes the 
constraints imposed by modern capitalism. In the words of 
The Communist  Manifesto:2 

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and 
class antagonisms,  we shall  have  an  association,  in 
which the free development of each is the condition for 
the free development of all. 

Marxist design philosophy, as I see it, is an integration of 
philosophical (ontology and epistemology), and sociological 
(e.g. labor process theory) aspects. Below I will try to illus-

1 Marx, K: Thesis on Feuerbach, (first published in 1845), 
(translated in Bottomore, T.B.: Karl  Marx-Selected Writings  in 
Sociology and  Social  Philosophy, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth 
1971, p. 84). 
2 Marx, K. and Engels F.: The Communist  Manifesto, (first pub­
lished 1848), Penguin Books, Harmondworth 1980, p. 105. 

84 

Design  Philosophy 

träte both aspects.3 What I am aiming at is to introduce 
concepts that are important to an understanding of design 
and use of  computer artifacts, not a comprehensive pre­
sentation of Marxist traditions. 

3 The Marxism I refer to is not the orthodox interpretations in the 
tradition of Marxism-Leninism and the interpretations  of dialec­
tical materialism in this tradition. Neither is it the structuralist 
school in the Marxist tradition of Lois Althusser. What I have in 
mind are  philosophical interpretations in the Marxist tradition of 
Georg Lukâcs, Anatoli  Gramsci, the Frankfurt school,  the Yu-
goslavan praxis philosophers etc. Here the links to Hegelian phi­
losophy are strong, as well as the parallels to existential pheno­
menology. On Marxist epistemology I have especially been in­
spired by Joachim Israel's The  Language of  Dialectics and  the 
Dialectics of  Language, Harvester Press, London 1979. His work 
has also been most challenging since it intellectually brings toge­
ther a convincing eclectic synthesis of the three philosophical  tra­
ditions I outline as a basis for design philosophy in this book. I 
also want to mention Karel Kosik's Die  Dialektik des  Konkreten, 
Suhrkampf, Frankfurt 1967, on Marxist epistemology with rela­
tions to Heidegger's existential phenomenology. Paulo Freire's 
Pedagogy of the Oppressed, Herder & Herder,  New York 1971, 
should also be  specially mentioned.  Jürgen Habermas, Jean-Paul 
Sartre and Peter Berger are perhaps not 'real' Marxists; never­
theless their works are certainly important to the kind of Mar­
xism I  am thinking of.  However, I also regard Marxism as  theory 
on social  and technical  change at work, in the labor process tra­
dition emerging from Marx's  three volumes of Capital. See e.g. 
Dahlkvist, M.: Att studera kapitalet,  Bo Cavefors, 1978 (disser­
tation), for an introduction, and Helgeson.  B.: Arbete,  teknik, 
ekonomi, Högskolan i Luleå, 1986 (dissertation), for an overview of 
trends in modern industrial sociology and, for cases  e.g. Björk­
man, T. and Lundqvist, K.: Från Max till  Pia , Arkiv, Malmö 1981 
(dissertation), and Ekdahl,  L.: Arbete  mot  kapital, Arkiv, Lund 
1983 (dissertation). Internationally I refer to books like Braver-
man, H.: Labor and  Monopoly Capital - The Degradation of  Work 
in the Twentieth Century, Monthly Review Press, New York 1974, 
Edwards, R.: Contested  Terrain, Heinemann, London 1979, Pro­
jektgruppe Automation und  Qualifikation (PAQ): Widersprüche 
der  Automationsarbeit,  Argument Verlag, West-Berlin 1987, 
Noble, D.: 'Social Choice in Machine Design ' in Zimbalist, A. 
(ed.): Case Studies on the  Labor Process, Monthly Review,  New 
York 1979. This will be further referred in the part on Designing 
for Democracy at Work and in chapter 18, Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

85 

Practice 
Practice is a fundamental concept in my interpretation of 
a Marxist approach. Practice is  both our producing the 
world  and  the product of  this process. It is  always the 
product  of  historically specific  conditions,  produced  by 
former practice as well as the production of the conditions 
for future practice. In the words of Marx 

society itself stands out as the ultimate result of the so­
cietal  process of  production, i.e.,  man  himself  in  his 
societal relations. Everything which has solid form, e.g., 
products, etc., appears only as a moment, a vanishing 
moment  in  this  movement.  The  conditions  and 
objectifications of  this process are themselves at the 
same time moments of it and as the subjects of this pro­
cess appear not only the individuals, but individuals be­
ing in  relation with each other, relations which  they 
produce in the same way as well as in a new way. It is 
their  own  continuous  moving  process  (Bewegungs-
prozess) in  which  they  renew  themselves as well  as 
they produce the world of richness.4 

Compared to a Heideggerian approach everyday practice 
is still the point of departure, that which is essential to de­
sign and vise, but now emphasis is on transcendence of the 
given as emancipatory practice. In the context of design of 
computer artifacts, emphasis changes from the users' ev­
eryday understanding and use of artifacts to possibilities 
and constraints hindering transcendence of this practice. 
But this emancipatory practice is the practice of the users. 
A design  process and  methods that support the users to 
emancipatorily transcend  the given  practice  comes into 
focus. This is also the  position  we  took  in  DEMOS  and 
UTOPIA. 

4 Marx, K.: Grundrisse  der Kritik  der  politischen Oekonomie, 
Diets Verlag, Berlin 1953 (quoted after Israel 1979, p. 118). 

86 

Design Philosophy 

Aspects of Practice 
In grasping practice as a  process of  transformation and 
transcendence we can view work, language  and  morals 
(Sittlichkeit) as the fundamental aspects of practice. The 
Marxist sociologist Joachim Israel argues in accordance 
with Habermas as follows: 

In  work  man's dependence  on  nature  is  manifested, 
and  through labor, used  in the Marxian sense of  the 
'material' process  of  production, man and society are 
produced  and  reproduced.  Language  signifies  man's 
dependence on man. Through  language human inter­
action is instigated and made possible. Work and inter­
action are indissolubly related to each other. Through 
morals as manifested  in  politics  and  power,  finally, 
man's dependence on common  goals and the means to 
reach them are manifested.5 

We  must  relate the  design  of  computer  artifacts to  all 
three aspects of practice: In practice as work, this is to the 
transformation of a given labor process and to the users' 
participation in the design  process.  In  practice  as  lan­
guage, it is to the professional language and the interac­
tion in a given labor process as well as the associated de­
sign process. In practice as morals, it is to the politics and 
power of the different groups or classes involved in a given 
labor process as well as in the associated design process. 

In this chapter I will focus on practice as work, espe­

cially the labor processes of  design and  use of  computer 
artifacts under 'the capitalist  mode' of  production.  But 
first I will consider Marxist epistemology and emancipa­
tory practice in the context of design and use of computer 
artifacts. 

6  Israel, op. cit. p. 46, with reference to Habermas J.: Erkentnis 
und  Interesse, Suhrkampf,  Frankfurt 1968. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

87 

Marxist Epistemology 
As  mentioned,  practice is  a  central  notion  for  Marxist 
epistemology. The Czech  Marxist  philosopher  and  non­
conformist politician, Karel Kosik, points out that 'for man 
to be able to recognize how things are independently of 
himself, he has to subject them to his practice; in order to 
determine how they are without his intervention he has to 
intervene into them.'6 

This intervention, rather than Cartesian detached re­

flection, is fundamental to Marxist epistemology. This is 
not  to deny the importance  of  Cartesian  reflection. Ac­
cording to  Kosik human consciousness  has to  be under­
stood both as theoretical or  reflective knowledge and  as 
intuitive understanding. To  deny or  understate the im­
portance of  theoretical knowledge leads to irrationalism 
and Vegetative thinking', and to deny or understate the 
importance of everyday practice and understanding leads 
to rationalism, positivism and scientism.7 

The two kinds of  knowledge form  a dialectical unity. 

Theoretical reflection is based on everyday involved prac­
tice and understanding, and may also change it by tran­
scendence.  However  theoretical  knowledge  is  not  the 
truth of  what was already practically understood, nor is 
everyday  practice  and  understanding  more  than,  in 
Kosik's  terminology, 'pseudo-concrete' knowledge.  This 
'pseudo-concrete' knowledge  has to be transcended by 'a 
revolutionary-critical  practice  of  humanity,  which  is 
identical with the humanization of man (...) the decisive 
steps of which are social revolutions.'8 

In The  Language  of  Dialectics  and  the  Dialectics  of 
Language  Israel  discusses  a  Marxist  epistemology  of 
practice in the direction indicated.9 Hence, his point of de­
parture is everyday practice. This practice is the human 

6 Kosik, op. cit. p.21 (quoted after Israel). 
7  Ibid, pp. 50. 
8 Ibid., p. 19 (quoted after Israel). 
9  Israel, op. cit. 

88 

Design  Philosophy 

production of  the world, a process of production through 
which that which exists is transformed. It is in practice 
that the world of objects is produced, as well as our know­
ledge of this world, and of our selves as subjects in it. 

Israel's and Kosik's point is that our pre-reflective un­

derstanding in everyday dealings with phenomena in the 
world,  as  discussed  in  the  Heideggerian  approach,  is 
fragmented knowledge, is 'pseudo-concrete'. In a Marxist 
approach essential knowledge is produced knowledge: it is 
understanding  mediated  by  reflection  to  theoretical  un­
derstanding. However, knowledge acquisition is a dialec­
tical relation between two different process of knowledge 
production. One is insight and new understanding as the 
result of  breakdown and active theoretical  production of 
knowledge. The other is acquisition of competence. 

Below I will relate Israel's account of a Marxist episte-

mology to design and use of computer artifacts.10 

Understanding 
The  first  category  or  stage  of  knowledge  that  Israel 
distinguishes is what I earlier have called understanding. 
This is to be acquainted  with something, without neces­
sarily  reflecting  about  why  we  know  or  can  do  it.  We 
know  both how  to do the activity in a 'routine manner' 
and how to talk about it. This could be how one knows how 
to drive a car, ride a bike etc., or how a carpenter knows 
how to use a hammer, and talk about 'hammering* so that 
other  carpenters  can  understand  him.  Or  think  of  a 
Cartesian  designer  using  rationalistic  description  me­
thods - it is all natural. 

10 Ibid., pp.  211—222. An interesting conceptual analysis of  sys­
tems design processes and methods along the lines of Israel's 
theoretical framework is Mathiassen,  L.: Systemudvikling  og 
Systemudviklingsmetode, DAIMI PB-136, Department of Compu­
ter Science, University of Aarhus 1981 (dissertation). 

Emancipatory  Practice 

89 

Awareness of  Understanding 
A second stage of knowledge is when we for some reason 
start to reflect upon what earlier has been natural, self-
evident or obvious. 

The carpenter finds  that the hammer slips, or the nails 
are of  a new kind with which he is not familiar; the car 
engine sounds strange to the driver, etc. In short we are 
facing a non-normal situation, or view a familiar situation 
from a new angle. These are examples of the breakdown 
situations discussed in the Heideggerian  approach.  We 
can call this breakdown  knowledge, or in Israel's  termi­
nology, awareness of understanding. 

This is the kind  of  knowledge our carpenter  acquires 
when forced to describe 'hammering' in terms of a system 
of related objects. This creates a breakdown of his under­
standing of  'hammering', but  not  necessarily better un­
derstanding. Or think of  a rationalistic designer who for 
the first  time is confronted with trade union demands for 
active participation and design  methods and goals in ac­
cordance  with  these  demands.  The  ready-to-hand  be­
comes present-at-hand, to speak the language of the Hei­
deggerian approach. However, this knowledge is not only 
different from traditional understanding, but also differ­
ent from active production of new knowledge. 

Insight 
Transcendence of former knowledge as awareness or as 
understanding is Israel's third stage of knowledge. This is 
a  process  of  active  production  of  knowledge, and  of 
changing practice, not an activity that passively  reflects 
the world within a tradition. The result of this process is 
insight.11 By actively treating well-known situations as if 
they  were  something  else,  or  by  actively  approaching 
them from a different  point of  view than the normal, we 

1 11 will not go into details of the terminology of the Hegelian dia­
lectics of negating a negation, as Israel does. But the presentation 
will hopefully illustrate the concept sufficiently for the present 
discussion. 

90 

Design Philosophy 

may produce new knowledge about them. To obtain in­
sight  you  have to know  the  practice  you  are  reflecting 
about. To produce insight requires the competence to re-
frame something well known in the light of of something 
else. For example, the dramatist Bertolt Brecht explicitly 
used his theatric method of Verfremdungseffekt  to make 
well-know situations appear as something new to the au­
dience,  something  worth  reflecting  on,  in  the  light  of 
Marxist theory of  capitalism. This is done in science as 
development of new theories and new scientific practices. 
In skilled work it can be done as development of new tools 
and  working procedures. In all cases it is a  competence 
close to what  we normally understand as artistic perfor­
mance. 

Think of  the library example from  the previous chap­
ter. New knowledge about library work may be produced 
by regarding a library as a meeting place for people inter­
ested in books, rather than as a place to input, store and 
output  books.  This  new  knowledge  may  suggest  com­
pletely new designs. New knowledge as insight is based in 
understanding,  but  produced  by  actively  negating this 
understanding as a means of transcending it in artistic or 
theoretical reflection. Hence, our Cartesian designer can 
suggest  alternatives  that  among  the  users  create  an 
awareness of their understanding and ultimately new in­
sight for them; but for the designer to also acquire new in­
sight about library work, he or she will have to have un­
derstood it, and that is not possible through just external 
theoretical detached reflection. 

Skill and Creativity 
Insight is  not the end  of  the  process.  When  we  get ac­
quainted with this new knowledge as insight it may be in­
corporated into our everyday knowledge as new practice 
and understanding. Knowledge is brought back to the first 
stage, but is not the same. This is the other related process 
of  knowledge  production - the acquisition  of  new  know­
ledge in the sense of competence or skill. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

91 

Carpenters who  understand hammering may start to 
reflect over  hammers and  nails if  they  meet trouble in 
their everyday hammering activity.  This may lead  to a 
process  of  active  production  of  new  knowledge  about 
hammering  by  negating  and  transcending  former 
understanding. This detached  theoretical reflection may 
result in new insight into hammering and new design of 
hammers,  nails or  work  methods. When carpenters get 
acquainted with this new design their understanding and 
practice of hammering may  change. They  may have ac­
quired new skills or competence. 

However,  to  really  master 'hammering'  requires the 
ability, in involved practice, to transcend the unaware and 
given routine  rules and  create new  ones within the  frame 
of social interaction. Israel calls this creativity. It is based 
on deep understanding and considerable practice, but it is 
different  from  theoretical  knowledge  produced  by  de­
tached reflection. 

Israel's  Marxist  reflections  on  acquisition  of  compe­

tence seems to be close to Dreyfus and Dreyfus's five stage 
characterization  discussed  under  the Heideggerian  ap­
proach. They also both relate to the understanding of what 
it means to 'follow a rule', which will be discussed under 
the Wittgensteinian approach in the next chapter. Hence, 
I will not go into details here. Instead I wish to point at a 
potential contradiction between the two processes of pro­
duction of  knowledge discussed, i.e.  between theoretical 
production of  knowledge and skill  acquisition. This is a 
contradiction of importance to design. 

According to a Marxist approach new insight requires 
theoretical  reflection.  But  this  is  at  the  same  time  a 
breakdown of the user's everyday understanding and use, 
a neglect of fundamental conditions for creativity and of 
the importance of  skilled  performance as unbroken  in­
volved activity. 

This is the contradiction between tradition and  tran­

scendence in design that I already discussed in connection 
with the Heideggerian approach. However, in the Marxist 
approach it also has another dimension. What has to be 

92 

Design Philosophy 

transcended theoretically and practically is an oppressing 
situation. The challenge to design is to identify such situa­
tions and to actively participate in the emancipation from 
them. 

Emancipatory Practice 
So far I have been discussing a Marxist approach as epis-
temology,  and  I have been  concentrating on  individual 
skill and understanding. Using an example, I will try now 
to illustrate a wider meaning of emancipatory practice. 

The systems approach by West Churchman mentioned 
in  the  previous chapter is a  good  example  of  a  design 
method  that helps produce  new knowledge about some­
thing normal and well known by actively supporting not 
only  breakdown  of  former  understanding  (as  do  most 
systems description methods), but also by suggesting use­
ful questions to  be asked  to transcend it.12  Churchman 
gives an illuminating example of a transportation system. 
When asked to describe a car, we might start by saying 
that it has four wheels and an engine. A second question 
would be if we can accept a car with only three wheels. A 
third question if  two is enough, etc. By  now our under­
standing has  broken  down.  Churchman's  systems  ap­
proach suggests that instead  of  the already  understood 
structure we  take, as the departure for our description, 
what a car is to be  used  for, which  resources are then 
needed, what  the environment of the car looks like, and 
what the meaning of  driving a car is. This way  we  may 
produce insight. We may find out that the need for wheels 
is one of the truly big problems in the transportation sys­
tem we call a car. Maybe it would be a much better trans­
portation system, creating fewer accidents and less traffic 
jams, if it had no wheels at all. We may even come up with 
new interesting designs  of flying cars,  new  planning of 
towns, etc. 

12  Churchman, C.  W.: The  Systems Approach, Delta,  New York 
1968. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

93 

The systems approach suggests a dialectical method for 
transcending the understanding we take for granted, but 
is it also a Marxist approach? Not necessarily, because to a 
Marxist approach it is of great importance  which ques­
tions are asked. As expressed by Kosik the Marxist dialec­
tical reason is not only a process of dialectical thinking, but 
also a process in which the world is designed for reason, 
that is, in which freedom is realized. This reason must in a 
Marxist  approach  be  seen  as a  historical  process.  The 
questions that must be asked are questions that support 
actions to overcome historically and socially produced op­
pression. This is why in a Marxist approach  the episte-
mology  at the same  time  has  to  be  a social  theory.  In 
Kosik's words:13 

Dialectical reason does not exist outside the world, and 
does not leave the world outside itself. It only exists by 
realizing its own reason, that is, it will take the form of 
dialectical reason only  to the extent that it  designs a 
reasonable world in the historic process. 

The problem  with the systems approach, despite  all its 
merits, is - from a Marxist position - that it is ahistorical. 
It may  be used by workers to fight  back against a com­
puter  based  planning and  control system  that deprives 
them of skill and control of their own work,14 but also used 
equally well by managers designing such systems. 

A good example of integration of the dialectical episte-
mology  and  social  theory  as  emancipatory  practice  is 
Paulo Freire's Pedagogy of  the OppressedL16  His method 
takes the form of a pedagogy to be used with and by op­
pressed  people in  their own  emancipatory practice. His 
basic concept is conscientization. The dialectical method of 
reflection  focuses  on  the  practical  understanding  that 
'students', 'users', etc.  have of  social, political  and  eco-

13 Kosik, op. cit. p. 108 (my translation). 
14 For an example see Ehn, P. and Erlander, B.: Vt  vågrar låta 
detaljstyra oss, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1978. 
16 Freire, op.  cit. 

94 

Design Philosophy 

nomic  contradictions,  and  their  discovery  of  ways  for 
acting in oppressing situations. Though developed for the 
situation of poor Brazilian peasants, the method was in the 
mid-seventies a great source of inspiration for  us in the 
DEMOS project and in general for the emerging research 
cooperation  in Scandinavia  between  trade  unions  and 
computer and social scientists on design and use of com­
puter artifacts.16 

The method is based on 'students' and 'teachers' form­
ing investigating  groups.  The  teacher,  researcher,  de­
signer etc. share everyday life with the members of  the 
group for some time. From what they see and understand 
they  help formulate generative  themes i.e.  a complex  of 
questions that can be useful in the groups' reflection over 
their own understanding of  their situation. These ques­
tions are grounded in the practice of the workers but also 
contain  a  theoretical  understanding  of  the  situation 
grounded  in social and historical  reflection of  the situa­
tion." 

The  dialogue  between  e.g.  workers  and  designers  is 
based on these generative themes, and in the breakdown 
process that follows they learn from each other, and par­
ticipate jointly in the integrated  process of  change. For 
example  a  generative theme on  'new  technology'  might 
contain questions about skills, cooperation between work­
ers, control of the work, the work environment, quality of 
the product etc. Typically they will be formulated as con­
trasting effects - craft-skill versus deskilled work, etc. 

These questions  may be formulated  in terms of a dis­

cussion of a computer based planning and control system 
that management has announced will be introduced. But 
they will also be based on theoretical knowledge of man­
agerial strategies, division of labor, technological develop­
ment, power structures, trade union resources, etc. 

The systems, approach can admittedly be a useful part 
of this knowledge production, but it is then integrated the­

16 See the part on Designing  for Democracy  at Work. 
17 For an example see Ehn and Erlander, op.  cit. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

96 

oretically into a context of social and historical knowledge, 
and  practically in  a strategy for emancipation based  on 
reflection  and  practical change  by  and  with  those con­
cerned. 

Emancipatory practice as epistemology is identification 
with oppressed groups and support of their transcendence 
in action and reflection. In  research as well as in actual 
design the interest in emancipation is the moral core of 
the Marxist  approach to design knowledge. It is not  ex­
ternal to this approach.18 

What  then  might be oppressing in design and  use of 
computer artifacts according to a  Marxist approach? To 
discuss that question I now turn to a Marxist social and 
historical theoretical understanding of the labor processes 
of design and use of computer artifacts. What kind of so­
cial and historical processes and structures are they? 

I see such an analysis in a Marxist approach as a social 
critique to support emancipation. As in the case of Marx's 
and his Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie19 it 
can be a social and historical critique of the forces of pro­
duction of  the capitalist mode of  production, or as in the 
case of the Marxist Rudolf Bahro and Die Alternative. Zur 
kritik des real  existierenden Sozialismus20  it can be a cri­
tique  of  bureaucratic-centralistic  organization, lack  of 
freedom, alienation of the workers, and detailed division of 
labor in those societies that according to their official doc­
trine have 'implemented' a Marxist approach. 

18 How this aspect of emancipatory practice in a Marxist ap­
proach in practice can have an  influence on research strategies 
and design methods in design and use of computer artifacts is 
something I will return to  in the concluding chapter of this part. 
For a more developed Marxist psychological theoretical frame­
work on 'tools  for transcendence' see  Engeström, Y.:  Learning by 
Expanding, Orienta-Konsultit, Helsinki 1987 (dissertation). 
19 Marx, K: Capital -A Critical  Analysis of  Capitalist Produc­
tion, vols. I-III, (first published 1867,1885,1895), Progress Publi­
shers, Moscow 1953 -1971. 
20 Bahro, R.: Die  Alternative - Zur kritik  des real  existierenden 
Sozialismus, Europäische Verlagsanstalt, Köln 1977. 

Design  Philosophy 

96 
Design and Use as Labor Processes 
Here  I  can  only  indicate  a  few  aspects  derived  from 
Marx's theoretical framework in the volumes of Das  Ka­
pital and of importance to design philosophy and our un­
derstanding of the labor processes of designing and using 
computer artifacts. 

Keeping in  mind  Marx's thesis that the philosophers 
have only interpreted  the world  in different  ways,  and 
that the point is to change it, we can say that what practi­
cally has to be transcended in emancipatory practice is the 
capitalist mode of production - in theory and practice. 

According to a  Marxist approach  this is  the  mode  of 
production in which our carpenter friends do not produce 
chairs  for  themselves  or  for  their  usefulness,  but  for 
wages. These wages are paid by possessors of capital who, 
to enlarge this capital, converts most of it into wages, ma­
chinery and materials. What such a capitalist buys from 
the workers is their labor power, their productive capac­
ity, their competence, over a period of time, not an agreed 
amount of labor. This labor power is what is put into work 
in the production  process. The  historical and social  re­
quirements for  this mode  of  production are in summary 
exchange  relations, commodities,  money, and  especially 
purchase and sale of labor power - a class society that has 
separated  the means of  production from  the  producers, 
and  transformed  them  into  hired  laborers,  whose  only 
property is their capacity to work. 

The carpenters and their building activity are part of a 
social division of labor and cooperation characteristic of all 
developed societies. When involved in the labor process of 
building their labor power is put into work to refine objects 
into new use-values e.g. wood,  nails etc. into a chair. In 
doing this they utilize hammers, saws, etc. - the artifacts 
or the instruments of labor, which Marx describes as: 

Emancipatory  Practice 

97 

a thing, or a complex of things, which the labourer in­
terposes between himself and the subject of his labour, 
and which serves as the conductor of his activity.21 

At this level of abstraction the labor process is not specific 
to the capitalist mode of production. It could be a descrip­
tion of producing with stone axes as well as with computer 
artifacts. Only a definition of artifacts, nothing new to our 
understanding  of  design  and  use  of  artifact  has  been 
added. 

However, if, with Marx, we understand the production 
process not just as labor process to produce use-values, but 
also as a valorization process to produce surplus value, in 
short a  process for  the expansion  and  accumulation  of 
capital and the creation of profit, then there is a clear dif­
ference. 

As values, to be used in the valorization process to ex­

pand capital, the carpenters' competence, their hammers 
and  the  materials they  work  with  will change for  this 
purpose, not for the purpose of the usefulness of the pro­
ducts produced. Or to paraphrase Marx: A carpenter is a 
man  who builds. Only under certain conditions  does he 
become a  wage worker. A hammer is a  tool  to hammer 
with. Only  under certain conditions does it become capi­
tal.22 

Rationalization 
These  changes of  the labor  process  understood  as val­
orization process may be called rationalization, and can be 
directed towards the worker's labor, the artifacts he uses 

21 Marx, op. cit., p. 174. 
22 'A negro is a negro. Only under certain conditions does he be­
come a slave.  A cotton-spinning machine is a machine for spin­
ning cotton. Only under certain conditions does it become capital.' 
Marx, K: Wage Labour and Capital, (first published in 1848), 
(translated in Bottomore, T.B.: Karl Marx - Selected writings in 
Sociology and  Social  Philosophy, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth 
1971, p. 155). 

96 

Design Philosophy 

or the objects of labor. Division of labor and design and use 
of new artifacts are means for this change. 

This form of division of labor is not the necessary social 
division of labor characteristic of all societies, but a form 
specific to the capitalist labor process, as is the human 
productivity gained by design and use of new artifacts. 

Detailed division of labor in an assembly plant, or pro­
gramming  of  CNC-machines  at  a  special  planning  de­
partment are, according to a Marxist approach, not tech­
nical necessities, but expressions of rationalization to in­
crease profits, the capitalist subsumption of the production 
process as valorization  process. A division of labor that 
gives the workers cooperative control over  the assembly 
work, or shop floor  programming that develops the wor­
kers' skill are both technical possibilities. These technical 
possibilities will in practice only be designed and used un­
der the condition  that they do not violate the production 
process as valorization  process. However,  ultimately the 
conditions for these changes are expressed as class strug­
gle. Not only market conditions and available technology 
are conditions for the valorization process, but also the or­
ganized strength of labor and capital. 

Rationalization actually affects the process of design of 

computer artifacts in a double sense. 

Not only is the form of division of labor between the la­
bor processes of design and  use an expression of this capi­
talist rationalization, but also the aim of  design is ratio­
nalization of the labor process being designed  for. 

An example could be systems designers that develop a 

production control system  to be used by a planning de­
partment and that takes away planning activities from 
the shop floor. This is an illustration of the often applied 
classical  method  of 'scientific management' by  Fredrick 
Taylor.23 This is in no way the only way of capitalist ratio­
nalization, but it has historically often proved to be a type 
of rationalization supporting the valorization process, the 
production of profits. Which rationalization strategy sup­

23 Taylor, F.W.: Principles of  Scientific Management, 1911. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

99 

ports the valorization process in a given historic situation 
has to be found out by analysis of the concrete conditions.24 
To the extent that this rationalization, by division of la­

bor, means a separation of human reflective thinking and 
imaginary  understanding from  the  actual  execution  of 
the work, it is not only epistemologically a tendency to de­
struction of  human knowledge, but also literally a ten­
dency to dehumanization. 

As  pointed  out,  the  rationalization  process  not  only 
transforms and  changes skill and control by changes in 
cooperation and division of labor, but also does so by the 
change  of  the artifacts themselves.  Marx  remarked  in 
Capital that: 

Though  a  use-value, in  the form  of a  product, issues 
from labour-process, yet other  use-values, products of 
previous labour, enter into it as means of  production. 
The same  use-value is both the  product of a previous 
process, and a means of  production of  a later process. 
Products are therefore not only results, but also essen­
tial conditions of labour.25 

In the capitalistic subsumption of  the labor  process the 
workers' own  capacity, via  design objectified  in the arti­
facts, becomes a hostile power. This is not only because the 
artifacts are owned by others, the possessors of capital, but 
because its capitalist genesis and design, is inherent in the 
structure of the artifact. 

To the use of computer artifacts this becomes true in a 

double sense. Not only are they artifacts that can be de­
signed for deskilling automation of competence, but also 
for alienating planning and control of  the labor process. 
This is confused  as neutral or general principles for in­
creasing human productivity. The capitalist genesis and 
design is all hidden in the technically objective rationality 
of the artifacts. The development of numerical controlled 

24 I will return to such concrete analyses in the part on Designing 
for Democracy at Work. 
25 Marx, op. cit., pp. 176-177. 

100 

Design  Philosophy 

machines, and how skill based alternatives were rejected, 
is a good example that is well documented by the historian 
David Noble.26 

The  computer  as  artifact  is  certainly  a  technically 
complex  machine. However it is not  primarily this fact, 
but rather its social form that distinguishes it from  the 
tools of the individual handicraft trades of the guilds. 

Taken as a whole this means that emancipatory  prac­

tice must not only aim at changing the use of artifacts, but 
also their technical design, the design process, and  the re­
lation between the design process and the labor process the 
artifacts are designed  for. When these changes violate the 
production process as valorization process there are social 
conflicts inherent in the capitalist mode of production. To 
identify with oppressed groups and to actively participate 
in their struggle is an essential aspect in a Marxist ap­
proach to the labor  processes of  design and  use of  com­
puter artifacts. 

In a Marxist approach  trade unions involved  in class 
struggle at work are today the most clear example of  an 
emancipatory practice that strives to counteract or tran­
scend capitalist rationalization, not only when  wages are 
concerned, but increasingly more as a struggle over  the 
artifacts to be designed and used, and the constraints to 
skill and democracy.27 

To regard the actual use of computer artifacts in mo­

dern industry and in offices as just artifacts for production 
of use-values is, in a Marxist approach, misleading. It is 
just as misleading as to understand the division of labor 
between design and use of  computer artifacts as natural 
or given. Certainly it is all rational, but in the sense of ca­
pitalist rationalization. 

26 Noble, op. cit. 
27  I will return to a discussion of concrete rationalization stra­
tegies, trade union responses and the theoretical framework in 
the later parts on Designing  for Democracy  at Work  and De­
signing  for Skill. 

Emancipatory  Practice 

Id 

A science of  design and  use of computer artifacts that 
has no theory for understanding the social and historical 
character of what is studied may have seen the technical 
side of the artifacts, but not really understood it. Division of 
labor is not only social but also technical; design and use of 
artifacts is not only technical but also social. These are the 
objectifications of social relations that produce us, and that 
we  reproduce  in  our  everyday  practice.  Regarding  the 
computers of today, this is more true than ever. Social re­
lations are inherent in them. A science of design and use of 
computer artifacts should not reject this as a fundamental 
aspect of its field of study. 

Summary 
Above I have discussed  design  philosophy in a Marxist 
approach as epistemology, as transcendental practice, and 
as  labor  process  theory.  In  comparison  with  the  Hei-
deggerian approach to design philosophy there is a com­
mon point of  departure in everyday practice and under­
standing. Less is said about the individual use of artifacts, 
but more about the social content of design and use of ar­
tifacts, and about the social relations inherent in the arti­
facts. And rather than finding  Dasein by transcendence of 
our everyday understanding of the world, we are advised 
to dialectical emancipatory  practice, which not only tran­
scends our everyday understanding of the world, but also 
the practical world itself. Interaction and use of language 
in design and  use of  computer artifacts could  very well 
have been discussed within a Marxist approach, especially 
the cultural-historic tradition of human activity.28 Instead 
I now turn to the language-games people play when they 

28 See e.g. Vygotsky, L.S.: Thought and  Language, The MIT 
Press, Cambridge 1962 and Leontiev, A.N.: Problems of  the De­
velopment of  the  Mind, Progress, Moscow 1981. For an application 
in the field  of human computer interaction see B0dker, S.: 
Through the  Interface-A Human  Activity  Approach to User 
Interface  Design,  DAIMI  PB - 224,  Department of Computer 
Science, University of Aarhus, 1987(dissertation). 

102 

Design  Philosophy 

design and use computer artifacts, and a Wittgensteinian 
approach to design  philosophy, an approach that also is 
based on everyday practice and understanding, or rather 
on ordinary language use. 

Chapter 4 
Language-games — 
A Wittgensteinian Alternative 

I will  introduce my third complementary interpretation 
of an approach to design philosophy as a treatise in lan­
guage, interaction and communication. This time the in­
terpretation will be in accord with the later philosophy of 
Ludwig Wittgenstein, the author of Philosophical Investi­
gations.1  As with the earlier approaches there is no at­
tempt  made  to give  a full  account  of  the  philosophical 
richness of the ideas involved, but hopefully I will be able tó 
demonstrate  the  usefulness  some  of  these  ideas  have 
when  understanding design  and  use  of  computer  arti­
facts. 

Once again I return to the carpenter and his hamme­
ring activity, but now emphasizing on language, interac­
tion and communication. In the professional language of 
carpenters there are not only hammers and nails. Say our 

1  Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical  Investigations, Basil Blackwell & 
Mott, Oxford 1953.1 have no clear relation to the Wittgenstein re­
ception. However, the group around the PAAS project at the 
Swedish Center for Working Life, including the philosophers Tore 
Nordenstam and Ållan Janik, have been important for my 
understanding of the 'second' Wittgenstein, as has the architect 
Jerker Lundeqvist, whose PhD thesis I especially want to men­
tion: Norm. och Modell - samt ytterligare  några begrepp inom de­
signteorin, Department of Architecture, Technical University of 
Stockholm, 1982, in which he develops the basis for a Wittgen­
steinian design theory. The influence from  Joachim Israel's in­
terpretation has been mentioned before. A philosopher as original 
as Peter Winch should also be mentioned. 

104 

Design  Philosophy 

carpenter is making a chair.2 Other artifacts used would 
be a draw-knife, a brace, a trying plane, a hollow plane, a 
round  plane, a  bow-saw, a  marking gauge,  chisels, etc. 
The  objects  or  materials  that  he  works  with  are  elm 
planks for the seats, ash in the arms, and oak for the legs. 
He is involved in saddling, making spindles, steaming etc. 
Are we as designers of new artifacts for chair  making 

helped by this labeling of artifacts, materials and activi­
ties? In a Wittgensteinian approach the answer would be: 
Only if we know the practice in which these names make 
sense, the point being the following: To label our experi­
ences is to do this deliberately. To do it deliberately we have 
to be trained to do so. Hence, the activity of labeling has to 
be learned. Language is not private but social. The labels 
that we come up with are inherent in our social meaning 
constituting practice. We cannot learn  without learning 
something specific. To understand and to be able to use is 
the same.3  Understanding the  professional language  of 
chair making, as any other language-game, is to be able to 
master practical rules which we did  not create ourselves. 
They are techniques and conventions for chair making as 
part of a given practice. 

To master the professional language of  chair  making 
means to be  able to act in a correct  way  together  with 
other  people  that  are  familiar  with  chair  making.  To 
'know' this does not mean that you explicitly have to know 
the rules you have learned, but it means, e.g. for a chair 
maker to know when someone utters 'saddling*, or is sad­
dling, in an incorrect way. To have a  concept is to have 
learned to follow rules as part of a given practice. Speech 
acts are, as a unity of language and action, part of prac­

2 The example is based on Seymour, J.: The Forgotten  Arts -A 
practical guide to traditional skills, Dorling Kindersley, London 
1984, pp. 65. 
3 Wittgenstein, op. cit. §264 'Once you know what the word stands 
for, you understand it, you know its whole use.', §421 liook at the 
sentence as an instrument, and at its sense as its employment.' 

Language-games 

105 

tice. They are not descriptions, but actions among others 
in a given practice. 

Artifacts  and  objects  in  a  given  language-game  also 
play a fundamental role. A  hammer is in itself a sign of 
what you can do with it in a certain language-game. And 
so is a computer artifact. These signs remind you of what 
you can do with it. In this light, an important aspect in the 
design of  computer artifacts is that its signs remind the 
users of  what they can do with the computer artifact in 
the language-games of  use, just as a  hammer does so.4 
This sheds some light on the popularity of 'what-you-see-
is-what-you-get' and 'direct manipulation' interfaces.6 

Below I will elaborate on language-games, focusing on 
the design process, descriptions in design, and knowledge 
in design and use of computer artifacts. 

Language-games 
To use language is to participate in language-games, the 
Wittgensteinian notion of practice. In discussing how we 
in practice follow (and sometimes break) rules as a social 
activity Wittgenstein asks us to think of games, how they 
are made up and played. Why games? 

We often think of games in terms of a playful, pleasur­

able engagement. I do not think that this aspect should be 
totally denied, but a more important aspect of the games 
children play is that they are most concerned activities, as 
are most  of the common  language-games we  play in our 
ordinary language. Even professional language-games of 
e.g. systems designers, carpenters or typographers, com­
plicated as they may be, are grounded in our everyday or­
dinary language. 

4 This 'sign' aspect of objects and artifacts in language games 
have been pointed out by Brock, S.: "Wittgenstein mellem faeno-
menologi og analytik' in Brock, S. et al.: Sprog, Moral & Livsform, 
Philosophia, Århus 1986. 
5 See chapter 17, The Toolness of  Computer" Artifacts. 

106 

Design  Philosophy 

We do  not understand what counts as a game because 
we have an explicit definition, but because we are already 
familiar with other games. There is a kind of  family  re­
semblance  between  games. Similarly, professional lan-
guage-games can be learned and understood because of 
their  family  resemblance  with  other  language-games 
which we know how to play. 

Language-games, like the games we play as children, 
are social activities. To be able to play these games we have 
to learn to follow rules, rules that are socially created, but 
far from always explicitly existing. The rule-following be­
havior of  being able to play together  with others  is more 
fundamental  to  a  game  than  explicit  regulative  rules. 
Playing is interaction and cooperation. It is intersubjective 
practice. To follow the rules in practice means to be able to 
act  in  a  way  that others  in  the game  can  understand. 
These  rules  are  'embedded'  in  a  given  practice  from 
which they cannot  be distinguished. They are this prac­
tice. To know them is to 'embody* them, to be able to prac­
tically apply them to a principally open class of cases. 

Language-games  are  performed  both  as speech  acts 

and as other activities, as practice with 'embodied' mean­
ing within societal and cultural institutional frameworks. 
To be able to participate in the practice of a specific lan-
guage-game  one  has  to  share  the  form  of  life  within 
which that practice is possible. This form of life includes 
our natural history as well as the social institutions and 
traditions we are born into. This is prior to agreed social 
conventions and rational reasoning. Hence intersubjective 
consensus is more a  question of shared background and 
language than of stated opinions. Wittgenstein put it like 
this:6 

'So  you  are  saying  that  human  agreement  decides 
what is true and what is false?' — It is what human be­
ings say  that is true and false; and they agree in the 

6 Wittgenstein, op. cit., §241, §242. 

Language-games 

107 

language they use. That is not agreement in opinions 
but in form of life. 

If language is  to be a means of  communication there 
must  be  agreement  not  only  in  definitions  but  also 
(queer as this may sound) in judgements. This seems to 
abolish logic, but does not do so. - It is one thing to de­
scribe methods of measurement, and another to obtain 
and  state  results of  measurement.  But  what  we  call 
'measuring'  is  partly  determined  by  a  certain  con­
stancy in results of measurement. 

This seems to make  us prisoners of language and tradi­
tion, which is not really the case. Being socially created, 
the rules of language-games, as those of other games, can 
also be altered. 

There are, according  to Wittgenstein, even games in 
which we make up and alter the rules according to which 
we play, as we go along.7 The design process is a good ex­
ample. 

Creative transcendence of traditional behavior is also 
possible in a language-game. With mastery of the practice 
of a certain language-game comes  the freedom  to follow 
the rules in totally unforeseen but still 'correct' ways.8 

I see the Wittgensteinian notion of language-games as 
a  most  fruitful  elaboration  of  understanding  human 
practice as the product of, and the same time producing, 
the world  and our understanding of it; of  the ontological 
and epistemological point of departure for the inquiry into 
design philosophy in this part of the book. 

I also find  it striking how much Wittgenstein's view of 
language resembles the view of artifacts in general in the 
Marxist design approach. Being social, as the product of 
others, and  as something we  use  to change  the  world, 

i Ibid., §83; see also §23, §67, §75. 
8 This will be further discussed in chapter 18, Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 

108 

Design Philosophy 

ourselves, and  our understanding of  it, language is not 
only an expression of social relations, but contains them. 

The  idea  of  language-games entails an  emphasis  on 
how  we linguistically discover and  construct our world. 
However, language is understood as our use of it, as our 
social, historic, and intersubjective application of linguistic 
artifacts. As I see it, this is not a neglect of  how we  also 
come to understand the world by use of other artifacts. As 
with the use of other artifacts we are, however, bound to 
tradition, a practice that in principle can be transcended. 
In  the following I will  concentrate on  the labor  pro­
cesses  of  design  and  use  of  computer  artifacts as lan­
guage-games  (not  forgetting  what  has  been  said  about 
them in the Heideggerian and Marxist approaches). 

The Language-games of Design and Use 
As designers we are involved in reforming practice, in our 
case typically computer artifacts and the way people use 
them. Hence, the language-games of  design changes the 
rules for other language-games - those of use of the arti­
facts.  What  are  the  conditions  for  this  interplay  and 
change? 

To design new artifacts that are useful for people, de­

signers have to understand the language-games of the use 
activity, or users have to understand the language-game 
of design, or the users must be able to give complete ex­
plicit descriptions of their demands. The latter seems, as 
discussed in the chapter on a Cartesian approach, to be the 
common  assumption  behind  most  design  approaches. 
Hence, the emphasis is on methods to support this expli­
cation by means of requirement specifications, system de­
scriptions etc.9  Earlier I have argued  that this means to 
make  professional  users express  their  knowledge  on  a 
level much below the knowledge they possess. One can say 

9 See e.g.  widely used methods like Jackson, M.: System Develop­
ment, Prentice Hall, 1983, or Yourdon, E.: Managing  the  System 
Life Cycle, Yourdon Press, New York 1982. 

Language •games 

109 

that they follow rules, but these are open-ended rules, and 
many of them have never been made explicit. Having ac­
quired the knowledge of when to break the given rules is 
exactly what counts as skilful and creative activity. This 
possibility of  radical innovation is the logical limit of de­
scription.10 

Design Artifacts 
In a Wittgensteinian approach, the emphasis is not on the 
'correctness' of  systems descriptions in  design, on  how 
well they mirror the desires in the mind of the users, or on 
how 'correctly* they describe existing and future artifacts 
and their use. Systems descriptions are design artifacts, 
typically linguistic artifacts. The crucial question is how 
we use them, what role they play in the design process. 

The  rejection of  emphasis on  'correctness' of  descrip­

tions is especially noteworthy: In this we are advised by 
the author of the perhaps once strongest arguments for a 
picture theory and the Cartesian approach to design — the 
young Wittgenstein in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.11 

Nevertheless, we  know that systems descriptions are 
useful in the the language-game of  design. The new ori­
entation suggested in a Wittgensteinian approach is that 
we see these linguistic artifacts as a special kind of arti­
facts that  we refer to as typical examples' or 'paradigm 
cases' when  we describe something, or when we 'inform' 
each other. That does not, however, make them models in 
the meaning of  Cartesian mirror-images of  reality.12 In 
the language-game  of  design  we  use  these  artifacts as 
reminders  and as  paradigm cases for our reflections on 

10 This will be further discussed in chapter 18,  Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 
11  Wittgenstein, L: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Kegan Paul, 
1923. 
12 This aspect of models and descriptions in a Wittgensteinian ap­
proach is argued by Nordenstam, T: Två oförenliga traditioner' 
in Göranzon, B. (ed.): Datautvecklingens Filosofi, Carlsson & 
Jönsson, Malmö 1984, pp. 58-60. 

110 

Design Philosophy 

future computer artifacts and their use. The use of design 
artifacts brings earlier experiences to our  mind  and  it 
^bends' our way of  thinking of  the past and the future. I 
think that this is how we should understand them as re­
presentations.13 And this is how they 'inform' our practice. 
If they are good design artifacts, they support good moves 
within a specific design-language-game. As such they can 
be intended to create breakdowns (to use the language of 
the  Heideggerian  approach)  as  well  as  help  avoiding 
them, depending on what kind of  reminders or paradigm 
cases they are in the learning process of design. 

Consider the following example of an application  of  a 
popular  systems  descriptions  method  in  the  Cartesian 
tradition:14 

The  users of  a future  page  make-up system are  pre­

sented with a data flow diagram. This is a graphic means 
of modelling the flow of data through a system. The basic 
objects are sources (or sinks) of data, data flows, processes, 
and data  stores. Typical processes  may be 'copy  editing" 
and  'make up'. They are represented  by circles. 'Ad  de­
partment' and  'news  room' might  be examples  of  data 
sources. They are represented by rectangles. Example of 
data  flows are 'article' and 'ad'. They are represented  by 
arrows between the other objects, etc. 

In  the  proposed  language  of  Cartesian  systems  de­

scriptions this may be a model of a system in which e.g. the 
copy editor Joan  may tell Martin the composer  that the 
article  on  the life  of  that strange  philosopher  Ludwig 
Wittgenstein is delayed at least half an hour, but that he 
can  place  the display ads and  make-up  the  rest of  the 
page. 

Does the system description really shed any light on the 
users' understanding of  making-up of  newspaper pages, 
with  or  without  computer  artifacts?  Which  arguments 

13 This has been suggested by Kaasb0ll, J.: A Theoretical and Em­
pirical  Study of  the Use of  Language and  Computers, Department 
of Informatics, University of Oslo, forthcoming (dissertation). 
14 Yourdon, op. cit. pp. 9-35. 

Language-games 

111 

can be made that support the idea that Joan and Martin 
necessarily should think about their situation in terms of 
systems, with objects and relations like sources (or sinks) 
of data, data flows, processes, data stores, circles, rectang­
les, arrows, etc? 

If we focus on system descriptions as linguistic artifacts 
that  designers  and  users  can  use  as  reminders  or 
paradigm cases in the language-games of design, linguis­
tic artifacts like the one above are probably close to useless; 
literally they make non-sense. 

What if the description above instead was done in the 
professional and situational language of Joan and Martin? 
Nor is this done to make a mirror-image of their situation, 
but by e.g. a metaphorical twist transforming it into a lin­
guistic artifact which may help both users and designers 
to be struck by something familiar as the most striking 
aspect of  the situation.  Why are for  example  Joan and 
Martin  working  in  different  departments,  when  they 
could  do  their  cooperative  work  much  better  if  they 
shared offices and used available technology that makes 
this possible? The acquisition of this understanding could 
for example be triggered by use of scenario methods. One 
basis for development of these scenarios could be methods 
for studying the users' vise of their professional language 
as speech acts in real professional language-games.15 

Given this example, there are two aspects of design ar­
tifacts that I will consider a little further. One is the ques­
tion of tradition and transcendence. The other is language 
and design artifacts. 

If we see the design artifacts from the example above as 
reminders or paradigm cases are  we  not then caught in 
the tradition, without support to transcend it? Not really. 
As referred above, in language-games we not only follow 
rules, but we also make up and alter rules as we go along. 

15 For such an approach see Andersen,  P.B.: 'Semiotics and In­
formatics: Computers  as Media' in Ingwersen et. al.:  Informa­
tion Technology  and  Information Use, Taylor Graham, London 
1986. 

112 

Design Philosophy 

In my view this is typical of the language-games of design. 
In  a  Wittgensteinian  approach  transcendence  is,  how­
ever, understood differently than in a Marxist approach. 

In  a  Marxist  approach  focus  is  on  producing  new 
knowledge  by  demonstrating  practical  transcendental 
possibilities. It could  for example  mean utilizing some­
thing like  the Marxist Bertolt  Brecht's theatrical Ver­
fremdungseffekt  to  highlight  emancipatory  untried 
possibilities  in  everyday  practice  by  presenting a  well 
known  practice in a  new light. Practice enlightened  by 
theory, one could  say. It could  for example mean a  play 
about the composer and copy editor in the example above 
by which the users come to insight about how the division 
of labor between them is a result of the capitalist mode of 
production, a rational means for accumulation of capital 
as analyzed by Marx. 

Also in a Wittgensteinian approach design artifacts can 
shed new light on a well-known situation, since, as earlier 
quoted:16 

the aspects of things that are most important to us are 
hidden because of their simplicity and familiarity. (One 
is unable to notice something - because it is always be­
fore one's eyes.) The real foundations of his enquiry do 
not strike man at all. Unless that fact has at some time 
struck him. - And this means: we fail  to be struck by 
what, once seen, is most striking and most powerful. 

However, as Peter Winch put it, in a Wittgensteinian ap­
proach 

the only legitimate use of such a Verfremdungseffekt is 
to draw  attention  to the familiar and obvious, not to 
show that it is dispensable from our understanding.17 

Design  artifacts,  linguistic  or  not,  may  in  a  Wittgen­
steinian approach certainly be used to create breakdowns, 

16  Wittgenstein, Philosophical  Investigations, § 129. 
17  Winch, P.: The Idea of a  Social Science and its Relation to Phi­
losophy, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1958, p. 119. 

Language-games 

113 

but  they  must  make sense in  the  users'  ordinary  lan­
guage-games. If the design artifacts are good, it is because 
they help users and designers to see new aspects of an al­
ready  well-known  practice,  not  because  they  convey  a 
theoretical interpretation. 

With  a Wittgensteinian approach  there is  a focus on 

the language-games of design. Hence, it is almost para­
doxical that it was this approach that best helped us in the 
UTOPIA  project  to  understand  our  relatively successful 
use  of  non-linguistic  design  artifacts  like  prototypes, 
mock-ups and  role plays. The  point is that, since design 
artifacts understood as reminders or paradigm cases  do 
not linguistically  mirror a  given or future  practice, they 
can even be experienced beyond language, e.g. as practical 
use of a prototype or mock-up, or as participation in a role 
play, an experience that can be further reflected upon in 
the language-games of design in ordinary language or in 
an artificial one. This does not, however, change the fun­
damental role of non-linguistic design artifacts as soon as 
we forget about the picture theory of reality. 

On the other hand this focus on  non-linguistic design 
artifacts is not a rejection of the importance of linguistic 
ones. Understood as triggers for our imagination  rather 
than as mirror-images of  reality, they  may  well be  our 
most wonderful human inventions. 

Practical Understanding and Propositional Knowledge 
There are many actions in a language-game that cannot 
really be explicitly described in a formal language. What is 
it that the users know, i.e. what have  they learned, that 
they can express in action, but that they are  not able  to 
state explicitly in language? Wittgenstein asks us to 

compare  knowing  and  saying:  how  many  feet  high 
Mont Blanc is - how the word  'game' is used - how a 
clarinet sounds. If you are surprised that one can know 
something and  not be  able to say  it, you  are perhaps 

114 

Design Philosophy 

thinking of a case like the first. Certainly not of one of 
the third.18 

In the UTOPIA  project we were designing  new computer 
artifacts to be used in typographical page  make-up. The 
typographers could tell us the names of the different arti­
facts and materials that they use e.g. knife, page ground, 
body text, galley, logo, halftone, frame and spread. They 
could also tell when, and perhaps in which order, they use 
specific artifacts and materials to place an article, e.g. they 
could say, Tirst you pick up the body text with the knife, 
and place it at the bottom of the designated  area on  the 
page ground. Then you adjust it to the galley line. When 
the body text fits you get the headline, if there is not a pic­
ture, etc.' What I, as designer, get to know is equivalent to 
knowing the height of Mont Blanc. What I get to know is 
very different from the practical understanding of  really 
making up  pages, as knowing the  height of Mont Blanc 
tells very little of the practical understanding of climbing 
the mountain. 

Knowledge of  the first  kind  has been called  proposi-
tional  knowledge. It is what you have 'when  you know 
that something is the case and when you also can describe 
what you know in so many words'.19  Propositional know­
ledge is not necessarily more reflective than practical un­
derstanding. It might be something that I just have been 
told, but have neither practical experience, nor theoretical 
understanding of. 

The second case, corresponding to knowing and saying 
how  the word 'game' is used, was  more complicated  for 
our typographers. How could they for example tell us the 
skill  they  possess in  knowing  how  to  handle  the  knife 
when making up the page in paste-up technology? This is 
their practical  experience  from  language-games of  typo­
graphic design. To show it they had to do it. 

18 Wittgenstein, op. cit. § 78. 
19  Nordenstam, T.: Technocratic and  Humanistic Conceptions  of 
Development, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Language-games 

115 

And how should they relate what counts as good layout, 
the complex interplay of presence and absence, light and 
dark, symmetry and asymmetry, uniformity and variety? 
Could they do it in any other way than by giving examples 
of good and bad layouts, examples that they have learned 
by participating in language-games of  typographical de­
sign? As in the case of knowing how a clarinet sounds, this 
is typically sensuous knowing by  familiarity  with earlier 
cases of how something is, sounds, smells, etc. 

Practical understanding in the sense of practical expe­
rience from  doing something and having sensuous expe­
riences from earlier cases defies formal description. If it is 
transformed  to  propositional  knowledge,  it  becomes 
something totally different. 

The  practical  understanding that  remains  unarticu-
lated is often referred to as tacit knowledge.20 It should be 
observed that it is not tacit in the sense that no one else can 
understand  expressions about it. One  typographer can 
very  well communicate about the layout of a page with 
another typographer, or someone else who knows how to 
play  the  language-games  of  typography.  However  it is 
subjective in the sense that it requires a human subject to 
possess it. 'Objective  knowledge' is knowledge that has 
been objectified as signs in a medium, e.g. a museum, a 
book, a film,  or a computer. Objective knowledge is acces­
sible and useful for us only via our subjective knowledge. 
Subjective knowledge or practical understanding is car­
ried by the participants of specific language-games. You 
cannot learn typography entirely from books. Only in in­
teraction with others skilled in the trade is it possible.21 

20  Polanyi, M.: Personal  Knowledge, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
London 1957. This will be further discussed in chapter 18,  Skills 
and  the Tool  Perspective. 
21 These aspects of objective and subjective knowledge in a 
Wittgensteinian approach are discussed by Lundeqvist, J.: 
'Ideological och teknologi* in Göranzon, B.  (ed): Datautveckling­
ens  filosofi, Carlsson & Jönsson, Malmö 1984. He discusses ob­
jective knowledge in relation to Karl Popper's position. 

116 

Design Philosophy 

It is  typically propositional knowledge that we  make 
objective in systems descriptions (though the use of e.g. 
video film  as a  design artifact make it possible  to also 
make objective tacit aspects of practical understanding). 
However, it is hard to see how we as designers of com­
puter artifacts for  page make-up could  manage to come 
up with  useful designs without  understanding how  the 
knife is used or what counts as good layout. For this pur­
pose  we  had  to  have access  to  more  than  what  can  be 
stated as explicit propositional knowledge. This we could 
only achieve by at least to some extent participating in the 
language-games of use of  the artifacts. Hence, participa­
tion is not just a question of users participating in the lan­
guage-game of  design, but perhaps more fundamentally 
of designers participating in use. It may be repeated again 
that it of course helps if the designers and the users are the 
same persons. 

Nevertheless, I think that we to some extent must ac­

cept that design is a language-game of its own, it has its 
own professionals, so that it is now time to ask: What do 
we as designers have to do to qualify as participants in the 
language-games  of  the  users?  What  do  users  have  to 
learn to qualify as participants in the language-game of 
design? And which means can we develop in design to fa­
cilitate these learning processes? 

Design-by-doing — New 'Rules of the Game' 
If designers and users share the same form of life it should 
be possible to overcome the gap between the different lan­
guage-games. It should at least in principle be possible to 
develop  the  practice  of  design  so  that  there is enough 
family  resemblance between a specific language-game of 
design and  the language-games  the design  of  the com­
puter artifact is intervening in. A  mediation should  be 
possible. 

Language -games 

117 

But what are the conditions for this 'if? To Wittgen­

stein it makes no sense to ask questions beyond  a given 
form of life. In a famous quotation he says:22 

If a lion could talk, we could not understand him. 

To  a  Marxist  approach  the  'if  can  in  practice  only  be 
achieved  by emancipatory  practice in class struggle,  as 
activities that transcend existing forms of life and create 
new ones within which it is possible. In the arguments be­
low,  I have assumed  that the conditions for a common 
form of life are possible to create, that the lions and sheep 
of industrial life can live together. This is more of  a nor­
mative standpoint of how design ought to be, a democratic 
hope rather than a reflection over political conditions for 
its realization.23 

To possess the competence required to participate in a 
language-game  requires  a  lot  of  learning  within  that 
practice. But in the beginning, all you can understand is 
what you  have already  understood in another language-
game. You understand because of the family resemblance 
between the two language-games. (It should be observed 
how close this is to what can be said in a Heideggerian ap­
proach about conditions for understanding.) 

What kind of design artifacts may be applied to support 
this interplay between language-games, and to make this 
mediation from the one to the other possible? I think that 
what  we in the UTOPIA  project  called  design-by-doing 
methods, e.g. the use of prototyping, mock-ups, scenarios 
etc., are good examples.24 

22 Wittgenstein, op. cit. p. 223. 
23 I shall return to this in the part on Designing  for Democracy  at 
Work. 
24 See Ehn, P. and Kyng, M.: 'A Tool Perspective on Design of In­
teractive Computer Support for Skilled Workers' in Proceedings of 
the  Seventh Scandinavian  Research Seminar  on Systemeering, 
Helsinki, 1984, Ehn, P. and Kyng K.: "The Collective Resource 
Approach to Systems Design' and B0dker, S. et al.: 'A Utopian 
Experience' inBjerknes, G.et al. (eds.): Computers and 
Democracy -A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. This is 

118 

Design Philosophy 

The language-games played in design-by-doing can be 
viewed both from the point of view of the users and of the 
designers. This kind of design becomes a language-game 
in which the users learn about possibilities and constraints 
of new computer artifacts that may become part of their 
ordinary  language-games.  The  designers  become  the 
teachers that teach the users how  to participate in this 
particular language-game of  design. In order  to set  up 
these kind of language-games the designers have to learn 
from the users. 

However, paradoxical as it sounds, users and designers 
do  not  really have to understand each other in  playing 
language-games of  design-by-doing together. Participa­
tion in a language-game of design and  the use of design 
artifacts  can  make  constructive  but  different  sense, to 
users and designers. Wittgenstein notes: 

When children play at trains their game is connected 
with their knowledge of trains. It would nevertheless be 
possible for the children of a tribe unacquainted with 
trains to learn this game  from others, and  to  play it 
without knowing that it was copied from anything. One 
might say that the game did not make the same sense 
as to us.25 

As long as the language-game of design is not a nonsense 
activity to any participant, but a shared activity for better 
understanding and good design, mutual understanding is 
desired but not really required. 

User Participation and Skill 
The users can participate in the language-game of design, 
because the design artifacts applied give their design ac­
tivities a  family  resemblance  with the  language-games 
that  they  play  in  ordinary  use  situations.  An  example 
from  the  UTOPIA  project  is a  typographer  sitting at  a 

further developed in chapter 15, The 'Tool  Perspective' - An 
Example. 
25 Wittgenstein, op. cit. §282. 

Language-games 

119 

mock-up  of  a future workstation for  page  make-up, ac­
tually doing make-up on  the simulated future computer 
artifact.26 

The family  resemblance is only  one aspect of the me­

thods. The other is what can be expressed. I think that it is 
reasonable to say that in design-by-doing the user will be 
able express both propositional knowledge  and practical 
understanding.  Not  only  could  e.g.  the  typographer 
working at the mock-up tell that the screen should be big­
ger because then it would be possible to show a full spread, 
something which is important in page make-up. He also 
could show what he meant by 'cropping a picture', by ac­
tually doing it, as he said it. It was also possible for him to 
express practical understanding in the sense of sensuous 
knowledge by familiarity. He could e.g.  while working at 
the mock-up,  express the fact that, when  the artifact is 
designed one way he can get a good balanced page, but not 
when it is designed another way. 

Designer Participation and Skill 
For us as designers it was possible to express both proposi­
tional knowledge  and practical understanding about de­
sign and computer artifacts.  Not only could  we express 
propositional knowledge  like 'design-by-doing design ar­
tifacts have  many  advantages as compared  with  tradi­
tional systems descriptions' or  ^it-map displays bigger 
than  22  inch  and  with  a  resolution  of  more  than 
2000 X 2000 pixels are very expensive'. In the language-
game of  design-by-doing we could also express practical 
understanding of technical constraints and possibilities by 
'implementing' them in  the mock-up, prototype, simula­
tion, experimental situation etc. Not least simulations of 
the user interface, the sign aspect of  the future artifacts 
discussed above, the reminders of what they are for, were 
important in this language-game of design. 

26 See Ehn, P. et al: Datorstödd Ombrytning, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1985, B0dker et al., op. cit. 

120 

Design Philosophy 

However,  as  designers,  our  practical  understanding 

will most of all be expressed as the ability to construct spe­
cific  language-games  of  design  in  such  a  way  that  the 
users can  develop  their  understanding  of  future  use  by 
participating in design processes. 

Family  resemblance  with  the  users'  ordinary  lan­
guage-games is an  important aspect of  these language-
games of  design, but there is also, as  mentioned above, 
another important aspect  of  language-games: we  make 
up  the  rules  as  we  go  along.  To  assist  in  such  tran­
scendental rule breaking activities should be an important 
competence of a skilled designer. Perhaps this is the artis­
tic competence a good designer needs? 

I have argued that in design-by-doing language-games 
users  can  express  both  propositional  knowledge  and 
practical knowledge. From both these kinds of activities 
there is much that will prove useful in the design process 
for the designers. But it should be observed that most of the 
items that  can  be  learned  are examples of  correct  and 
incorrect moves in the language-game of  use, not formal 
descriptions of this practice. 

However, in language-games of  design based  on  par­

ticipation and design-by-doing, much can also be learned 
from the users by the practice that is shared in the design 
activity. To take some examples from the UTOPIA project, 
activities such as joint visits to work places, with situations 
in some aspects similar to the ones being designed for, may 
be a kind  of 'design artifact' from  which both designers 
and users can learn and create the language-game of the 
specific design they both are involved in.27 To really learn 
the language-game of the use activity by fully participa­
ting in that language-game is of course an even more ra­
dical attempt by the designer.  Less radical but perhaps 
more practical would  be  that the designer concentrates 
the design  activity to just a few language-games of use, 

27 See chapter 15, The 'Tool  Perspective' - Art  Example. 

Language-games 

121 

and for them develops a practical understanding of useful 
specific language-games of design.28 

The Language-games of Design Research 
This brings me to some reflections about a science or an 
art of design and use of computer artifacts in a Wittgen-
steinian approach. What if researchers lack practical ex­
perience about actual language-games of  design, and  of 
the language-games which the design is aimed for, and in 
which  the  computer  artifacts  are  used?  What  kind  of 
knowledge  will  our  reflections  produce  if  we  do  not 
understand design and  vise of computer artifacts  practi­
cally? 

-

These questions could be put to any science, and the an­
swer  would  be: theoretical  propositional explicit  know­
ledge,  but also considerable  practical  understanding of 
these  theories  as  language-games,  as  they  are  being 
played within the scientific community. They may be in­
teresting language-games in their own right, games with 
intricate  moves  and  complicated  explicit  and  implicit 
rules that it may take a lifetime to master. 

However, in the language-games of an art or a science 
of design and  use of computer artifacts we  are not only 
reflecting, but also proposing new designs, and methods to 
be used in design. Our purpose is not only to reflect, but 
also to advocate change. We do not leave things as they 
are, as according to Wittgenstein, philosophy does.29 This 
doubleness we share with other design sciences.30 

This  makes  the initial  questions  more  crucial. As  a 
Wittgensteinian  inquiry  we  can  also  reformulate  the 
questions  in  the  following  way:  How  can  we  as  re­
searchers in design and  use of computer artifacts learn 
from  the actual language-games of design and  use, and 

28 See Ehn and Kyng 1987, op. cit. 
29 Wittgenstein, op. cit. § 126. 
30 This has been pointed out by Lundeqvist, op. cit. 

122 

Design Philosophy 

how can we teach designers and users our theoretical de­
sign  knowledge? Participation and  family  resemblance 
seem to be  just as important  aspects of  the language-
games of design research as in the language-games of de­
sign and use. After all, we are not only following the rules 
of science or reflecting those of practice; we also make up 
the rules as we go along. And we even alter them - as we 
go along. 

Summary 
In my discussion of the Wittgensteinian approach to de­
sign philosophy, focus  has been  on  communication  and 
interaction in the design  process. Less has been said in 
general about  the acquisition  of  knowledge, and of  how 
artifacts, including computer artifacts, have to be under­
stood as their  use, though  much  could  have been  said. 
However, it should be obvious that the view of skilled work 
as rule following and eventually creative rule  breaking 
activities  that  must  be  achieved  in  practice,  through 
practical experience, has great similarities to the under­
standing of acquisition of skill in both the Heideggerian 
and the Marxist  approaches.31 Hence, I will  not go into 
details on these aspects now, but turn to a summary of and 
some conclusions on what might have been learned from 
all three intertwined 'interpretations' of design philosophy 
in the context of an art and a science of design and use of 
computer artifacts, and the experiences from DEMOS and 
UTOPIA. 

31  Wittgensteinian aspects of tacit knowledge' and of 'creativity' 
will be further developed in chapter 18,  Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 

Chapter 5 
With Alternative Glasses — 
Conclusions on 
Design Philosophy 

In this part of  the book  I have  tried to weave an inter­
twined  web of  three philosophical languages for  under­
standing design and  use of  computer artifacts.  In prag­
matic interpretations of  Heidegger, Marx and  Wittgen­
stein I have argued that an emphasis on human practice 
is a possible philosophical foundation serving as an alter­
native to the Cartesian design philosophies of rationalism 
and dualism. 

Beyond Systems Thinking 
In opposition to the Cartesian approach which dominates 
computer science and systems thinking today, I have ar­
gued  that human practice and  understanding in every­
day life should be taken as the ontological and epistemo­
logica! point of departure in inquiries into design and use 
of computer artifacts. 

In the Heideggerian approach there was an emphasis 
on how people use the artifacts that we call computers. 
Concepts  like  ready-to-hand, breakdown,present-at-
hand and thrownness were important for this interpreta­
tion. A conceptual framework for understanding the skill 
people acquire and possess in design and use of computer 
artifacts was introduced as well. The fundamental differ­
ence between practical  understanding and theoretical re­
flection, as well as their relation in the process of skill ac-

124 

Design Philosophy 

quisition, was demonstrated. Without the development of 
theories and methods based on people's practical under­
standing and  use of artifacts rather than just detached 
representations of it, 'knowledge acquisition' in systems 
design is in serious trouble, practically as well as theoreti­
cally. That was a message for the science of design and use 
of computer artifacts. Furthermore, the use of artifacts is 
something very fundamental to human beings. In fact, in 
designing computer artifacts there is much to learn from 
the use of stone axes. A science of design and use of com­
puter artifacts is advised to learn from the Humanities. 
For practical design, the message was that the users' real 
competence cannot be formally described, and that design 
should aim at computer artifacts that do not break down 
the users' understanding in ordinary use situations. 

Emancipatory practice was emphasized in the Marxist 
approach. This was understood both epistemologically and 
socially. In addition to the cultural understanding of  de­
sign and use of computer artifacts that was offered by the 
Heideggerian approach, the Marxist approach points at 
the need for social or political interpretations. The eman­
cipatory focus was on social  relations, on  the transcen­
dence  of  conditions  that  prevent  humanization  of  the 
world - theoretically and in practice. A message to a sci­
ence of design and use of computer artifacts was that the 
labor process of  design and  vise  must be understood so­
cially. This does  not only mean that such a science must 
understand the social relations (and the oppression) in the 
division  of  labor  between  design  and  use, or  the social 
relations within  the design  process. The  artifacts them­
selves must be understood as social relations. Especially an 
understanding of  the rationalization processes in design 
and  use of  computer artifacts in  our contemporary  soci­
eties was seen as necessary. A science of design and use of 
computer artifacts is advised to learn from the Social Sci­
ences. Not only are theories in design to explain these re­
lations  necessary,  but  also  relations  to  emancipatory 
practice to practically,  not only theoretically, transcend 
oppressing relations. One message addressed to practical 

With Alternative  Glasses 

125 

design was that it is a political process, in our society often 
a process of  rationalization, and as such neither neutral 
nor rational as a mean for humanization. Hence, to par­
ticipate in the design process, is to take a stand one way or 
another. 

With the Wittgensteinian approach an 'untheoretical' 
way of  understanding the  practice of design and  use of 
computer artifacts was introduced. However, knowledge 
was understood  in much the same way as in the earlier 
approaches,  with  emphasis  on  competence  as  having 
learned to follow a rule in practice. The suggestion was to 
think of design and use activities as language-games that 
people play, i.e. how we learn to participate, interact and 
communicate in games,  how  we  use  our  ordinary  lan­
guage in shared  activities. No concepts were  introduced 
that could  not  be  understood  with ordinary use of  lan­
guage. If a science of design and use of computer artifacts 
in the two former approaches was advised to learn from 
the Humanities and the Social Sciences, I think the com­
plementary lesson  here rather should  be formulated  as: 
learn from the games people play in their ordinary use of 
language and artifacts in their everyday lives. This may 
also have been said about the other approaches, but here it 
is the essence. This is also the Wittgensteinian message to 
practical design. 

Throughout the discussion of the Heideggerian, Marx­
ist and Wittgensteinian approaches they have been com­
pared, and family resemblances between them have been 
pointed out. 

Certainly I could also have discussed major differences 

between a philosopher that found  the conditions for hu­
man existence  once  and for all given, another who saw 
philosophy as a way 'not only to explain the world but also 
to change it', and a third one that tells us that philosophy 
leaves everything as it is'. 

I could  also have gone deeper  into existential  pheno­

menology and Heidegger's cultural conservative relation 
to Nazism, into relations between Marxism as philosophy 
and Gulag as reality, or even into the understanding of 

126 

Design  Philosophy 

social interaction as language-games and Wittgenstein's 
socially deviant behavior. 

Some might find  this "blindness' unacceptable. Others 
might find  it inappropriate  to 'interpret'  philosophical 
traditions in such an instrumental way as has been done 
above. Philosophers could say that what has been inter­
preted above is not really Heidegger, Marx, Wittgenstein, 
or Descartes. They could also point out that the relations 
between  the  philosophical  traditions  are  much  more 
complicated than indicated. From a philosophical point of 
view they are right. 

In the same  way  different schools in  phenomenology 

could claim that this is not really existential phenomeno­
logy, as could hundreds of Marxist schools argue that this 
is not the right Marxism, and the same probably goes for 
those engaged in the analytic ordinary language school of 
philosophy. 

As stated in the introduction of this part, my purpose 
here has been a different one. The interpretations are an 
attempt  to  explicitly  state  my  understanding  of  what 
aspects in the different philosophical traditions discussed 
are especially important to design and use of the artifacts 
we call  computers, as practice, as science, or even as art, 
but not as philosophy in general. This is done with my own 
practice as a researcher and designer in the field as back­
ground. The labels  attached  to the different approaches 
are not what is important here; instead, it is whether the 
approaches can be instrumental in design research and in 
practical design. 

Some Consequences 
I have neither the philosophical competence  nor the in­
tention  to  present  a  great  synthesis  of  the  three  ap­
proaches, a consistent conceptual framework  that tran­
scends the discussions on design philosophy so far. For the 
time being I find  it wiser to see them as partly convergent 
trends, while still philosophically very different. Openness 
to eclectic 'bridges' and a transcending 'dialogue' between 

With Alternative  Glasses 

127 

approaches focusing on the role of human practice seem 
to me to be  more fruitful than a proclamation of  the one 
and only new design philosophy. 

Instead of that new design philosophy I will give some 
examples as illustrations or paradigm cases, in which I try 
to apply design philosophy from the three approaches to 
actual research and design situations I have been involved 
in. 

However, a  few more general comments on  the philo­

sophical  foundation  for  the  main  topic  of  this book  on 
work-oriented,  design  of  computer  artifacts  should  be 
made, before considering the examples. 

In the Prologue  I singled  out  two  aspects as funda­
mental - conditions  for  skill  and conditions  for  democ­
racy. 

I think  all three  philosophical  approaches have con­
tributed  to  an  epistemological  foundation  for  under­
standing the role of skill, both in the design process and in 
the use of  computer artifacts. This will be utilized in the 
part on Designing for Skill. 

When it comes to democracy, their contributions are 

more unclear. Only  the Marxist approach suggests radi­
cal  emancipation,  since  its epistemology  also  includes 
transcendence  of  whatever  might  socially  oppress  hu-
manization of the world. The Marxist approach offers an 
understanding of oppressing aspects in the labor processes 
of  design and  use, as  well  as in  the computer artifacts 
themselves. And  methods for  emancipation by and  with 
those oppressed are focused on. 

However, methods for establishing a  democratic dia­

logue in design and use of computer artifacts are perhaps 
better supported by the more conservative approaches of 
Heidegger and Wittgenstein. With  the Heideggerian in­
terpretation of computer artifacts, and with the Wittgen-
steinian interpretation of  the language-games of design 
and use, philosophical suggestions arise for useful means 
for a practice towards democracy both in design and use -
a  democratic  dialogue  based  on  participation  by  and 
competence of the users. 

128 

Design Philosophy 

But there also seems to be an inherent conflict between 
democracy and skill.  I have focused on the character  of 
professional skill as knowledge that cannot be made fully 
explicit  nor  fully  communicated  to  or  understood  by 
others  than humans with  similar  competence  or  back­
ground. It is, for example, a well-known phenomenon that 
professional groups use this to escape democratic control 
and participation by others in what they are doing. One of 
the foundations in the democratic tradition is not only 
equal participation by all concerned, but also a demand for 
arguments to be, in principle, made explicit in a way that 
can be understood by all involved.1 No doubt, this is close to 
a Cartesian rationalistic ideal. This will be kept in mind in 
a following part on Designing  for Democracy at Work. 

I also  think  that all three  philosophical  approaches 

show that work-oriented, design must transcend theoreti­
cal reflection and be involved in the practice of  practical 
design and use. This is true whether we see it as conditions 
for  interpretation, emancipatory  practice, or family  re­
semblance between language-games. Given the Marxist 
approach it is also obvious that its moral stance must be 
not only to be participative, but also to take a stand when­
ever it finds situations that are oppressive of the develop­
ment of skill and democracy at work. 

Finally, if  I should  single out one aspect  that to  me 
seems to be the most crucial to design philosophy, it must 
be the contradiction that has run through all three inter­
pretations above, and also between them and  the Carte­
sian approach. This is the dialectics of tradition and tran­
scendence in design and  use. Emphasis has mostly  been 
placed on the utilization of involved practical competence 
by interaction in design, which  has been seen as funda­
mental, compared to detached theoretically produced  in­
sight. However, breakdown of traditional knowledge, eis a 
process of  transcendence  by finding out  new aspects of 

1 See e.g. Vedung, E.: Det  rationella samtalet, Aldus,  Stockholm 
1977, Abrahamssoll, B.: Varßr finns organisationer, Norstedts, 
Stockholm 1986. 

With Alternative  Glasses 

129 

what already has been understood, has also been seen as 
important to design. 

During the discussion several dimensions of  the con­

tradiction  between  tradition  and  transcendence  have 
emerged. One can focus on tradition or transcendence in 
the artifacts  to be  used. Should  a word  processor be de­
signed as a traditional typewriter or as something totally 
new?  Another  dimension  is  professional  competence. 
Should the 'old' skills of typographers be what is designed 
for or should  'new* knowledge  replace these skills in fu­
ture use? Along the same dimension is division of  labor 
and  cooperation. Should the new design support the tra­
ditional organization in a composing room or suggest new 
ways  of  cooperation between typographers and  journal­
ists? There is also the contradiction between tradition and 
transcendence in the objects or use values to be produced. 
Should the design support the traditional services a library 
has produced or should it support completely new services 
and even new clients? Tradition or transcendence, that is 
the question in design. 

Not an answer, but an illustration of the dialectics be­

tween  traditional  competence  and  new  knowledge  is 
given in The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco. We enter 
the story at a meeting between his rational hero William 
of Baskerville and Nicholas of Morimondo, master glazier 
of the abbey. 

It's hopeless,' he (the master glazier) went on. We no 
longer have the learning of the ancients, the age of the 
giants is past!' 
'We  are dwarfs,' William  admitted,  Taut  dwarfs  who 
stand on the shoulders of those giants, and small though 
we  are, we sometimes manage  to see farther on  the 
horizon than they.' 
Tell me what we can do better than they were able to 
do,' Nicholas exclaimed. 'If you go down to the crypt of 
the church, where the abbey's treasure is kept, you find 
reliquaries of  such exquisite craftsmanship that  the 
little monstrosity I am now cobbling up — he nodded to-

130 

Design  Philosophy 

ward his own work on the table — Svili seem a mockery 
of those!' 
'It is not written that master glaziers must go on mak­
ing  windows,  and  goldsmiths  reliquaries,  since  the 
masters of the past were able to produce such beautiful 
ones, destined  to last over  centuries. Otherwise,  the 
earth would  become filled  with  reliquaries in a time 
when  saints  from  whom  to  take  relics  are so  rare,' 
William jested. 'Nor will windows have to be soldered 
forever.  But  in  various  countries  I  have  seen  new 
works  made  of  glass  which  suggest  a  future  world 
where glass  will serve  not only for  holy purposes but 
also as a help for man's weakness. I want to show you a 
creation of  our own  times, of  which  I am  honored  to 
own a very useful example.' He dug inside his habit and 
drew  out  the lenses,  which  dumbfounded  our  inter­
locutor. 
With great interest, Nicholas took  the forked  instru­
ment William held out to him. 'Oculi de vitro cum cap­
sula!' he cried. 'I had heard tell of them from a Brother 
Jordan I met in Pisa! He said it was less than twenty 
years since they had  been invented. But I spoke with 
him more than twenty years ago.' 
'I believe  they  were  invented  much earlier,' William 
said, "but they are difficult to make, and require highly 
expert master glaziers. They cost time and labor. Ten 
years ago a pair of these glasses ab oculis ad legendum 
were sold for six Bolognese crowns. I was given a pair of 
them by a great master, Salvinus of  the Armati, more 
than  ten  years  ago,  and  I  have  jealously  preserved 
them all the time, as if they were - as they now are - a 
part of my very body.'2 

1 think that it is in a transcendence of the contradiction 
between Nicholas and William that the design philosophy 

2 Eco, U.: The Name of the Rose, Pan Books Ltd, London 1984, pp. 
85. 

With Alternative  Glasses 

131 

of the future should be looked for. In design of computer 
artifacts  we  can  neither  do  without  traditional compe­
tence  nor  without  new  knowledge  that challenges  and 
transcends what already has been  understood. We  can 
create breakdowns of traditions. But that is not necessa­
rily production of  new knowledge. We  can  produce  new 
transcendental knowledge and  practice. But that is not 
done  by  neglect  of  traditional  competence  and  under­
standing. 

Design Knowledge - Three Illustrations 
To conclude this part I will in a few examples apply the 
design knowledge argued in the three philosophical ap­
proaches above. These examples or illustrations of design 
knowledge are reflections on situations which  I already 
have  understood, in  the sense  that they all  have been 
ready-to-hand to me. The illustrations are reflections on 
practice I have been involved in. 

One illustration is of design philosophy applied to pro­

duction  of  theoretical  knowledge  on  design  and  use  of 
computer artifacts. The  example is this book  on Work-
Oriented. Design of  Computer Artifacts. The second illus­
tration  is  design  philosophy  applied  to  strategy  and 
methods  in  research on design and  use of  computer ar­
tifacts. The examples will be based on DEMOS and UTOPIA, 
the two research projects that have given me most of the 
understanding that I reflect in this book. The third illus­
tration is  of  design  philosophy  applied  to strategy  and 
methods in actual design of computer artifacts. As my ex­
ample I will choose to reflect upon how we designed com­
puter-based  tools  for  skilled  graphic  workers  in  the 
UTOPIA project. 

The  illustrations  are  just  examples,  not  extensive 
treatments of  what  has  been studied; at best  they will 
work as ^paradigm cases'. I will begin with the application 
to an actual design case. 

132 

Design  Philosophy 

UTOPIAN Design - on Design Strategy and  Methods 
The UTOPIA  project was both a  research and a develop­
ment project. Actual design of alternative computer-based 
page  make-up  and  image  processing  were  part  of  the 
project. To this end a design strategy and methods had to 
be applied. The strategy that was chosen meant coopera­
tion  with  the ultimate  users of  the design, i.e. graphic 
workers. To begin  with, requirement specifications and 
the  systems  descriptions  were  based  on  traditional 
methods like interviews and graphical representations of 
existing and future systems. This was not very successful. 
The situation improved when:3 
•  we started to understand traditional tools as a design 
ideal for  computer  artifacts - the  design  of  tools  for 
skilled work, 

•  we  made  joint  visits (designers  and  graphic  workers 
together)  to  interesting  plants  (and  discussed  with 
users there), trade shows, vendors, etc., 

•  we dedicated considerable time for learning from each 
other:  designers  about  graphic  work,  and  graphic 
workers about design, 

•  we  started  to  use  design-by-doing  methods  and 
descriptions in the language of graphic work, i.e. mock-
ups, work organization games etc. 

From all three philosophical approaches the usefulness of 
these changes may be understood in  the way that they 
help utilize the practical understanding of both designers 
and graphic workers, not just their detached reflections of 
what they already had understood. 

Interpreted  as  Heideggerian  design  knowledge,  the 
mock-ups as design artifacts helped the graphic workers 
express their practical knowledge by doing design on the 
simulated equipment. This  helped to some  extent avoid 
breakdown of their practical  understanding, and even if 

3 This will be further discussed in chapter 13, Case II: The 
UTOPIA Project. 

With Alternative  Glasses 

133 

they were simulations the mock-ups supported  ready-to-
hand experiences. 

Interpreted as Wittgensteinian  design knowledge the 
methods may be understood as supporting integration by 
family  resemblance  between  the  language-games  of 
newspaper production and design of computer artifacts. 
Most activities can  be understood as creating conditions 
for  participation  in  these  language-games.  Especially 
there is the creation  of  a language-game  that designers 
and graphic workers have in common when designing for 
graphic work by doing it. 

As Marxist design  knowledge the design strategy can 
be  understood  as  emancipatory  practice.  The  graphic 
workers' existence as skilled  workers was threatened by 
capitalistic technological development. To show the possi­
bility of skill based alternatives by actually designing them 
was seen as essential to counteractions. The work  was 
carried out with graphic workers and their organizations. 
The purpose was to support actions like negotiations on 
new  technology  and  professional  training.  The  design 
process was seen in its total context of industrial relations. 
The UTOPIAN design was not a general methodology, but 
methods applied as part of a strategy for emancipation. 

The  designs  produced  were  quite  new  as compared 
with how computer-based  page make-up and image pro­
cessing generally was understood at that time. Though 
technically advanced, our designs were, however, less new 
as compared  with traditional paste-up and graphic arts 
technology.4 

What  could  have  been  achieved  with  more  drastic 
breakdowns, and what would have been lost? This is again 
the contradiction  between tradition and  transcendence, 
which seems to be at the heart of design. 

4 See Ehn, P. et al.: Datorstödd ombrytrdng, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 

134 

Design Philosophy 

DEMOS and  UTOPIA - on Research Strategy and  Methods 
In my work as a researcher in the field of design and use 
of computer artifacts the DEMOS and the UTOPIA  project 
have been the cornerstones. 

As outlined in the Prologue, the DEMOS project was an 
attempt to develop knowledge on planning, control  and 
use  of  computers  at  work.  The  study  was  conducted 
jointly with workers and trade unions in order to find  ac­
ceptable  democratic alternatives to  the  then  dominant 
practice and theory. The research work was based on the 
practice of  investigative groups that the project  helped 
establish in local unions at four enterprises: a department 
store, a steel mill, a newspaper and an engine repair shop. 
The groups investigated problems at the plant where they 
worked. As  researchers we  participated as resource per­
sons in this work. We contributed with practical investi­
gations, as well as with teaching our knowledge in com­
puter science, organization theory etc.  Our other  role in 
the project was reflection over the practice in the investi­
gation  groups  as a  basis for  contributions  to scientific 
knowledge  in  our field  of  research,  and  to  research 
methodology. 

As described  earlier, the UTOPIA  project concentrated 
on one industry - newspaper production. It was based on 
the experience from the DEMOS project and other similar 
research, namely that the supply from the vendors had to 
be influenced if new technology that in practice supported 
a democratic work organization and skilled work was to 
be implemented. Hence, our emphasis was on actual de­
sign of technological alternatives for text and image pro­
cessing. These alternatives were  not only to include  the 
technology, but also professional training. Quality of work 
and product were the design goals. Both technical and so­
cial prerequisites, as well as obstacles and limitations, were 
part of the research analysis. 

Strategically, the project was supported by the Nordic 

Graphic Workers' Union. The actual research and  deve­
lopment work  was done jointly by a group of  researchers 

With Alternative  Glasses 

135 

and  graphic workers (skilled  workers and at the  same 
time experienced trade unionists). 

The researchers participated both in the actual design 

work, and  in the analysis of  the conditions for  the ap­
proach taken, and in theoretical reflection on the practical 
experiences. 

Both the DEMOS and the UTOPIA  projects were action 
research based - gaining understanding by participation 
in  actual  change,  an  understanding  that  could,  be 
theoretically  reflected.  The  projects' grounding in  par­
ticipation in the practice investigated seems well anchored 
as a research strategy in all three philosophical interpre­
tations of design knowledge used here. 

Interpreting the  research strategies and methods via 
Heideggerian design  philosophy, I will only  point at the 
hermeneutic aspect. To understand other human beings, 
and what they are doing, we must have a shared  back­
ground. All we can do is interpretations, which are always 
done  within  the horizon  created  by  our  background  of 
understanding. Interpretation based on participation does 
not seem to be such a bad idea, at least when compared 
with just Cartesian reflections based on collected data. 

With Wittgensteinian design  philosophy both projects 
can be interpreted as developing knowledge by learning 
the rules of the language-games of use, by creating design 
artifacts that support the users' acquisition of new under­
standing, and at the same time teaching the rules of the 
academic knowledge about design and use of  computers. 
If  successful,  the  projects  also  changed  the  language-
games for design and use, or at least some of the rules, in a 
democratic direction. The 'negotiation model'6 for system 
design developed in the DEMOS project is an example that 
to some extent changed  both the practice of systems de­
sign, and the theoretical understanding of the rules of that 

6 This will be discussed in chapter 12, Case I: The DEMOS Project. 

136 

Design Philosophy 

game.  'The  tool  perspective'6 of the UTOPIA  project has 
had a similar effect. 

It is also possible to understand the methods applied as 

means  to  create family  resemblance  between  the  lan­
guage-games  of  research  and  what  is  researched  (as 
above with design and use). This way it would to some ex­
tent  be  possible for  researchers to  understand  the lan­
guage-games of use, e.g. graphic workman understanding 
that later can be  reflected in the language-games  of  re­
search. 

Interpreted via  Marxist design philosophy the DEMOS 
project is a clear case. Workers seen as oppressed by capi­
talist technology and division of labor are the subjects of 
this research. The aim is emancipatory practice, and this 
is the practice of the workers themselves at the plants in­
vestigated. It is not only the researchers that are supposed 
to reflect, but also the other subjects involved. And it is re­
flection of changes in their practice that is emphasized. If 
successful, these changes are in a more democratic direc­
tion or at least some limits to such a development are un­
derstood. These experiences can  also be theoretically re­
flected upon and help produce new theoretical knowledge 
as  understanding of,  e.g.,  limits  to  democratization  at 
work, the labor processes of  design and  use of computer 
artifacts, or trade union organization theory. 

Interpreted via Marxist design philosophy the research 
strategy  and  methods  of  the  UTOPIA  project  can  be 
understood  as follows:  It aimed  at  practical  knowledge 
about  the impact  of  new  technology in  newspaper  pro­
duction. This knowledge was to  be used by graphic wor­
kers and their organizations in emancipatory practice  to 
transcend the dehumanizing aspects of the existing capi­
talistic technology. But to develop alternatives requires not 
only resources, but also  new knowledge of  design  possi­
bilities  with  the  new  technology.  Hence,  the  research 
strategy was on the one hand based on strong institutional 

6 This will be discussed in chapter 13, Case II: The  UTOPIA 
Project, and chapter 15, The 'Tool  Perspectie' - An Example. 

With Alternative  Glasses 

137 

support (the  trade unions of  the graphic workers in the 
Nordic countries). This way the market conditions for the 
new technology could be influenced, since technology that 
fulfills certain demands would be accepted by the unions. 
On the other hand these alternatives had to be developed 
and  made concrete. This required  new design principles 
that made it possible for graphic workers to express their 
practical  knowledge in the design  process, and  to think 
creatively about alternatives. These are requirements for 
the practical change, but also for  theoretical reflection. 
The activities performed and the understanding achieved 
can be broken down  and  reflected  upon in a  theoretical 
context.  This  may  produce  new  knowledge  about,  e.g., 
strategies for and limits to technological change, or design 
methods that utilize users' practical understanding. 

Interpreted  via  Marxist  design  philosophy  one  more 
aspect  common  to  the  research  approaches  of  the  two 
projects  should  be  mentioned.  With  its  emphasis  on 
emancipatory practice the results of the projects had first 
of all to be communicated to the subjects of this transcen­
dence - the  workers  and  their  trade  unions.  Hence  an 
important aspect of  the research strategies was  to find 
forms in  which the theoretically reflected and produced 
knowledge could be returned to the practice it grew from. 
The textbook on design, planning and computers from the 
DEMOS project is an example of this.7 Examples from the 
UTOPIA  project are  the summary  report  distributed  to 
graphic  workers  in  all  the  Nordic  countries,8 and  the 
textbooks for  professional  training of  graphic workers.9 
The  intellectual  challenge  of  writing  these  kind  of 

7  Ehn, P.  and Sandberg, Å.: Företagsstyrning och  löntagarmakt, 
Prisma, Stockholm 1979. 
8 UTOPIA project  group: An  Alternative in Text  and  Images, 
Graffiti no 7, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 
9 See e.g. Ehn et. al., op. cit., and Frenkner, K. and Romberger, 
S.: Datorstödd  Bildbehandling, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1985. 

138 

Design Philosophy 

research reports is by no means smaller than in trying to 
communicate with an academic audience. 

Work-Oriented, Design - on  Theory 
My purpose in writing this book is to theoretically reflect 
upon  and  hopefully  transcend  what  I  already  have 
understood in my practice as researcher and  designer. I 
am involved in Cartesian reflections on the kind of expe­
riences that have been exemplified above.  I want to con­
tribute  to  theoretical  understanding of  Work-Oriented, 
Design  of  Computer  Artifacts. What  I have in mind are 
reflections about conditions and strategies or methods in 
designing for democracy at work and for skill-enhancing 
computer-based tools. 

An  interpretation  of  the  practice  of  contributing  to 
theoretical knowledge of work-oriented design, along the 
lines of  all three philosophical approaches, may run as 
follows: 

My  understanding of  design from the involvement in 
research projects and actual design has to be broken down 
and transcended by reflections. This  breakdown may  be 
created by framing my understanding in a philosophical 
context, e.g as a Heideggerian approach, as a Marxist ap­
proach, or as a Wittgensteinian approach to design philo­
sophy as in this part of the book. 

My  understanding may also be  broken down  by  rela­

ting it to other approaches to designing for democracy and 
skill.  An  example  of  alternative  theory  of  design  and 
democracy is the socio-technical approach.10  An example 
of alternative theory for skill and design is the approach 
taken  by  cognitive  science.11  Such  breakdowns will  be 
considered in the appropriate parts of this book. 

10 See e.g. Mumford, E.: 'Sociotechnical System Design - Evolving 
Theory and Practice', in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): Computers and 
Democracy-A  Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 
11  See e.g. Norman, D.  & Draper, S. (eds.): User Centred  System 
Design, Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986. 

With Alternative  Glasses 

139 

Another way of  reflecting on  my understanding is by 
relating it to other design disciplines and approaches like 
architecture or industrial design, as will be done in a later 
chapter.12 

However, the point of  these breakdowns is to produce 
new  knowledge  of  what  was  already  understood.  The 
questions have to be asked in ways that allow new aspects 
to be seen, e.g. so that practical knowledge can be brought 
into focus.  Only then is new  theoretical knowledge  pro­
duced. If successful, this can be  understood by others as 
new insight and in the long run as new practice and un­
derstanding.  This  is  the  most  general  interpretation. 
However, the  fundamental  point  is the  practice and  un­
derstanding that is being reflected, what has already been 
understood.  Philosophically there seems  to  be  a strong 
case for  action research, and  participation in actual de­
sign, as the instance for this practice and understanding. 
This is true whether we call it hermeneutics, dialectics, or 
ordinary language. 

The  paradox is that  my  rejection  of  a  Cartesian  re­
search approach itself is being argued  as Cartesian  re­
flections, though explicitly grounded in a  practice. Even 
when taking a Heideggerian, Marxist, or Wittgensteinian 
approach, Cartesian  reflections seem  to be  a  necessary 
beginning for developing design philosophy. To interpret 
philosophers one has in a way to be a Cartesian one. The 
point is, however, as Hans Skjervheim has put it, not to try 
to escape this dilemma (which is impossible), but to be in it 
in a proper way. Ultimately it is a question of being with 
others in the world  in a  proper  way.13  The  alternative 
philosophical approaches to design argued in this part of 

12 See e.g. Lundeqvist, J.: Norm och Modell  - samt ytterligare 
några  begrepp inom designteorin, Department of Architecture, 
Royal Institute of Technology of Stockholm, 1982 (dissertation), 
Cross, N. (ed.): Developments in Design  Methodology, John Wiley 
& Sons, Bath 1984, Mayall, W.H.: Principles in Design, Design 
Council, London 1979. 
13 Skjervheim, H.: Deltagare  och åskådare, Prisma,  Halmstad 
1971, pp. 79-80. 

140 

Design Philosophy 

the book can shed some light on what that means. Tran­
scending a tradition while being in it; that is the dialectics 
of design as well as of design research. 

Now  to  some  more  specific  interpretations.  For  a 
Marxist inquiry one can  ask what kind of emancipatory 
practice this book  on  work-oriented design is part of.  A 
negative answer could be that it is part of no such practice; 
its academic conception of design even makes it harmful 
to emancipatory practice. But there are also possible posi­
tive answers: production of  new knowledge is not  a bad 
thing, especially if it is supportive of emancipatory prac­
tice; academic  legitimacy  of  work-oriented  design  is of 
importance; understood and used by other academics, this 
theoretical  knowledge  might  even  contribute  to  better 
conditions  for  work-oriented  design  as  emancipatory 
practice. 

Finally, with a Wittgensteinian approach the writing of 
this book  can  be  seen  as a  move  in  the  the  academic 
language-game of a science of computer and information 
science. Can I demonstrate that I have learned the rules 
of the game? This means not only mastering a set of theo­
ries and research methods, but also for example a style of 
writing, or more generally, the conventions of being a re­
searcher in the field  of design and  use of computer arti­
facts  in  the  Scandinavian  academic  world  in  the  late 
1980s. What counts is whether the move is a proper one or 
not. To play the academic game according to the rules is 
what is done in what Thomas S. Kuhn calls normal  sci­
ence  in his  well-known book  The Structure of  Scientific 
Revolutions,14 

In normal science  there is  an established  practice  of 
exemplary  cases  that  define  the  paradigm.  However 
anomalies may begin to occur within this paradigm, e.g., 
observations that cannot be explained; theories that do not 
fit  but still get spread; other  researchers entering the 
game and  claiming superiority of  their  rules (research 

14 Kuhn, T.S.: The Structure of  Scientific Revolutions, Chicago 
1962. 

With Alternative  Glasses 

141 

methods and theories from another discipline), etc. Then 
we enter a phase of revolutionary science in which the old 
paradigm withers away and a new one is established. 

Whether or  not this book is part of such a new para­

digm in computer and information science remains to be 
seen, and is up to others to judge. However, I think there 
are enough anomalies in the existing language-games of 
computer science, and enough  researchers that have be­
gun to play according to changed  rules, for us to under­
stand the current state as unstable. Not only are philo­
sophers and  scholars in  other disciplines engaged  in a 
fundamental critique of the Cartesian orientation of  ra­
tionalism and dualism in computer science, but even ra­
tionalization as such in society (to which computer science 
makes  a  major  contribution)  is being  more  and  more 
questioned.18 These alternatives have their emphasis on a 
dialogue between the people concerned. 

Tore  Nordenstam  calls  the  existing  paradigm  the 
technocratic conception of  development.16  The opposing 
alternative he labels humanistic. I can only hope to have 
made a correct  move or broken a rule or two in that di­
rection. My point is that this humanistic conception of de­
velopment not should be external to, but a paradigm case 
in the language-games of a science or art of design and 
use of computer artifacts. 

With these reflections on  design  philosophy as back­

ground I now turn to an inquiry into The Art and Science 
of Designing Computer Artifacts. 

15 The Environmentalist movement all over the western world is 
perhaps the strongest practical evidence of this critique. The 
theoretical critique typically develops ideas from Karl Marx or 
Max Weber. See e.g.  Habermas, J.: Theorie  des Kommunikativen 
Handelns, I, II, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt 1981 or Offe, C.: Disorga­
nized Capitalism, Polity Press, Oxford 1985. 
16 Nordenstam, T.: Technocratic and  Humanistic Conceptions  of 
Development, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985, 
p. 8. 

Part II 
The Art and Science of 
Designing Computer Artifacts 

'Both art and design at last seem like meeting, 
across the Cartesian split of mind  from body, 
to enable us to find a new genius collaboration 
not in the making of 
products and systems and bureaucracies 
but  in  composing  of  contexts  that  include  everyone, 
designers too. 
To be a part. 
To find  how to make all we do and think 
relate to all we sense and know, 
(not merely to attend to  fragments 
of ourselves and our situations). 
It was a question of where to put  your feet. 
It became a matter of choosing the dance 
Now its becoming 
No full stop ' 

J. Christopher Jones in 
How My Thoughts about Design Methods 
have Changed  During the Years 

Introduction 

In this part I will be concerned with the art and science of 
designing computer  artifacts, and  with finding an aca­
demic  'home'  for  work-oriented  design.  I  am  not  con­
cerned with the name of this place, be it computer science, 
information science, informatics,  or  whatever, but  with 
what should be done there. 

Disciplinary Boundaries 
What is computer science? Not long ago this question was 
addressed by Paul Abrahams, president of the Association 
for  Computing  Machinery,  in  Communications  of  the 
ACM.1 

As a first conclusion  he suggests that any definition 
whose  scope strays too far  from  the  pragmatic answer 
that computer science is what is taught by computer sci­
ence departments is unlikely to meet much acceptance. I 
would  guess he is right. Nevertheless I agree with him 
that the questions are worth discussing. 

I agree with Abrahams that computer science is not the 
study of  Vaxes or Macintoshes,  not even  of  Connection 
Machines or Turing Machines, though such studies may 
be part of it. However, I am afraid that this is where the 
agreement  might stop. At  least  when  he suggests that 
'most of  the interesting questions in  theory are special 
cases  of  two general types: what can  we  compute, and 
what resources do we need in order to compute it?', I can 
imagine  many other theoretically interesting  questions 

1  Abrahams, P.: 'What is Computer Science' in Communications 
of the ACM, vol 30, no 6, June 1987. 

146 

The Art and. Science  of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

for an art and  science  of  designing computer artifacts. 
These questions concern designing computer artifacts for 
concernful human use. The disagreement may be due to a 
different emphasis, but I think it goes deeper. 

It is not a disagreement on  the belief  that theory of 
computer science includes such specialities as algorithmic 
analysis, computational complexity, and formal language 
theory, but perhaps on the scope of what we are studying, 
and what other theories we need. 

It is not a disagreement on the position that pragmatic 

computer science has a flavor  of engineering (or is con­
cerned with design of computer artifacts, as I would put 
it) but perhaps on the theoretical consequences of this po­
sition. 

Finally, it is not a disagreement on the position that the 
microstructure of computing is inherently mathematical, 
and  that the macrostructure may  not be, but maybe on 
what it may be. 

Leaving Abrahams for the Scandinavian scene I think 
what has to be challenged is what is understood as normal 
science2 in computer science. 

I have neither competence nor reason to challenge the 

mathematical and  natural science base of  computer sci­
ence when the subject matter is efficiency of algorithms, 
semantics of programming languages, computability, etc. 
However, I will have to consider it problematic as soon as 
any kind of human use of computers is involved, or when 
any social or organizational setting for its design ought to 
be taken into  account. Here I am  primarily thinking of 
specialities such as 'systems design', or design of computer 
artifacts, i.e. the subject matter I am concerned about. I 
also think  matters become  problematic in subject  areas 
such as knowledge-based  systems, human-computer  in­
teraction or design of programming environments. 

In fact, the idea of mathematics and natural science as 

normal science for a science of designing computer arti­

2 Kuhn, T.: The Structure of  Scientific Revolutions, University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago 1962. 

Introduction to  Part  II 

147 

facts is due to history, tradition and coincidence, rather 
than fundamental reflections of the subject matter. Here, 
I have the history of these academic institutions in Scan­
dinavia in mind.3 

When the first  departments were established in the late 
sixties it was typically around people with a mathematics 
or  natural science  background. They  were  people  that 
either had participated in constructing computers or had 
used their computational power in their academic work. 
The focus on natural science and the neglect of other sci­
entific perspectives may have been reasonable then. To­
day they are not, especially if the speciality of'systems de­
sign' is to be part of what is studied at such departments. 
One obvious reason is the tremendous expansion in use of 
computers during the two decades departments for com­
puter or information science have existed in Scandinavia. 
Let me consider two major objections to my conclusion 
that the scientific base for computer science is too limited: 
• The first objection is based on the need for division of la­
bor. The objection is that computer science only deals with 
the natural science and  mathematical aspects of  compu­
ters, the rest being left to other disciplines in the human 
and social sciences. 

I think that this objection holds in so far as the effects of 
using computers are studied by many other disciplines. 
However, there is, to my knowledge, no computer science 
department in  Scandinavia  that does  not  at least  have 
something like  knowledge-based  systems, human-com­
puter interaction, design of programming environments, 
or 'systems design' in their curriculum for the students. Is 
the study of these subjects true natural science? I question 
the fruitfulness of such an assumption. I will also, at least 
in the case of 'systems design', argue against the fruitful­
ness of the prevailing division of labor between academic 
disciplines. 

3 See Bansler, J.: Systemudvikling - teori og  historié i  skandi­
navisk  perspektiv, Studentlitteratur, Lund 1987 (dissertation). 

148 

The  Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

One of my arguments against this academic division of 
labor, an argument that can be raised as a critique from 
inside computer science, is that  many  researchers and 
teachers  in  the  human  and  social  sciences  base  their 
statements on too limited an understanding of computers. 
My other argument against  the prevailing division  of 
labor is more fundamental. Social  and  human sciences 
play  an  important  role  in  the study  of  effects,  or long 
range social  consequences of  adaptation of  computers in 
society, etc. However, their role in design of computer ar­
tifacts is so far very limited and certainly constrained by 
the existing division of labor between the disciplines. When 
it comes to 'systems design' I see this eis a major obstacle. 
• Now to the second major objection to human and social 
science approaches in computer science. It is theoretical. 
It is the idea of a science of design of computer artifacts as 
engineering  based  on  natural  science  theories  and  me­
thods. Historically  I see  this as the  main  approach  to 
'systems design'. Though a lot of criticism has been raised 
over  the years, this approach seems stronger than ever 
today. A good example is the recent plea for real systems 
engineering by Janis Bubenko,  a  leading Scandinavian 
computer science professor.4 

In this part I will  take the foundation  of  such  engi­

neering approaches to design as a challenge for reflections 
on  the subject  matter  of  design  of  computer  artifacts. 
However,  in  search  for  fundamental  theories  and  me­
thods of  the subject  matter  I  will  argue  that  we  must 

4  In a plea for a real engineering approach the theme was formu­
lated like this in a conference invitation recently: 'Information 
Systems Engineering represents an approach to information sys­
tems development that is based on an 'engineering' way of 
coming to grips with the different tasks to be solved in large sys­
tems development projects. (...) Information Systems Engineering 
represents work carried out by 'engineering' analysts and con­
structors in a rigorous, methodological way of coming to grips 
with every sub-problem, no task in the systems development being 
solved by capricious approaches' (my translation), Invitation to 
conference in Åre, April 6-8,1987. 

Introduction to  Part  II 

transcend  the  prevailing  division  of  labor  between 
academic  disciplines,  focusing  instead  on  the  subject 
matter itself,  reconstructing it so we can grasp use as a 
fundamental aspect of design. 

Knowledge and Interest 
By returning to the scientific interests of  knowledge that 
Jürgen Habermas has been  investigating,  I  think  that 
some light can be shed on the dilemma for a subject mat­
ter of designing computer artifacts.6 

Habermas traces the base for every science  to the a 
priori imperatives of  our sociocultural form of life  that I 
earlier have discussed in connection with Wittgenstein's 
ordinary language philosophy. 

Labor takes place in 'the functional sphere of  instru­

mental  action'  where  we,  as human  beings,  encounter 
objects as things, events, and conditions which in principle 
can be  manipulated. The knowledge interest of technical 
control concerns instrumental action. 

In  language  and  interaction  we  encounter  speaking 
and acting subjects. This is where understanding in prin­
ciple is possible. The practical knowledge interest of inter-
subjective  communication  concerns language and inter­
action. 

According to Habermas these a priori anthropological 

everyday  procedures and  interests of  knowledge  deter­
mine the conditions under which every science objectifies 
reality. Typically the technical control interest leads to fo­
cus on observation, empirical analyses, and instrumental 
control, as in the technical and natural sciences, whereas 
the  practical  interest in intersubjective communication 
leads to focus on dialogues, participatory relations, and 
understanding, as in the hermeneutic sciences. 

5 These knowledge  interests were referred in the introduction to 
the part on Design Philosophy. Here they are elaborated with re­
ference to Habermas,  J.: Technik und  Wissenschaft als 
'Ideologie', Suhrkampf,  Frankfurt 1968. 

150 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

The dilemma in determining the subject matter for an 
art and science of designing computer artifacts is, as I see 
it, that both  the technical  knowledge  interest  in instru­
mental  control, and  the  practical  knowledge  interest  in 
intersubjective  communication, seem  just  as  fundamen­
tal. 

Design  of  computer  artifacts is  an  activity  of  deter­

mining these artifacts so that they can be constructed and 
implemented. Hence the technical interest in instrumen­
tal control. But it is also a dialogue and a participatory re­
lation between  those concerned  about the computer arti­
fact being designed. Hence the practical interest in inter-
subjective communication. 

Considering the use situation designed for, there is the 
same doubleness. Computer artifacts may be designed to 
support control of objects as well as to facilitate dialogues 
and intersubjective communication. 

This doubleness I see as the fundamental condition un­

der which design of computer artifacts must be objectified 
as a scientific subject matter. Hence, in studying this sub­
ject  matter  we  must  transcend  the disciplinary  bound­
aries between the natural sciences, the social sciences and 
the humanities, to be able to deal with the different inter­
ests of knowledge that constitute the subject matter. 

As  mentioned in the first  part Habermas  also distin­
guishes a third scientific interest of knowledge, the eman­
cipatory interest. This is a consciously incorporated inter­
est in science that directs knowledge towards emancipa­
tion going  beyond  the other interests of  knowledge. As 
paradigm  examples  Habermas  mentions  the  critique 
Marx developed as a theory of capitalism, and Freud as a 
metapsychology. This is the interest in the process of cri­
tique as a means to reveal power relations embodied in our 
sociocultural  form  of  life  as  systematically  distorted 
communication - the interest of liberation and a dialogue 
free  from  coercion  through  knowledge.  Hence  the  fun­
damental relations to political practice in Marxist theory 
and to therapy in Freudian theory. 

Introduction to Part II 

151 

I am  not proposing that the emancipatory interest of 
knowledge must be constituent to all aspects of the subject 
matter of  designing computer artifacts, though  the fun­
damental relation between such a science and changes in 
work and language is an obvious argument. However, for 
work-oriented  design  of  computer  artifacts this interest 
should be cardinal. 

Structure of Part II 
In this part of  the book I will investigate the theoretical 
possibilities for establishing an art and science of designing 
computer  artifacts.  I will sketch a complementary  pro­
gram of the subject matter and a curriculum for its study, 
a  program  that  if  institutionalized  can  be  a  base  or  a 
'home'  for  further  studies  of  work-oriented  design  of 
computer  artifacts. As mentioned above,  my emphasis is 
not  on  the  names  of  such  departments,  whether  they 
should  be called  computer science, information  science, 
information  processing, informatics,  datalogy  or  what­
ever, but on the 'spaces' for doing research and teaching 
on the art and science of designing computer artifacts. 

Part II has the following structure: 
In chapter 6, From Systems Design to Design of  Com­

puter Artifacts I relate the subject matter to some existing 
positions on systems design in Scandinavia and outline a 
frame of reference in line with the discussions in the part 
on Design Philosophy. 

I will then (chapter 7) turn to a critique of the science of 
design  of  the  artificial  by  Herbert  A. Simon, since  the 
problematic influence of  his scientific  program on com­
puter science is mandatory, not only for artificial intelli­
gence  and  the  understanding  of  complex  hierarchical 
systems, but also for computer science as an empirical 
discipline. 

In chapter 8, Other Ways of  Seeing and  Doing  I - In­

ternal  Alternatives, I discuss contributions to an art and 
science  of  designing  computer  artifacts  from  'within' 
computer and information science. The contributions dis-

152 

The  Art and. Science  of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

cussed are: 'social system design methods', 'a  new foun­
dation of  design', and 'a changing paradigm in  software 
engineering'. 

In chapter 9, Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II -Ex­

ternal Alternatives, I investigate contributions from other 
'design disciplines' than those focusing on computer arti­
facts. Developments  in the 'design  methodology  move­
ment' are introduced, and  a 'catalogue' of  paradigm ex­
amples from architectural design are considered. 

Finally, in chapter 10, Conclusions: A Subject  Matter 

and  a  Tentative  Program for the art and science of  de­
signing computer artifacts is outlined. 

Chapter 6 
From Systems Design to 
Design of Computer Artifacts 

The purpose of this chapter is to 'define' the subject matter 
for an art or science of designing computer artifacts. 

I will relate my understanding of the subject matter to 
approaches in the field of'systems design', and I will relate 
'definitions' of design and design science to the approaches 
discussed in the part on Design Philosophy. In particular, I 
will consider  the conceptualization of design, the means 
used in design, and  the artifacts and  use situations de­
signed. 

The chapter expresses a frame of reference, to be used 

later in this part, when I discuss the different contribu­
tions to a curriculum in design of computer artifacts. 

'Systems Design' 
The proper study of  mankind is the science  of  design'1 
Herbert Simon  concludes in  his well-known  book, The 
Sciences of  the  Artificial. That may or may not be  true. 
My inquiry is much more constrained. I will try to distin­
guish important features of an art or a science of design of 
computer  artifacts.  What  I  have  in  mind  is  a  subject 
matter close to what goes under such names as 'systems 
design', 'systems development', and 'systemeering\ This is 
the study of the kind of production and creation processes 
that typically contribute to new or changed computer ap­

1 Simon, H.: The Sciences of  the Artificial, The  MIT Press,  Cam­
bridge 1969, p. 83. 

154 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

plications in organizations, e.g. 'a production control sys­
tem' or tools for desktop publishing'. 

Historically, the field borrowed its concepts from engi­
neering in  general and from  early experiences of  deve­
loping computer applications.2 

'Systems design' was typically seen  as a  step-by-step 
method, starting with a  phase of  analysis  of  problems, 
needs, requirements, etc., then a design phase resulting in 
formal requirement specifications, then (based on these) a 
phase involving construction of the computer application, 
and finally  implementation of the system.3 The emphasis 
was on the technical system running on the computer and 
on techniques for formal specifications of this system. 

When developed  as an academic discipline in Scandi­

navia, both  the phase or step-by-step approach, and  the 
inability to deal with organizational and environmental 
aspects of  the design  were criticized, as was  the lack  of 
user participation in the development process. Especially 
the need  for a theory of systems design was stressed, as 
opposed  to  just a collection  of  practical  and  normative 
principles.4 

The state of art in the beginning of the 1980s in systems 
design as an  academic discipline in Scandinavia  can be 
seen in two dissertations. 

In the tradition of  Börje  Langefors and  Mats Lunde-
berg,  Göran  Goldkuhl  defined  systemeering  as people's 
work  with  analysis  and  design  of  computer-based  or 

2 For an overview see e.g. Boguslaw, R.: The  New  Utopians -A 
Study of  System Design and  Social Change, Prentice-Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs 1965. 
3 See e.g. Sveriges Standardiseringskommission: Riktlinjer för 
administrativ systemutveckling, SIS-Handbok 113, Stockholm 
1973 (English version: Systems Development -A Constructive 
Model, SIS handbook 125, Stockholm 1975), and Andersen C. et 
al.: Syskon - en bog om  konstruktion af  datamatiske  systemer, 
Gads Forlag, Copenhagen 1972. 
4 See e.g. Bansler, J.: Systemudvikling - teori  og historié  i  skan­
dinavisk  perspektiv, Studentlitteratur, Lund 1987 (dissertation), 
and the coming part on Designing  for Democracy  at Work. 

From Systems  Design to  Design of  Computer Artifacts 

155 

manual information systems. Prior to systemeering there 
has to be a decision in an organization to develop an in­
formation system. An information system 

is  intentionally  arranged  by  certain  people  and  the 
purpose of its utilization is to inform certain people of 
something. An information system is always part of  a 
larger interpretation and action field. A formalized and 
computer-based information system can consist of  the 
following functions: deduction of messages; transporta­
tion of messages; storage of messages. (...) This process 
can  be supported  by the aid  of  methodology. I define 
such  a  methodology  as  consisting  of:  concepts 
(definitions); division into problem areas; method steps, 
order and contents; description techniques.5 

To Goldkuhl, systemeering does not include construction 
in the sense of writing computer programs or manual in­
structions. However it is construction in the sense of de­
sign of models of future information systems.6 

Lars Mathiassen,7 in the tradition of Kristen Nygaard, 
suggested that systems development should be understood 
as a labor process. The term systems development process 
was advocated  partly for  historical  reasons, but at the 
same time  because programs and computers are essential 
parts of  systems development  and that it is relevant to 
understand them as systems.8 

Mathiassen distinguished between the  functions and 

the methods of the systems development labor process. 

5  Goldkuhl, G.: Framställning och användning av  informations­
modeller, TRITA—IBADB-4099, University of Stockholm, 1980 
(dissertation), p. 288 (my translation). 
6 Ibid., p. 289. 
7  Mathiassen, L.: Systemudvikling og  Systemudviklingsmetode, 
DAIMI PB-136, Department of Computer Science, University of 
Aarhus 1981 (dissertation). 
8 Mathiassen, op.  cit., pp.  45-48. 

156 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

The  continuously  ongoing  functions  (as opposed  to 
stages ordered in time) that he used to characterize the 
content of systems development are: 

•  change of an organization 
•  based on iterative decision-making 
•  with prior investigations 
•  as the basis for construction of computer applications 
that via the change function are integrated into the or­
ganization 

•  and a precondition for these functions is the function of 
communication between individuals and groups with 
relation to the system development process. 

As systems development methods he characterized prin­
ciples for how to carry out systems development, includ­
ing tools, techniques, and principles for organization of the 
labor process. Methods are based on an understanding of 
the functions of  systems development.  Descriptions are 
important sub-functions of investigation, communication, 
construction and change. They are used both in commu­
nication about changes  and as complete formal descrip­
tions  in  a  programming  language  to  be  automatically 
executed by a computer. 

With  the  Marxist  inspired  approach  by  Mathiassen 
and  the phenomenologically inspired  approach by Gold-
kuhl steps were taken towards a reformulation of the en­
gineering approaches to the subject matter for a science of 
design  of  computer artifacts in Scandinavia. The users 
had become visible in the design process. Human and so­
cial sciences, just as much as natural sciences, received 
emphasis. 

Professionally  I grew  up  within  the same  traditions 

that formed the above approaches, and my way of think­
ing about the subject matter has family resemblance with 
the examples. 

However, though computers and  information systems 
are central to the subject matter I find it far from obvious 
that concepts like systems, descriptions, models, informa-

From Systems Design  to Design  of Computer  Artifacts 

157 

tion,  and  data  should  be  fundamental  to  our  thinking 
about design of computer artifacts.9 

Hence, I will  now  take a  broader view  of  the subject 
matter, putting questions like: What do we mean by  de­
sign and design methods? What are the characteristics of 
using computers as compared with other artifacts? What 
does it mean to design these artifacts and their use? I will 
provide, and elaborate on, arguments I have found in de­
sign literature that fit  with the understanding suggested 
in the part on Design Philosophy. 

Design 
Let us start with some 'definitions' of design and  design 
science found in the literature. 

My dictionary suggests that to design is to:10 

•  make preliminary sketches of; sketch a pattern or out­

line for; plan 

or in a skillful way 

•  plan and carry out, especially by artistic arrangement 

•  form (plan, etc.) in the mind; contrive 
•  plan to do; purpose; intend 
•  to intend or set apart for some purpose 
The second  point, 'to  plan and  carry out by artistic ar­
rangement or in a skillful way', comes closest to my  un­
derstanding of design. 

In defining a science of design Herbert Simon has sug­
gested  not only,  as mentioned, that 'the proper study of 
mankind is the science of design', but also that 'everyone 

9 This does not imply that I understand technical aspects of com­
puters, programs,  systems, data, information etc., as external  to 
the subject matter. Professional designers will need this kind of 
competence to be good designers. They will need it to be able to de­
sign according to technical possibilities and constraints. Many of 
them will also be good programmers. This is not very different 
from an architect's  knowledge of building techniques, materials 
etc. 
10 Websters New World Dictionary, 1982, p. 382. 

158 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing 
existing situations into preferred  ones.'11  Or a bit more 
elaborated: 

Engineering,  medicine,  business,  architecture,  and 
painting are concerned not with the necessary but with 
the contingent - not with how things are but with how 
they might be - in short, with design. The possibility of 
creating a science or sciences of  design is exactly  as 
great  as  the  possibility  of  creating  a  science  of  the 
artificial.12 

I will return to Simon's position in a later chapter. Here I 
will  only  remark  on  the  problem  of  knowing  what  a 
'preferred situation' is. Preferred by  whom? Under what 
social and historical conditions? Such questions — typically 
posed by the social and human sciences - have, I think, to 
be an integrated aspect of  a science of  design. Further­
more, why a science of the artificial? Why not of the prac­
tical,  of  changes  and  reforms  in  the  practice  of  using 
computer artifacts? Such  a position comes closer to my 
arguments in the  part on  Design  Philosophy, and  the 
foundation  for  a  science  of  design  suggested  by  Terry 
Winograd and Fernando Flores. In 'defining' design they 
argue that : 

it constitutes an intervention in the background of our 
heritage, growing out of  our already-existent  ways of 
being in  the world,  and deeply affecting the kinds of 
beings that we are. In creating new artifacts, equip­
ment, buildings, and  organizational structures, it at­
tempts  to specify  in  advance  how  and  where  break­
downs will show  up in our everyday practices and  in 
the tools we use, opening up  new spaces in which we 
can  work  and  play.  Ontologically  oriented  design  is 
therefore necessarily both reflective and political, look­
ing backwards to the tradition that has formed us but 
also forwards  to as-yet-uncreated  transformations of 

II Simon, op. cit., p. 54. 
12 Ibid., p. xi. 

From Systems  Design to  Design of  Computer Artifacts 

159 

our lives together. Through the emergence of new tools, 
we  come  to  a  changing awareness of  human  nature 
and human action, which in turn leads to new techno­
logical development. The designing process is part of 
this 'dance' in  which  our structure of  possibilities is 
generated.13 

Such a 'definition' of  design goes beyond  a rationalistic 
conception  of  design  restricted  to  methodology for  con­
scious design. As Winograd and Flores put it: 

We address the broader question  of how a society en­
genders inventions whose existence in turn alters that 
society.  We  need  to establish  a  theoretical  basis for 
looking at what the devices do, not just how they ope­
rate.14 

I agree with this position. As one of the consequences I see 
the need for two kinds of theories in a science of  design. 
We need instrumental  theory on  how to do design. This 
aspect is characteristic to design science as opposed  to 
natural, social and human sciences in general. But as in 
any other science we also need substantial  theory about 
the phenomenon of design, about e.g. what kind of social, 
historical, scientific, artistic, and technical activity design 
is.15  Especially,  we  need  approaches that integrate in­
strumental and substantial theories. 

Winograd  and Flores's 'definition' of  design is in line 

with the approaches discussed in the part on Design Phi­
losophy. In many way it constitutes the Heideggerian ap­
proach. In a similar way the Marxist and Wittgensteinian 
approaches have been developed by the architect Jerker 
Lundequist. 

Ibid., p. 163. 

14 Winograd, T. and Flores, P.: Understanding Computers and 
Cognition - a new  foundation  for design, Ablex, Norwood 1986, 
p. 4. 
16 The distinction is due to Bunge, M.: Scientific  Research. The 
Search for System. The Search  for Truth, Springer 1967, who 
talks about operational and substantial theories. 

160 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

In contributing to a general design theory  he defines 
design as a product determining process.16  There are, in 
society, social labor and  production  processes in  which 
commodities and services, or in general, artifacts are pro­
duced.  Before  realizing  or  constructing  these  products 
they have to be determined as to form, function, and in 
terms of economic and social consequences. This is done in 
the design  process. I agree with Lundequist, but  rather 
than  focusing  on  the  artifacts  themselves,  I  think  we 
should emphasize their use. And I also think that it should 
be stressed  that  the design  process  very  well  can  take 
place during the use of the artifacts, not just before. 

Lundequist  distinguishes  four  aspects  of  the  design 
process that ought to be studied and related, in an art and 
a science of design. They are design as:17 
•  an artistic and creative process; 
•  an information and decision-making  process; 
•  one of many societal planning processes; 
•  one of many socially determined labor processes. 
Pursuing this, he goes on to argue that design is a special 
form of knowledge production. In short: 

Design is an activity that arises in the intersection be­
tween politics and economy, art and technology.18 

And he concludes that in trying to develop general design 
theory we must start from  the following  two questions: 
What is a designer really doing ? What is really the skill of 
a  designer?19 The question of who  the designer  really is 
could have been added. What are different groups of peo­
ple doing in the process of designing computer artifacts? 
Which are their skills? Who are they? 

16  Lundeqvist, J.: Norm och Modell - samt  ytterligare några  be­
grepp  inom designteorin, Department of Architecture, Royal In­
stitute of Technology, Stockholm, 1982 (dissertation), p. 10. 
17 Ibid., p. 11. 
18 Ibid., p. 21. 
19 Ibid., p. 27. 

From Systems  Design to  Design of  Computer Artifacts 

161 

These questions relate to the understanding of practice 
discused in the previous part. The philosophical discussion 
also gave rise to the Wittgensteinian idea of  design as a 
language game,  to  be  played  as a language-game  with 
family resemblance to the language-games of  the users, 
and to a Marxist understanding of design as a social and 
historical labor  process characterized by  a fundamental 
division of labor. The division of labor lies between the ac­
tivities of planning and execution, in the sense that design 
interacts with and sets conditions for the process of  use. 
Furthermore the Heideggerian approach gave  rise to the 
idea of  design as a concerned activity, a process of inter­
pretation  and  breakdown,  and  anticipation  of  further 
breakdowns. I also concluded that the main dilemma or a 
fundamental characteristic of  design is the dialectics be­
tween tradition and transcendence. 

With the above 'definitions' as a background, I suggest, 

in summary, that design should  be understood as a con­
cerned social  and historical activity in which artifacts and 
their  use  are anticipated; an  activity and  form of  know­
ledge  that  is  both  planned  and  creative,  and  that  deals 
with  the  contradiction  between  tradition  and  trans­
cendence. 

So far I have tried to outline design without taking the 
specific artifacts and their use into account, i.e. design of 
computer artifacts. Hence it is high time to ask: How can 
we understand the changes anticipated in design of com­
puter artifacts and their use? 

Computer Artifacts 
Thinking of  computers and  their use  we  often  take for 
granted  ideas  from  the  domain  of  causal  events  in  a 
physical artifact or the domain of  computing in a logical 
artifact. The languages of systems and logic from natural 
science are used. Typically, we talk about logical aspects of 
software and  physical aspects of hardware. However, as 
pointed out above, the design and use of computers takes 
place in practical situations, in domains of concerned and 

162 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

conventional  human  activity.  I  take  the  position  that 
computers, in these domains, may be seen as the material 
or media from which we make artifacts. What is then an 
artifact? 

My  dictionary  'defines' artifacts as objects  made  by 
human work, especially  primitive  tools. In the Marxist 
approach discused in the previous part, it was pointed out 
that artifacts not only reflect social relations, but are social 
relations. According to the Heideggerian approach, use of 
artifacts (or rather of  'Zeug\ including the tools that we 
use as well as the clothes we wear and the houses we live 
in) was to be understood as fundamental to human exis­
tence. A carpenter's understanding of a hammer in ordi­
nary hammering is its use. Only in breakdown does the 
hammer as handle and  head become present-at-hand to 
him. 

Deliberately or not, in design of artifacts we design not 
only the artifacts but also conditions for their use. Hence, 
in design of artifacts the situation of the users and  their 
understanding of  it should  be anticipated and included, 
rather than seen as external to the design of the artifact. 

Now to some characteristics of artifacts understood as 

their use:20 

Artifacts can support both communicative and instru­
mental  activities. Artifacts  can mediate  our activity to­
wards other humans or towards 'objects'. A telephone or a 
book are examples of artifacts mediating communication; 
they  are  used  to  e.g.  coordinate  activities  in  time  and 
space. Language is important in this aspect. A hammer or 
an electric drill are  examples of  artifacts mediating in­
strumental activities: they can typically be used to refine 
'products'.  Human  work  is  important  in  this  aspect. 
However,  many  artifacts are designed  to  support  both 

20 These aspects are further developed with special reference to 
computer artifacts in B0dker, S.: Through the  Interface -A Hu­
man Activity Approach to User  Interface  Design, DAIMI  PB-224, 
Department of Computer Science, University of Aarhus, 1987 
(dissertation). 

From Systems  Design to Design of  Computer Artifacts 

163 

communicative  and  instrumental  activities.  Think,  for 
example, of a house. 

Another aspect of artifacts understood  as their  use is 

the degree and  character of  externalization of human ac­
tivity. An artifact can augment a human activity more or 
less. It can also replace it more or less. A telephone may 
augment the communicative side of a human activity. We 
can talk over a longer distance. A telephone answering 
machine may replace the communicative side of  the hu­
man activity of  taking a  message. Automatic dial num­
bers on a telephone may replace the instrumental side of 
the activity of calling another person. An electric drill may 
augment the activity of  drilling, whereas a drilling ma­
chine may  replace it. An assembly robot for automobiles 
may  replace  both  the communicative  and instrumental 
side of the activity of assembling. Degree and character of 
externalization are closely related to questions of skill and 
competence. 

Furthermore  artifacts  can  to  a  varying  degree  aug­
ment or replace individual  or cooperative human activi­
ties. For  a  hammer  the individual aspect  may be  most 
important. For a conference room the cooperative aspect 
may be in focus. Cooperative and communicative aspects 
of use of  artifacts are closely related to the questions of 
participation, decision-making and democracy. 

In the use of an artifact the users' activity is both aug­
mented and constrained by the artifact. On the one hand 
the artifact is concernfully and purposefully used, because 
it is thought of as something that can be useful to carry out 
the intention - like killing an animal, typing a letter or 
communicating an idea. On the other hand, in use the ar­
tifact also stands in the way of carrying out the intention. 
For what and how an artifact can be used depends on the 
material it is made out of. 

The  fundamental  characteristic  of  computers  as  the 
material or medium to design artifacts from, as opposed to 
e.g.  wood  or  clay, is that it has a  capacity  for  symbol 
manipulation. This  is what  is utilized  when computer 
artifacts are designed, even when we use them as e.g. a 

164 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

word  processor, a spreadsheet, a  mail handler, a coordi­
nator, etc. Alan Kay has put it this way: 

One feels the clay  of computing through  the 'user in­
terface': the software that mediates between a person 
and the programs shaping the computer into a tool for 
a specific goal, whether the goal is designing a bridge or 
writing an article. The user interface was once the last 
part of the system to be designed. Now it is the first.  It is 
recognized  as being primary because, to  novices and 
professionals alike, what is presented to one's senses is 
one's computer. 21 

This user  interface  of a computer artifact should  be un­
derstood in relation to intentions of the use activity. Hence, 
functionality of a computer artifact is a relation between 
the user and the artifact, something that is found in the 
use activity, not just a property of  the artifact. The user 
interface is both form  and function, in the sense that it 
from the user's point of view conditions not only how  but 
also  what  can  be  done  through  the  artifact.  The 
functionality  comprises  the remaining  possible  actions 
when the user's intentions have been constrained by the 
user interface. 

In designing computer artifacts emphasis should be on 
concernful  design  of  signs  that make sense  in the lan-
guage-game  of  use.  We  design signs to  be  used  as re­
minders of the user's earlier experiences, to speak in the 
Wittgensteinian language. The signs remind us of  what 
we can do with the artifact. They can remind  the user of 
earlier  use  of  the  artifact,  but  often  they  are  used 
metaphorically. A user interface of a computer artifact to 
be used for document preparation can remind the user of 
earlier use of this specific artifact, but it can also be de­
signed to remind  the user of  experiences from typewrit­
ing. Then metaphorical signs are used to create a family 

21  Kay, A.: 'Computer Software' in Scientific  American, vol 251, 
no 3, September 1984, p. 42. 

From Systems  Design to  Design of  Computer Artifacts 

165 

resemblance with the use of a typewriter in a well known 
language-game of document preparation. 

It may be true that in the beginning we understand all 
artifacts, not only computer artifacts, metaphorically, as 
something already familiar. However, computer artifacts 
are in  many  use situations  relatively  new  phenomena, 
and they are often redesigned. Hence, a stable use tradi­
tion, in which  the computer  artifact has a  conventional 
meaning, frequently  does not exist. To  design computer 
artifacts  metaphorically,  as  something  new  but  with 
family resemblance with something well known, becomes 
a way of avoiding breakdowns for the user. 

However, the sign aspect is far from the only aspect of 
importance in designing computer artifacts. As with other 
artifacts we may e.g. be interested in:22 
•  physical aspects 
•  handling aspects, i.e. conditions for operating or con­

trolling the artifact 

•  subject I object directed aspects i.e. conditions for activi­

ties towards 'objects' or with 'others' via the artifact 

•  ergonomie aspects 
•  aesthetic aspects. 

In summary I have suggested that in designing artifacts 
we  should  consider  them  as  mediating  instrumental 
and/or communicative activities; as supporting individual 
and/or  cooperative activities; as augmenting  and/or  re­
placing human activities; as function and form  that are 
irrevocably interconnected 

All  these characteristics apply  to computer artifacts. 
However  they  are  based  on  a  material  or  medium -
computers  having  a  specific  capacity  for  symbol 
manipulation - that can be shaped quite flexibly with re­
gard  to the different activities and  aspects summarized 
above. Thus, a special characteristic of computer artifacts 

22 For a human activity approach to the physical, handling, and 
subject/object directed aspects of computer artifacts, see B0dker 
op. cit. 

166 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

seems to be the kind of reminders they can be designed to 
be. These reminders may be in the tradition of the use of 
artifacts in a specific use activity, or they may transcend 
it 

In any case, a computer artifact is fundamentally what 
it is to the user in practical use and understanding, not 
what we find in detached reflection about its properties. If 
we focus on computers as their use, they must  primarily 
to be understood as practical artifacts that are designed 
for and used in practice, not as objects that are related in a 
system. It is this practice that we must understand.23 

I will  now turn to some characteristics of  how we de­

sign artifacts. 

Norms, Rules and Design Artifacts 
The means we  apply in design typically go  under names 
such as methods, models,  descriptions,  prototypes,  mock-
ups and the like. Earlier I referred to some 'definitions' of 
these means in design of computer artifacts. 

To Mathiassen methods may be characterized by prin­

ciples for how to do systems development, including tools, 
techniques,  and  principles  of  organization  of  the labor 
process.  Methods are  based on an understanding of  the 
functions of systems development. But there is a relation 
between methods and models too: 'a method may be seen 
as a model for a subset of system development processes'.24 
Mathiassen also sees descriptions as import ant sub-func­
tions of  investigation, communication,  construction  and 
change.  Descriptions  are  both  used  in  communication 
about changes, and as complete formal descriptions in a 
programming language to be automatically executed by a 
computer. 

To  Goldkuhl  a  methodology  consists  of  concepts 
(definitions); division into  problem  areas; method steps 

23 In chapter 17 on The 'Toolness' of Computer  Artifacts the 
arguments in this section will be further developed. 
24 Mathiassen, op. cit., p. 99. 

From Systems  Design to  Design of  Computer Artifacts 

167 

and their order  and content; description  techniques. In­
formation models are made  according to certain rules of 
description  techniques. The  design  process can  also  be 
guided by certain method  rules (i.e. prescriptions for ac­
tion). 

Below, I will reinterpret these means used in design as 
norms, rules , and design artifacts in a language closer to 
that in the part on Design Philosophy. 

In design of computer artifacts methods are typically 
understood as some kind of prescriptions (based on theory 
and/or practical experiences) of how to conduct some as­
pect of  the design  process. They prescribe how to think 
about design and computer artifacts, how to organize the 
design work, which tools and techniques to use, etc. In the 
Wittgensteinian approach, the methods in design may be 
understood  as  norms or rules  governing  specific  lan­
guage-games of design.25 

In  suggesting that  methods  are  norms  and  rules,  I 
think of  how they are used in practice. I think of  norms 
and  rules that professional designers follow,  and some­
times  transcend,  often  without  being  aware  of  them. 
Methodological prescriptions are explicit rules that can be 
used in learning a practice or reflecting about it, but they 
are not to be  mistaken for actual rule following in a lan-
guage-game. To master the norms and rules of design in 
practice  also  requires learning by  examples  passed  on 
from more experienced designers and users, since there is 
more  to  design  than  can  be  captured  as  propositional 
knowledge.26 

Norms and  rules on  how to manage and control a de­

sign activity as an organizational arrangement typically 
take the form of project administration. These norms and 
rules include who the actors in design ought to be, their 
relations and  commitments, and  most importantly, how 
the design process is to be managed and controlled. Man­

25 This has been suggested by Lundequist, op. cit. 
26 This is further developed in chapter 18, Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 

168 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

agement and control concerns distribution of  resources, 
coordination of activities, handling of practical deadlines, 
etc. Norms and rules for project administration are basi­
cally a subject matter of business administration, but have 
also  been developed  with special  reference  to design  of 
computer artifacts.27 

However,  one  of  the  problems  in  understanding the 
language game of design as a project to be administrated, 
is that we tend to have historically and technologically too 
specific types of projects in mind. There is the risk of only 
taking as  paradigm cases design  projects like: develop­
ment of  new  large administrative computer  based sys­
tems, with a special design organization distinct from the 
use organization, using more or less formal techniques for 
program specification and testing, and  third generation 
programming languages. 

Factors that may change this view of the design process 
include new  programming environments like application 
generators, explorative programming, prototyping, adap­
tion of standard software rather than development of new 
systems, new domains of application, etc. Projects may be 
carried out as individual activities, as part of and within 
the use activity, as redesign of existing artifacts and their 
use, etc. No matter which form the design process takes, 
design is an intervention in the practice of  ordinary use 
activities, an intervention based on norms and rules in a 
social, historical, and technological setting.28 

Now to descriptions, models, prototypes, etc. I call these 
means design  artifacts. My  interactive computer-based 
thesaurus defines 'artificial' as: 

27  A good practice based example is Andersen, N.E. et. al.: Pro­
fessioneI  Systemudvikling, Teknisk Forlag, Copenhagen 1986. 
28  I will not discuss aspects of management, control and planning 
of design any further in this part, but return to the subject in the 
part on  Designing  for  Democracy at Work. Here my emphasis will 
be on design as a creative process and the design artifacts we use 
to this end in design. 

From Systems  Design to  Design of  Computer Artifacts 

169 

•  taking the  place  of  something else  and  especially of 

something finer  or more costly 

•  lacking in spontaneity and genuineness 
•  formed or developed  by human art, skill, or effort and 

not by natural processes 

•  typical synonyms are: affected, assumed, dummy,  er­

satz, factitious, false, feigned, imitation,  man-made, 
mock, sham, simulated, spurious, substitute. 

I regard the above as a good characteristic of what design 
artifacts are. The role of design artifacts in the language-
game of design is as reminders and as paradigm cases for 
our reflections on existing and future computer artifacts 
and their use.29 The use of design artifacts brings earlier 
experiences to our mind and it bends' our way of thinking 
about the future. I think it is in this sense we should un­
derstand them as re-presentations.30 

I see descriptions or models as design artifacts to objec­
tify experiences, visions, and ideas relevant for communi­
cation in the design process. This may be communication 
between designers, between users, or between designers 
and  users. Typically  they  are  textual  or  graphical  re­
minders. They have names like data or information flow 
diagrams, descriptions of  existing and  future labor  pro­
cesses, models of computer system architecture, informa­
tion  system  models,  program  specifications  etc.  These 
kind of artifacts support reflection. 

Another  category  of  design  artifacts  is  prototypes, 
mock-ups, scenarios  with  role  playing, etc. They  differ 
from descriptions and models in the sense that they also 
allow for involved practical experience, not just detached 
reflections. Since these kind of artifacts support both de­
tached  reflection and  involved  experience,  they can  be 
used as reminders or paradigm cases, not only of proposi-

29 See chapter 4, Language-Games -A Wittgensteinian Approach 
for a further discussion. 
30 This has been suggested by Kaasb0ll, J.: A Theoretical and Em­
pirical  Study of  the Use of  Language and  Computers, Department 
of Informatics, University of Oslo, forthcoming (dissertation). 

170 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

tional  knowledge  but  also  of  practical  understanding. 
They give better support to the ideal of design to be played 
as  a language-game  with family  resemblance  with  the 
users' ordinary language-games. 

However, textual and graphical reminders may also be 
used beyond  detached  reflection. A good  example is the 
design artifacts called  maps. Maps are intended  for  re-
flection-in-action, on-the-spot diagnoses of  what is hap­
pening in a design situation. With reference to theory of 
action31 Lanzara and Mathiassen32 have developed design 
artifacts as means for active intervention in design situa­
tions themselves, as well as in the use situation designed 
for.33 

Often, but far from always, the material or medium out 
of which we make design  artifacts is computers. This is 
for instance the situation in prototyping. Hence, the design 
artifact is made out of the same material as the computer 
artifact that we are designing. I have heard the argument 
that this is what is specific about design of computer arti­
facts, as opposed to e.g. architectural design. However, no 
matter how efficient the code in the prototype is, a piece of 
correct code is not the same thing as the final  computer 
artifact. The computer artifact should be understood as its 
use. Hence, as long as the design situation does not entirely 
overlap the use situation, the design artifact is not identi­
cal with the anticipated computer artifact. 

31  Argyris, C. and Schön, D.A.: Organizational  Learning: A The­
ory of  Action Perspective, Addison-Wesley, Reading 1978. 
32 Lanzara, G.F.  and Mathiassen,  L.: 'Mapping Situations Within 
a System Development Project' in Information & Management 
8,1985. 
33 The design artifacts discussed by Lanzara and Mathiassen are 
diagnostic maps, ecological  maps, virtual  maps and historical 
maps. 

From Systems Design  to Design  of Computer Artifacts 

171 

Summary 
In this chapter  I have outlined some fundamental char­
acteristics of designing computer artifacts.34 I have tried 
to do this in a language closer to the philosophical positions 
argued  in  the  preceding  part  than  the often  taken for 
granted rationalistic understanding of  what design is all 
about. 

I  have  argued  that  we  should  understand  design  of 
computer  artifacts as a concerned social, historical, cre­
ative, and planned activity in which we try to anticipate 
computer artifacts and their use. 

I have chosen to regard computers as the material or 
medium out of which computer artifacts can be designed. 
When designing computer  artifacts we  utilize the capa­
city for symbol manipulation in this material, in order to 
design them as signs that remind the users of earlier ex­
periences.  Use  is emphasized  in my 'definition'  of com­
puter artifacts. Design concerns the practical rather than 
the artificial. What we design is not primarily artifacts, 
but a changed or reformed practice. 

I have used concepts such as norms or rules and design 
artifacts  (reminders  or  paradigm  cases)  rather  than 
methods, descriptions and models, to avoid the rationalist 
conception of design that such concepts come from. How­
ever, in the following chapters I will often use the 'old' 
terms to  avoid  too strange a language, even though the 
intended meaning will be the 'new* one. 

I have also suggested that in the search for a science of 

design of  computer artifacts  we should  look for  instru­
mental theories proposing design norms or rules to be fol­
lowed, and for substantive  theories giving better under­
standing of what we do in design of computer artifacts. 

I do not think that the position taken here on what de­

sign of computer artifact is all about, is very different from 
the positions of  Mathiassen and Goldkuhl, referred  ear-

34 Most of them will be further developed in the part on Designing 
for Skill. 

172 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

lier. But by discussing the language-games of systems de­
sign and system design methods in a language free from 
systems, data, information models, and  methods, an un­
derstanding is offered that transcends the Cartesian ra­
tionalistic conception of what design is all about. 

With the above discussed concepts, and those from the 
more philosophical  part on design philosophy, I will now 
take a closer look at some of the candidates for forming a 
basic program for the art and science of designing com­
puter artifacts, and a curriculum for its study. Such pro­
grams and a curriculum for its study already exist in the 
rationalistic tradition. Hence I start out with a critical note 
on the rationalistic foundation of the science of design of 
the artificial by Herbert Simon. 

Chapter  7 
'The Science of Design' —  A Note 
on Herbert Simon's Program 

In a famous lecture at M.I.T. in 1968, Noble Prize winner 
Herbert A. Simon outlined a program for a science of de­
sign,  and  a  curriculum  for  training  of  professional 
designers. He did this with engineering as an example, but 
argued that it was just as relevant for e.g.  management 
science or computer science, fields  from which he himself 
had experience. In fact he argued that1 

everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed 
at changing existing situations into preferred ones. (...) 
Schools of engineering, as well as schools of architec­
ture, business, education, law,  and  medicine,  are all 
centrally concerned with the process of design. 

In a  broader  perspective  he concluded,  as earlier  men­
tioned, that2 

the proper study of mankind is the science of design, not 
only as the professional component of  a technical edu­
cation but as a core discipline  for every liberally edu­
cated man. 

Simon based this latter statement on his experiences from 
having lived close to the development of the modern com­
puter  and  the growing  communication  among intellec­
tual disciplines  taking place  around  the computer. The 

1  Simon, H.: The  Sciences of  the Artificial, The  MIT Press,  Cam­
bridge 1969, pp. 55. 
2 Ibid., p. 83. 

174 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

ability to  communicate across fields  does not come from 
the computer as such, he argues, but from the need to *be 
explicit, as never before, about what is involved in creating 
a design and what takes place while the creation is going 
on.'3 With the philosophical investigations in the previous 
part as background; some skepticism towards this inter­
pretation should  be  recommended. What kind of  design 
knowledge  can  be  communicated  by  being  explicit  as 
never before? Is thiäj really the essence of the language-
games of design? 

However,  his  theory  for,  and  curriculum  in,  design 
should indeed be most relevant to discuss in the context of 
designing computer artifacts. After all, computer science 
and  management science  are  two  disciplines  which  he 
has a great deal  of  experience with, and they both deal 
with our subject matter. Furthermore, few scientists have 
been as influential in our field as he has. 

Before looking at his program, let us see how he poses 
the  problem.  It  may  sound  paradoxical  that  he  is 
proposing that something is wrong with the natural sci­
ence based education in the design disciplines. He observes 
that in order to gain academic respectability e.g.: 

engineering schools have become schools of physics and 
mathematics; medical  schools have become schools of 
biological science; business schools have become schools 
of finite  mathematics.  The  use  of  adjectives  like 
'applied' conceals, but does not change, the fact.4 

He argues that this way of acquiring a scientific subject 
matter has moved the design disciplines away from their 
real subject - design of the artificial. Simon takes the po­
sition that what was traditionally known about design was 
'intellectually soft, intuitive, informal, and  cookbooky'5, 
and that this is scientifically unsatisfactory. However, at 
the same time he claims that design of the artificial is re­

3 Ibid., p. 83. 
4 Ibid., p. 56. 
5  Ibid., p. 57. 

'The  Science  of  Design' 

175 

ally what  most professions are about. Thus it cannot be 
replaced by mathematics, physics etc. This understanding 
of  a  fundamental  dilemma  for  design  sciences  is  an 
important observation by Simon. 

The alternative that Simon suggests is a science of de­
sign of the artificial, a genuine science of its own. His ele­
gant solution is to pose the problem of design of the artifi­
cial in such  a  way that we can  apply methods of  logic, 
mathematics, statistics etc., just as we do in the natural 
sciences. Let us proceed to the scientific alternative to the 
traditional 'cookbook/  knowledge about design - to the 
science of Herbert A. Simon. 

The Program for a Rationalistic 
Science of Design 

The proper study of those who are concerned with the 
artificial  is  the  way  in  which  adaption  of  means  to 
environments is brought about - and central to that is 
the process of design.6 

Such a science of design of the artificial did, according to 
Simon,  already  exist  in  the  late  sixties,  'particularly 
through  programs in computer science and 'systems en­
gineering".7  Management  science  was  also  included 
among the systems or design sciences that had started to 
develop 'a body  of  intellectually  tough, analytic, partly 
formalizable,  partly empirical,  teachable doctrine about 
the design process.'8 

To Simon the natural sciences are concerned with how 
things are, whereas design is concerned with how things 
ought to be —  we devise artifacts to attain goals. However, 
Simon sees no need for a  new logic to deal with the nor­
mative character of design. The problem of design can be 

6 Ibid., p. 58. 
7 Ibid., p. 58. 
» Ibid., p. 58. 

176 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

reduced to declarative logic. We can, according to Simon, 
achieve this by: 

1. Utility theory and statistical decision theory -a logical 
framework  for rational  choice among  given alternatives.9 
This is the field of optimization methods, and the first  topic 
in Simon's curriculum in design. In a design there exists a 
set of alternative actions, command  variables. The envi­
ronment which we design in can be represented by a set of 
fixed  parameters and  perhaps a number  of constraints. 
Command variables are linked to the given constraints by 
a utility function. 

The optimization problem is to find an admissible set of 
values of  the command variables, compatible with the 
constraints, that maximize the utility function for the 
given values of the environmental parameters. (In the 
probabilistic  case,  we  might  say, 'maximize  the  ex­
pected value of the utility function,' for instance, instead 
of 'maximize the utility function.')10 

When a design problem is formalized in  this way, 'it is 
evident that the logic  used to deduce  the answer  is the 
standard logic of the predicate calculus on which mathe­
matics rests.'11 According to Simon no special logic of im­
peratives is needed  because we are dealing with sets of 
possible worlds — the worlds that meet the constraints in 
the environment and maximize the utility function. 

We  simply  ask  what  values  the  command  variables 
would have in a world meeting all these conditions and 
conclude that these are the values the command vari­
ables should have.12 

Simon's approach is an elegant way of dealing with  the 
normative  character  of  design,  but far  from  useful for 

9 Ibid., p. 62. 
i® Ibid., p. 60. 
11 Ibid., p. 62. 
12 Ibid. p. 62. 

'The  Science  of  Design' 

177 

most  situations  of  design  for  concerned  human  use  of 
computer artifacts. In design, designers typically do not 
know the alternatives - that is what they have to find out 
about.  Furthermore,  in  design  many  groups  with  dif­
ferent and often conflicting interests participate. They will 
typically neither agree on constraints nor a relevant util­
ity function. Besides, if we accept that there is more to de­
sign knowledge than detached reflection over what can be 
formally described (as the philosophical inquiry has sug­
gested), then a great deal of knowledge relevant to design 
is excluded by this way of representing a design situation. 

However, Simon also saw problems for the rationalistic 

approach,  e.g.  that finding the optimum is a computa­
tional problem. Even  if  we can easily define  an optimal 
strategy the computations required may be astronomical 
and even beyond  the capacity  of  prospective computers. 
Hence, a curriculum in the science  of design should in­
clude: 

2. The body of of techniques  for actually deducing which of 
the available alternatives is the optimum.13 
What Simon  has in mind is linear programming theory, 
dynamic  programming,  geometric  programming,  queu­
ing theory, control theory, etc. 

But  rationalistic  reasoning  logically  faces  another 
practical problem. It requires full knowledge of the outer-
world  being investigated. This is  impossible, since  in a 
given practical situation we cannot anticipate all future 
consequences. We are forced to operate with what Simon 
called 'satisficing' solutions and Taounded rationality'. 

We satisfice by looking for alternatives in such a way 
that we can generally find an acceptable one after only 
moderate search.14 

As designers we have to search an enormously extensive 
problem space for combinations of  given  elements that 

13 Ibid. p. 62. 
« Ibid., p. 65. 

178 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

give a satisfactory solution to the problem. To this end we 
can use heuristic problem solving  methods. By  dividing 
the search into steps, directions of further search can be 
based  on  the  information  gained  from  earlier  steps -
design becomes a process of learning and adaption in a 
given  but  not  completely  known  problem  space.  The 
problem is of course which steps - how to 'factorize' the 
problem space. To Simon, as well, this 'factorization' is a 
problem from the point of view of logic' in the design pro­
cess. 

However, more unsatisfactory from my point of view is 

the still implied reduction of the design process to indivi­
duals  making  rational  decisions,  hiding  which  people 
participate in the design process or are affected, what they 
know, what different interests they may have, etc. This 
cannot be understood with the (bounded) rationalistic ap­
proach, no matter how successfully it deals with heuristics 
or satifìcing problem solving methods. 

The formal logic of design and  the search for alterna­

tives, are matters Simon develops further into three more 
topics  in  his  curriculum  of  design.  I  will  not  comment 
upon them here, but add them for completeness. They are: 

3. Adaption of standard logic to the search  for alterna­
tives.15 

4. The exploitation of parallel, or near-parallel,  factoriza­
tions of differences.16 

5. The allocation of search resources to alternative partly 
explored action  sequences.17 

is ibid., p. 69. 
" Ibid., p. 69. 
" Ibid., p. 69. 

'The  Science  of  Design' 

179 

Now to Simon's view of hierarchical systems and the topic 
of: 

6. The organization of complex structures and its impli­
cation for the organization of the design process.18 
Simon's systems engineering approach is so well  known 
that it is often taken for the systems approach, though we 
know that there are many alternatives. The basic idea is 
that in  design of  the artificial we  often design  complex 
systems. A complex system is 'made up by a large number 
of  parts that interact in a nonsimple way.'19  A complex 
system can  be biological, social,  physical etc. To design 
complex systems we have to understand them as a hier­
archy of levels, or as boxes-within-boxes down to the low­
est level  of subsystems. The 'inner environment' of  the 
whole system as well as of the different subsystems may 
be defined by describing the different systems' functions 
without detailed  specification of  the sub  mechanisms in 
them. As a flying system, a  bird  and an aeroplane  may 
have the same functionality independent of their different 
inner structures and processes, Simon argues. 

According to Simon, the method we can apply in design 

of complex systems is 

to discover viable ways of decomposing it into semi-in­
dependent  components  corresponding  to  its  many 
functional  parts. The  design  of  each  component  can 
then be carried out with some degree of independence 
of the design of others, since each will affect the others 
largely through its function and independently of  the 
details of  the  mechanisms that accomplish  the func­
tion.20 

However, decomposition can be performed in many ways, 
including the question of how to organize the design pro­
cess - the precedence and sequence  of steps to  take. To 

i» Ibid., p. 76 
19 Ibid., p. 86. 
20 Ibid., p. 73. 

180 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

this end Simon saw a need for new principles to be deve­
loped and included in a theory of design. 

This  systems  approach  has  had  a  major  influence 
theoretically as well as practically on 'systems design' in 
the design of computer artifacts.21 

I have no intention of arguing against the power of this 
systems  approach for controlling  complex  hierarchies, 
whether they are design projects or computer-based sys­
tems. However, I will argue, referring to our philosophical 
inquiry, that this is not primarily how professionals design 
in areas which they really understand. Actually, an un­
derstanding  of  a  design  situation  as  decomposition  of 
complex systems may destroy their creative competence. 
Furthermore, from  my  point  of  view  there is a  big dif­
ference between applying a systems perspective to arti­
facts like computers and to social and concerned human 
use of these artifacts. This leads me over to the question of 
representation of systems in design and Simon's last topic. 

7.  Alternative representations  for design problems.22 
Simon is much more humble in proposing solutions when 
it comes  to representations, though he finds  it a  central 
topic of design. Actually, he poses the problem pretty close 
to the non-rationalistic seeing as that was proposed in the 
Wittgensteinian approach. Nevertheless, the fundamen­
tal difference is that to Simon the problem is given and a 
new representation is only a question of making it trans­
parent. There is no doubt that Simon saw the possibilities 
of a rationalistic scientific theory in this domain as well, at 
least as a theory of  properties of  representations. Espe­
cially  in  theories  of  machines  and  programming  lan­
guages he saw the basis for a  theory of  representations. 

21  Good examples of theoretical approaches are Langefors, B.: 
Theoretical  Analysis of  Information  Systems, Studentlitteratur, 
Lund 1973, Lundeberg, M.:  Some Propositions Concerning Ana­
lysis and  Design ofinformation Systems, TRITA-IBADB-4080, 
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1976 (dissertation). 
22 Simon, op. cit., p. 79. 

'The  Science  of  Design' 

181 

This  rationalistic  view  takes  us  far  away  from  the 
Wittgensteinian notion of language-games. 

To sum up: The propositions from Herbert Simon's sci­
ence  of  design  of  the  artificial  are  that computers  are 
complex  hierarchical systems, as are  the users and  the 
use organizations, and as is the design process - together 
they are subsystems of a bigger system, and we can define 
their various functionalities separately. In designing these 
systems we  can  use  many scientific  methods (based  on 
theory  in  formal  logic,  mathematics  and  statistics) for 
evaluation of designs and in the search for alternatives. 

However, to do this it seems that we  have to assume 
that design is a process of problem-solving by individuals 
making decisions among sets of possible worlds. It may be 
that this transforms the question of design into the ratio­
nalistic scientific vein, but at the same time most essential 
aspects of design are lost. I am thinking of the creativity of 
professional designers and users that cannot be reduced to 
formalized decision-making. I am also thinking of the so­
cial and  historical character of  the design process — the 
conflicting interests, the differences in skill, experiences 
and professional languages. Given such aspects, but little 
in the science of design of the artificial seems useful in or­
ganizing the design process, and in developing reminders, 
paradigm cases, etc., in the design process. 

About computer artifacts, the science of design of  the 

artificial, informs us that computers are systems 

of  elementary functional  components  in  which,  to  a 
high approximation, only  the function  performed  by 
those  components is relevant  to  the  behavior  of  the 
whole system.23 

Scientifically they can be studied both as abstract objects 
by  mathematical theory and as objects  in an empirical 
science of the behavior of computers as complex systems. 
At the same time the computer artifact is also seen 'as a 
tool for achieving a deeper understanding of  human be-

23 Ibid., p. 18. 

182 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

havior.'24 This is argued because of its similarity in orga­
nization of components with the 'most  interesting of  all 
artificial systems, the human mind'.25 

The science of design of the artificial leads us in the di­
rection of  what we today know as the discipline of artifi­
cial intelligence. And even though computer artifacts are 
in the center of  most of Simon's examples of a science of 
design of the artificial, we are not told how to design com­
puter artifacts that can  be skillfully used  by concerned 
users. 

No  matter how  'intellectually  tough, analytic,  partly 
formalizable, partly empirical, teachable [a] doctrine about 
the design process'26 Herbert Simon's rationalistic science 
of design of the artificial is, it answers very few questions 
about the design of  computer artifacts as I have formu­
lated the inquiry. We are forced  to question Simon's ar­
gument that since we have explicit knowledge of the de­
sign  process in computer  programs  running optimizing 
algorithms, search procedures, etc., there is no need to re­
treat to 'the cloak of  'judgment' or 'experience".27 Yet the 
practical understanding that we cannot formally describe 
and put into the computer may well be the most essential 
experience and  judgement in  professional design.  In his 
rationalistic perspective Simon has very little to suggest on 
principles for organizing the design process, and on theory 
of descriptions. Is it more than a coincidence that exactly 
these questions are seen as the most crucial ones, when 
attempting to understand the subject matter of design of 
computer artifacts that I have outlined? 

In the search for an art and a science of design of com­
puter artifacts and a teachable doctrine about it we will 
have to look for further alternatives about what  profes­
sional designers should do and know. Are  there alterna­

24 Ibid., p. 22. 
2® Ibid., p. 22. 
26 Ibid., p. 58. 
27 Ibid., p. 80. 

'The  Science  of  Design' 

183 

tives to rationalistic 'systems engineering* to be included 
in our own curriculum? 

Chapter 8 
Other Ways of Seeing and Doing I — 
Internal Alternatives 

In this chapter I will discuss 'internal alternatives' to be 
used as paradigm cases for an art and science of designing 
computer  artifacts.  I  call  them  internal  because  they 
either emanate from  within  computer  and  information 
science, or  are more concerned  with the development  of 
systems thinking than with taking a non-systems view. 

My first  examples  are  social  system  design  methods 
like  those  proposed  by  C.  West  Churchman,  Russel  L. 
Ackoff and Peter B. Checkland. 

The next example is a new  foundation  for  design pro­
posed  by  computer  scientists like Terry  Winograd  and 
philosophers like Hubert Dreyfus. 

My last example of internal alternatives is a changing 
paradigm —  from  product-orientation  to  process-orienta-
tion - within software engineering, as outlined by Chris­
tiane Floyd. I will  especially stress the new  potential  for 
design in the use of  prototyping software. 

Social System Design Methods 
My first  alternative approaches to Simon's systems engi­
neering I have called social systems design methods, and I 
have labeled them as internal alternatives. By this I indi­
cate  that  they  have  their  origins  in  natural  science, 
mathematics and  logic oriented environments like oper­
ations research and systems analysis. They still argue the 
importance of  systems thinking as detached  rationality, 

Other Ways of Seeing and Doing I 

185 

but counter in many respects the view  of Simon on the 
role of subjectivity in social systems design.1 

The Systems Approach 
The Systems Approach2 and Design of  Inquiring Systems3 
by  C.  West  Churchman  is a  challenging  alternative to 
systems engineering. The  philosophical  richness of  the 
alternative is beyond what can  be summarized  here - it 
grasps almost the entire history of  modern western phi­
losophy. 

To Churchman a designer is engaged in detached  re­
flection  over the possibilities for  developing and imple­
menting good systems. In this he is guided by the systems 
approach. This is a  special development  of  ideas from 
American  pragmatism,  especially  Churchman's  philo­
sophical mentor E. A. Singer. The systems approach is a 
methodology the designer can apply. When the designer 
sees something as related components in a system he does 
this for pragmatic reasons — there is a purpose to the sys­
tem. This purpose is the purpose of  the client. Who the 
client is, is not given. To find out is part of the inquiry. If 
the purpose of  the system changes, the designer has cho­
sen another client. It is also part of the inquiry to find the 

1  For the arguments in this section I am very much indebted to a 
dialectical debate in Journal of Applied  System Analysis, vol 9, 
1982 and vol 10,1983. The debate was initiated by Michael C. 
Jackson and addressed The  nature of 'soft'  systems thinking by C. 
West Churchman,  Russel L. Ackoff, and Peter B.  Checkland. It 
should be clear that I share with Jackson admiration for their 
methodological contributions to design, as well as criticism from 
a social theory point of view of their idealism. Later in the part on 
Designing  for  Democracy at Work  I will make it clear how this 
position has guided my practical actions research work  with 
trade unions since 1974. 
2  Churchman, C. W.: The  Systems Approach, Delta,  New York 
1968. 
3  Churchman, C.W.: The  Design of  Inquiring  Systems-basic 
concepts of  systems and  organization, Basic Books, New York 
1971. 

186 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

decision-maker. Like the client, the decision-maker is also 
a user of the system; he controls the resources of the sys­
tem. The environment of the system is what is of impor­
tance, but beyond  the control of  the decision-maker.  In 
designing systems the designer  also needs a  measure  of 
performance. Otherwise there is  no  way to express  im­
provement - that some  situation  appears  to  be  clearly 
better than it was before. Ideally this is improvement of 
human conditions. 

But who really does apply the systems approach? Not 
the ordinary  designer, the one we  know as a  consultant 
who accepts the goals of the system as given by the deci­
sion-maker, without reflecting about  whether these are 
the right purposes, taking the right clients into account, or 
the right decision-maker, etc. Nor is it the objective plan­
ner, the designer who tries to model the system objectively 
and simulate possible implementations. Only the ideal de­
signer, the one that derives objectives and goals from 

the ethics of  the systems approach, where a dialectic 
will emerge between the ideal of human well-being and 
the ideal that no one be forced to lead a life that others 
choose for  him. In the first  ideal, experts play an im­
portant role; especially  those who perceive the larger 
system; in the second, everyone is an expert.4 

In the ideal situation the designer, client and  decision­
maker are the same group or person. 

As I understand  the systems approach applied to the 
processes of designing computer artifacts and their use, it 
is a  humanistic ethical ideal. Churchman's humanistic 
designer does  not, as Simon's  scientific designer, solve 
given problems, but tries first to identify the problems to be 
solved in the interest of humanity. In ordinary practice of 
design  most of the crucial aspects of  the system may be 
given, but should be challenged. To this end the systems 
approach can be instrumental. How far from Simon's ap­

4  Churchman C.W.: The  Systems Approach and  its Enemies, 
Basic Books, New York 1979, p. 94. 

Other Ways of Seeing and Doing I 

187 

proach this takes us may be illustrated  by the following 
reflections in a recent paper by Churchman. 

Over the years I've asked  my students to look at vari­
ous systems, and among other things, to use their own 
ethical intuitions  and  judgement to decide  whom  the 
system is serving and whom the system should serve. 
With one exception among hundreds of such systems 
studies, the students judged that these two classes are 
different, often seriously different. In other words, the 
systems being studied served the ethically wrong client. 
From the point of view of the systems designer, this is 
another shocking result. What's the point of designing 
a system  by  an elaborate  model and impeccably  col­
lected information in order to maximize a performance 
measure which serves the wrong people?5 

Another difference compared with Simon's systems engi­
neering approach is the view of objectivity in descriptions. 
Instead of transforming the normative ought into the sci­
entific is of  mathematics and logic, Churchman suggests 
that the is is always an ought. It is a social convention. The 
meaning of the description "X is F is 'the object observed is 
to be  taken as having the  property P plus or  minus ep­
silon.'  6 As a consequence the quality of a description de­
pends on  how different views it captures. Objectivity is 
gained  by  representation  of  as different  and  divergent 
views as possible from  subjects with different interests, 
background, etc.7 

As a remarkable blend of mathematical and logic pro­
fessionalism,  philosophical  wisdom, and  religious spirit 

5 Churchman C.W. 'Who Should Be the Client of Systems 
Design', IIASA  International roundtable  on The  Art and  Science 
of  Systems Practice, IIASA, November 1986. 
6 Churchman, 1971, op. cit., p.  202. 
7 This idea is developed in Ivanov, K.: Quality Control ofinfor­
mation, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1972, (disserta­
tion). 

188 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

Churchman's  systems  approach  is  certainly  a  serious 
humanistic alternative in design. As such it is a clear can­
didate to appear in the curriculum for design of computer 
artifacts. And at many institutes this is already the case. 

However, given the way I have 'defined' design, I must 

have critical comments on this approach, as well. 

To a great extent the design process is reduced to in­

quiring and detached reflection by the designer. Users as 
clients and decision-makers are certainly involved, but it 
is the designer that, via reflection, identifies and describes 
the problems. Hence, he tends to neglect the non-explicit, 
practical understanding of the clients in the design pro­
cess. How much creativity is wasted in this way? In terms 
of the philosophical inquiry in the previous part Church­
man's designer  only considers  what is present-at-hand, 
while the ready-to-hand practice of skillful users must be 
neglected. The systems  approach works in the world  of 
ideas with  breakdown and  transcendence, but  not  with 
practice and understanding. 

Certainly Churchman's designer learns from  experi­

ence,  but  in  his idealistic conception  of  design  (deeply 
rooted in the history of ideas) he foresees the social history 
of the labor process to be redesigned. Though humanistic 
in spirit, the systems approach provides no means for un­
derstanding the social and historical conditions for eman­
cipatory design. Hence, in  practice it  may foster heroic 
designers to whom no one listens, as well as narrow goal 
oriented  designers that follow  the methodology  instru-
mentally, but leave the humanistic ethics behind. Socially, 
both are tragic results of a great idea. 

Participation and Consensus 
Another  of  the  pragmatist  philosopher  E.  A.  Singer's 
disciples who has had a major influence on social systems 
thinking in operations research is Russell L.  Ackoff. As 
with Churchman, he includes subjectivity in objectivity. 
But whereas Churchman is basically interested in ideas, 
Ackoff argues the crucial role of participation. To him ob-

Other Ways of Seeing  and Doing I 

189 

jectivity in design 'is the social product of the open inter­
action of a wide variety of individual subjectives'.8 Ideally 
the design process involves as participants all those who 
can be directly  affected  by the system, its stakeholders. 
AckofFs designer does  not like  a doctor identify or solve 
organizational messes by diagnoses, or prescriptions. He 

is more like a  teacher than a doctor. Teachers know 
they  cannot  learn  for  their students; students  must 
learn for themselves. But teachers can enable students 
to learn more, and more rapidly, than they can without 
the teachers' help.9 

The  designer  is someone  that  through  encouragement 
and facilitation enables the participants and stakeholders 
to deal more effectively with their organizational messes. 
Successful participation, according to Ackoff,  requires 

that 
•  it makes a difference for the stakeholders to participate, 
•  participation is fun, and 
•  implementation of the results are likely. 
The first  point  requires equal  voice in decision-making, 
that decisions are based on consensus, and that it can be 
understood how consensus  will be sought and how deci­
sions will be made if this is not possible - a surely demo­
cratic but rarely seen situation in design of computer ar­
tifacts in corporate business today. 

However, Ackoff  argues that in his practice such con­
sensus has mostly been possible to achieve. By testing al­
ternatives  on  which  consensus  cannot  be  reached  one 
might find  consensus  on goals and  then a  new  way  of 
seeing the problem, he argues. If this is not possible the re­
sponsible decision-maker  should  make  the choice. This 

8 Ackoff R.L.: The Social Responsibility of OR' in Operational Re­
search Quarterly, 25,1974. 
9  Ackoff R.L.: 'A Theory of Practice in the Social Systems 
Sciences' IIASA  International roundtable  on The Art  and  Science 
of  Systems Practice, HASA, November 1986. 

190 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

tends, according to Ackoff, to create consensus, since con­
flict means that the participants lose their influence on the 
decision. 

Idealized redesign10  makes participation fun, according 
to  Ackoff.  It is 'a  design  of  that system  with  which  its 
designers would  replace an existing system if  they were 
free to replace it with whatever they wanted.'11 The only 
restrictions imposed  on  the design are that the system 
should be technically feasible and capable of survival if it 
were  brought  into  existence.  However,  there  is  no  re­
quirement that the system designed  be capable of  being 
implemented.  It should  be an ideal-seeking system  de­
signed so that it is capable of learning and adapting effec­
tively. Ackoff argues that since  the conditions assumed 
are so unrealistic, the design work is treated as play. 

To design is to imagine and create, and these activities 
are challenging and fun. Participation in idealized de­
sign enables the participants to raise their intrinsic and 
extrinsic values, especially their ideals, to consciousness. 
When the process is described to potential participants 
before it is initiated, it tends to invoke their curiosity. 
Once started, it usually generates excitement because it 
expands the participants' conception of what is possible. 
They find the process liberating' as well as fan.12 

Finally, to make an implementation seem likely, Ackoff 
argues that the responsible decision makers have to  pay 
for the work, that there has to be a widespread  commit­
ment to the design work being done, and that there has to 
be trust in the professional designers. He finds  participa­
tive idealized design a good way of achieving this. 

From my own  research experience I find  the question 
of resources  to  unprivileged  groups  just as crucial and 
important in design, as to organize a consensus despite of 
the risk of a genuine conflict in which there in practice is 

10  Ackoff, R.L.: Redesigning the Future, John  Wiley, 1974. 
11 Ackoff, 1986, op.cit., p. 9. 
12 Ibid., p. 10. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing I 

191 

no equality in decision making. In fact Ackoff himself ar­
gues in other places the importance in design of develop­
ing resources for unprivileged groups, to be controlled by 
the groups themselves.13 

Churchman  basically  develops  his  understanding of 
design  from  the  philosophy  of  knowledge,  whereas 
Ackoffs understanding rather  is supported  by  practical 
experience. However, the practice that he refers to is not 
the practice that I discussed in the part on philosophy of 
design. His practical experiences indicate that consensus 
between the stakeholders can and  should be  reached in 
design. It does take into account the ability and existential 
condition of human beings to create the world, but not the 
other side of  practice, that their world is objective in the 
sense that it is created by others as institutions as well as 
ideas. This sets conditions for their thoughts,  resources, 
interests, etc. With this view of practice, only theory that 
can help us understand the social and historical character 
of specific design  processes can legitimate the designer's 
effort to create consensus among the stakeholders.14 

There is no doubt that Ackoffs designer is a theoretical 
idealist, no matter how practical he is. However, this is not 
a  neglect  of  the importance of  Ackoffs contributions to 
methodology of social systems design, but a quest for the­
ory that helps us understand when, in a humanistic per­
spective,  the  methodology  should  be  used,  and  when 
rather to shift client  or decision-maker in  Churchman's 
terminology. Whether we want it or not, social systems 
design is politics, a fact which is also obvious for our third 
contributor to soft systems thinking. 

13 Ackoff, R. L.:, 'A  Black Ghetto's Research on a University* in 
Operations Research , September 1970. 
14 In the part on Designing  for Democracy at Work, I  will return 
to this problem. 

192 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

'Soft' Systems Thinking 
Peter Checkland, like Ackoff and Churchman, started out 
in the tradition of rationalistic systems engineering. Like 
them he found that systems engineering simply was not 
appropriate for practical intervention in the complex and 
ambiguous 'soft' problem situations in social practice. His 
systems  methodology  developed  in  the  direction  of 
Hegelian and Singerian inquiring systems (in the termi­
nology  of  Churchman15) - focusing on  the importance  of 
the dialectics between the many and different world views 
involved. With Checkland a step is also taken away from 
rationalistic systems thinking towards interpretation and 
phenomenology and the Heideggerian approach from the 
discussion in the part on Design Philosophy. 

Checkland's  methodology includes the following con­

siderations:16 

To begin with, a rich  picture is given of how different 
participants may perceive various aspects of a situation to 
be  problematic.  However,  there  is  no  definition  of  the 
problem at this stage. 

Out of  the  rich  picture root  definitions of some  pur­
poseful human activity systems are made. They are con­
densed  representations of  the system in its most funda­
mental form,  reflecting specific  ways of  looking at the 
problematic situation - specific Weltanschauungen. 

These root definitions are the basis for construction of 
conceptual models. They give accented one-sided views of 
the minimum activities which are necessary to produce a 
system according to a specific Weltanschauung. 

The  conceptual  models  are  then  compared  with  the 
rich  picture,  and  used  to  structure  the  debate  about 
change.  The  now  elucidated  Weltanschauungen  are 

15  Churchman, The  Design of  Inquiring  Systems. 
16  Checkland, P. B.: 'Systems Thinking in Management: the De­
velopment of Soft Systems Methodology and its Implications for 
Social Science' in Ulrich, H. and Probst, G.J.B. (eds.): Self-orga-
nisation and  Management  of  Social  Systems, Springer Verlag, 
1984. 

Other Ways of Seeing  and Doing I 

193 

compared and contrasted. They are held up for examina­
tion, exploring conflicts and possible changes. By this pro­
cess of  breakdown  and  reflection  the  participants gain 
new insight. 

On this basis the designer helps the participants to find 
possible changes that are both systematically desirable 
and culturally feasible. This is an iterative process. Rather 
than a 'solution' to the original  problem it creates new 
problem situations in a never ending learning process. 

To Checkland it is obvious that this kind of rational in­
tervention in a problematic situation is political. It is in it­
self a political act, and it is acting in a situation where the 
participants have different amounts of  power and differ­
ent interests. To this end Checkland, in a recent paper, 
suggests a process of political analysis to be part of the ini­
tial stage of the soft systems approach.17 

The political analysis first includes the definition of the 

roles of: 
•  the client causing the intervention to happen, 
•  the would-be  problem solver, who  will bring about im­

provement in the problematic situation, and 

•  the problem  owner, i.e. the person the would-be prob­

lem solver takes to be the problem owner. 

Secondly,  the  existing  and  changing  roles,  values  and 
norms in the problematic situation are analyzed. 

Finally, the abstract commodities of power, like formal 

authority, intellectual authority, personal charisma, ac­
cess to information, external reputation, membership of 
various committees etc. are analyzed. 

The reason for the analyses is as a basis for reflection by 
the different participants. This kind of analyses, Check-
land argues, 'open up issues crucial to achieving change in 

17  Checkland, P. B.: The Politics of Practice', IIASA Internatio­
nal roundtable on The Art  and  Science of  Systems Practice, 
IIASA, November 1986. 

194 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

real  situations. They  lead  to  a  clearer  vision  of  what 
changes are culturally feasible.'18 

Doubtless, this kind  of analysis can  bring about  new 
important insight. One can only ask, who will be powerful 
enough to benefit from it?19 

To this end we will need a theoretical understanding of 
the social, cultural and historical conditions that shape the 
practice  in  which  a  given  methodology  can  or  cannot 
support  communicative  competence  and  undistorted 
communication in a framework  free of domination - the 
emancipatory ideal set up by Jürgen Habermas and Cri­
tical Social Theory. This humanistic ideal I share  with 
Checkland. But in order  not  to just  remain idealists in 
good faith, we then also, like Habermas,20  must relate to 
theory of  the kind of social structures that bring about 
distorted communication. 

Lack of  Social Theory and of  Computer Artifacts 
To sum up: All the alternative approaches above point at 
important aspects in the design of social systems. By rea­
lizing and including the role of subjectivity in systems de­
sign and systems descriptions they have  blown  new life 
into the concept of system. However, it is a systems con­
cept that basically means system in the sense of a syste­
matic approach or a methodology. As such the approaches 

is Ibid. 
19 In two papers from 1973 and 1974 I argued a similar approach 
for trade union participation in design of computer artifacts and 
their use, based on a critique of Churchman's Hegelian inquiring 
system. However, rather than primarily emphasizing consensus 
formation, I argued for the development of resources on behalf of 
the weaker part in the dialectical confrontation between the basic 
assumptions of different Weltanschauungen. The  consequences 
of this approach to the politics of design will be discussed in the 
part on Designing  for  Democracy at Work. There I will also dis­
cuss the problem of participation and the role of the designer in 
that social context. 
20  Habermas, J.: Theorie  des Kommunikativen  Handelns, I, II, 
Suhrkamp, Frankfurt 1981. 

Other Ways of Seeing and. Doing I 

195 

are candidates for a curriculum in an art and science of 
designing computer artifacts. However, to that end I see 
two problems with them. 

Firstly, the methodologies of social systems design need 
to be supplemented with explicit substantial social theory 
that can help us understand the social, cultural and his­
torical  conditions for  their  practical  application in  dif­
ferent problematic situations.21 If not they may be reduced 
to nothing but instruments for manipulation of social or­
ganizations, even  more effective  than systems enginee­
ring, despite their humanistic spirit. 

Secondly, the above approaches to social systems design 

tell us very little about the special characteristics of de­
signing  computer  artifacts.22  To this end I now  turn to 
another vein  of internal alternatives and a new founda­
tion of design in computer science. 

Computers and Understanding 
My second  internal alternative  to an art and  science of 
designing computer  artifacts emphasizes on  the human 
use of computer artifacts. It is developed by people in close 
contact with the field of artificial intelligence. It is not just 
a  critique  of  Simon's  rationalistic approach,  nor  an at­
tempt to extend it to enable the design of computer arti­
facts in social systems. It is philosophically and practically 
a fundamentally different tradition. As 'founders' of this 

21  An example for developments in this direction may be the me­
thods of future  work  shops as developed by Jungk R. and Müllert, 
N. R.: Zukunftwerkstätten,  Wege  sur Wiederbelebung  der Demo­
kratie, 1981, and the application of such methods in design of 
computer artifacts,  Kensing, F.:' Generation of Visions in Sys­
tems Development' in Docherty, P et. al. (eds.) Systems Design  for 
Human Development  and  Productivity - Participation and  Be­
yond, Elsevier Science Publishers, North Holland, IFIP 1987. 
22 The design artifacts called maps are an example of possible 
ways in this direction. See Lanzara,  6.F. and Mathiassen, L.: 
'Mapping Situations Within a System Development Project* in 
Information &  Management, no 8,1985. 

196 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

tradition  two  persons  have  been  especially  important, 
philosopher  Hubert  L.  Dreyfus  and  computer  scientist 
Terry Winograd. 

Hubert Dreyfus argues for  the  relevance  and  impor­

tance of skill and everyday practice, in understanding the 
use  of  computers.  His  investigations are  based  on  the 
philosophical positions of existential phenomenology in the 
tradition of  philosophers  like  Heidegger  and  Merleau-
Ponty, and  the positions on ordinary language  and lan­
guage-games taken by Wittgenstein. 

His arguments  have been put forward  in What  Com­

puters Can't  Do23 from 1972, and recently, together  with 
his brother, operations researcher Stuart E. Dreyfus, in 
Mind  over  Machine - The  Power  of  Human  Intuition 
and Expertise in the Era of the Computer.24 

In Understanding Computers and  Cognition-A New 
Foundation  for Design,25 another recently published book, 
Terry Winograd  together  with Fernando Flores, former 
minister of Economics and Finance in the government of 
Salvador Allende in Chile, brings this view into computer 
science and  the design  of  computer artifacts for human 
use. 

Rather than proposing a systems view for understan­

ding the artificial in general, Winograd and Flores focus 
on the differences  between  concernful  human  activity 
within a tradition, and computer performance. In doing so 
they take as their point of departure what people do with 
computers, how  in cooperation  with each  other they are 
using computers,  and  what  might  be  done  better  with 
them. 

23 Dreyfus, H. L.: What Computers Can't  Do-A Critique of 
Artificial  Reason, Harper & Row, New York 1972. 
24 Dreyfus, H. L. and Dreyfus, S. D.: Mind over  Machine - The 
Power of  Human Intuition and  Expertise in the  Era of the Com­
puter, Basil Blackwell, Glasgow 1986. 
25 Winograd, T.  and Flores, F.: Understanding  Computers and 
Cognition-A New  Foundation  for  Design, Ablex,  Norwood 1986. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing I 

197 

It is in involved practical use and understanding, not in 
detached reflection, that we find  the origin of design. To 
them design is the interaction between understanding and 
creation. 

What they  propose is not  just another design metho­

dology, but an attempt to create a new foundation for an 
art and science of design. 

Here  I  will  not  go  into  details  of  their  theoretical 
framework, because it comes very close to what I already, 
strongly inspired  by them, have outlined in the part on 
Design  Philosophy, as  a  Heideggerian  approach,  and 
partly  as a  Wittgensteinian  approach.  What I have  in 
mind are concepts like thrownness, background, tradition, 
interpretation, ready-to-hand, present-at-hand, break­
down, and language as action. 

However, below I will give a short account of their ap­
proach in comparison with the rationalistic science of de­
sign. 

As pointed  out in an earlier chapter, in Simon's ratio­

nalistic science of design a computer artifact as well as the 
surrounding organization are seen as complex hierarchi­
cal systems of related components. From a systems point 
of view they are the same kind of phenomena. In design­
ing such artifacts we emphasize  redundancy, and on the 
outer functionality  of  subsystems in the hierarchy. This 
makes it possible for us to design complex systems. Fur­
thermore, the design process is a process of  rationalistic 
and  objective (though in practice often 'bounded') prob­
lem-solving, decision-making,  and choosing between al­
ternatives. The  objective of  the design is to meet given 
specifications and design efficient use. 

To Winograd and Flores, design is conceived quite dif­
ferently. Computer  artifacts are what they are concern-
fully used for. In a domain of writing documents a 'word 
processor' is not an assembly of electronic and mechanical 
devices, as it  might be for a  manager of  a factory that 
builds word  processors. Neither is it a collection of soft­
ware, as it might be for a person who programs word pro­
cessors. By emphasizing functionality in terms of issues of 

198 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

layout, type fonts, and the integration of text with illustra­
tions we may be closer to the answer, but are still missing 
the point. The word processor exists to the user not just as 
a means for creating a document. The user is involved in 
writing e.g. a letter or a book, which is a concerned activity 
that  takes  place  in  a  complex  social  and  technological 
network within a tradition of conventions. To the user the 
word processor is what it is within this background. It is 
only in breakdown of concernful use of the word processor 
that it becomes present-at-hand as pieces of hardware or 
software, or fonts and layout. 

The computer, like any other medium, must be under­
stood in the context of  communication and the larger 
network of equipment and practices in which it is situ-
ated.(...) One cannot understand a technology without 
having a  functional  understanding of  how it is  used. 
Furthermore, that  understanding must  incorporate a 
holistic view of the network of technologies and activi­
ties into which it fits, rather than treating the techno­
logical devices in isolation.26 

A computer artifact is what it is being used for in practice. 
In designing computer artifacts we should  not primarily 
be concerned with meeting technical specifications for ef­
ficient  use, but with understanding conditions for the fu­
ture user's readiness-to-hand in using the artifacts being 
designed. In doing this our concern should be to anticipate 
the breakdown that will occur in use. This anticipation 
means both designing to avoid breakdowns, and support to 
the user to  recover from  breakdown situations that will 
occur regardless. The breakdown in question is not seen 
with focus on breakdown in hardware or software, but in 
the larger context in which the artifact becomes present-
at-hand to the user. 

Furthermore, with this approach to design, the point of 
departure in design must be that the different participants 
enter the process acting in situations of  'normal resolu-

26 Ibid., pp. 5-6. 

Other Ways of Seeing and Doing I 

199 

tion'. They understand the situation they come from. This 
goes for  users as well as designers. This understanding 
includes the blindness created by the tradition they come 
from. The design process is characterized by a breakdown 
of this understanding, which creates a 'situation of irres­
olution'. Design is the resolution of these situations of ir­
resolution,  based  on  commitments between  the partici­
pants. This is neither objective problem solving nor ratio­
nalistic decision-making. It is concerned human activity, 
where different traditions and backgrounds meet. 

Turning  to  Dreyfus  and  Dreyfus,  they  are  basically 
concerned  with the difference  between on the one  hand 
human practical understanding and expertise, and on the 
other  hand  computers  as 'logic  machines' or  'inference 
engines'. One of  their fundamental  remarks is - as dis­
cussed in the  part on Design  Philosophy - that human 
knowledge on  proficient and expert levels cannot be cap­
tured in formal descriptions. 

In design this gives a new role to the skilled user, and a 

new orientation in design methodology. In the design pro­
cess  we should  concentrate on  norms, rules and  design 
artifacts that facilitate the use of this competence. These 
norms, rules and design artifacts are obviously not formal 
descriptions, but rather support for involved activity in the 
design process. 

It is somewhat paradoxical that those most critical to 
the rationalistic approach and especially its developments 
in artificial intelligence are those that may have the most 
challenging  theoretical  foundation  for  really  designing 
skill enhancing tools in the era of the computer. This will 
be examined in Part IV on Designing for Skill. 

However, I also see differences between the new foun­
dation of design by Winograd and Dreyfus, and the direc­
tion outlined in the part on Design Philosophy. 

There  is a  difference  in  emphasis in  understanding 
language as action  by Winograd  and  Flores on  the one 
hand, and my understanding outlined in the 'definitions' 
in earlier chapters. This is not a difference in focus on the 
need  for considering language as action  and  concerned 

200 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

activity based on commitment within a tradition. Nor is it 
a difference in subordinating the rationalistic tradition's 
understanding of language as description. 

However, Winograd and Flores emphasize descriptions 
of  these speech  acts in the tradition of John Searle.27 My 
focus on language as action is a more literal interpretation 
of  Wittgenstein's  language-games.  Emphasis is on  the 
design process. I propose that design should be organized 
as language-games of concernful playing or doing in ways 
that support design by experience and interaction, instead 
of design by description. This  position is close to that of 
Winograd and Flores, but one that they basically develop 
in the Heideggerian theoretical context and less in the or­
dinary language context. However, this is more a question 
of different emphasis, and I see these views as comple­
mentary rather than as conflicting. 

Being fundamentally ontological, the design approach 
discussed in this section does not explicitly relate to social 
theory supporting an understanding of the social, cultural 
and political conditions for a realization of the design ap­
proach  advocated.  However,  with the emphasis on  the 
spell of tradition and background, as well as the concern 
with conditions for future breakdowns in the application 
domain of use of computer artifacts, the approach is cer­
tainly open for such extensions. 

It should also be obvious that a methodology for design, 
as in the social systems approaches discussed in a previous 
section, still remains to be developed. 

However, the remarks above should not be understood 
as major objections to the approach to computers, under­
standing and design now being discussed. On the contrary 
I see this approach as a major breakthrough for an art 
and science of designing computer artifacts. It gives us a 
foundation  for  understanding  both  what  kind  of  phe­
nomenon the design process is, and how to organize it, and 
for  understanding what  kind  of  phenomena  computer 

27 Searle, J.: Speech Acts, Cambridge  University Press,  Cam­
bridge 1969. 

Other Ways of Seeing and Doing  I 

201 

artifacts are, their human use and directions for their de­
sign. 

In finding that the functionality of a computer artifact 
must be understood as how it is being vised, we also have a 
basis  to  reformulate  the demands for  design  artifacts. 
What is most urgently needed, is not better linguistic no­
tations for a  more or less formal description of the func­
tionality of a system. Instead 'descriptions' should be re­
minders  or  paradigm  cases  for  experiences  and  reflec­
tions on the use of the anticipated computer artifacts. This 
points in the direction of design artifacts to support con­
cerned  involvement, rather than correct description. This 
may be achieved by the use of scenarios, prototypes, mock-
ups, etc. For support for such methods I now turn to some 
recent theoretical and technical developments in the field 
of 'software engineering*. 

Software Engineering and Prototyping 
Software engineering is a field  of computer science where 
the rationalistic Cartesian systems approach  really has 
had  an influence.  Its emphasis  has, since  the founding 
conference of  the discipline in 1968,28 been on computer 
programs  as  formal  mathematical  objects  derived  by 
formalized  procedures  from  an  abstract  specification. 
This development was very  much a  reaction to the soft­
ware crisis of the late 1960s caused by the advent of pow­
erful third generation computers with complex operating 
systems, and numerous new sophisticated applications in 
many fields.  The old methods and approaches were simp­
ly insufficient. 

By insisting on program and specification texts as the 
basis of  human understanding and  of  proofs for  pro­
gram correctness, it was provided a starting-point for 
the task of dealing with errors in programming. By as­

28  Naur, P. and Randell, B.: Software  Engineering, report from a 
conference sponsored by the  NATO Science Committee, Brussels 
1969. 

202 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

sociating successive development stages with the con­
trolled  transition  between  increasingly  formalized 
defining documents leading eventually  to  computer-
executable code, it offered a means of structuring soft­
ware production in a way that could be controlled, the 
defining documents  taking the place of  intermediate 
results. By  providing guidelines  on  how  to subdivide 
programs into parts, it supported the division of work in 
large development teams.29 

These are remarks by Christiane Floyd on the still domi­
nant paradigm in software engineering. However, having 
been active in the field  since its very start, she notices 
many 'anomalies' in this product-oriented, paradigm. 

The product-oriented view leaves the relationship be­
tween programs and  the living human world  entirely 
open: 
•  There is  no  way  of  checking  the relevance  of  the 
specification. 
•  Learning and  communication  between  developers 
and  users can  only  be  accommodated  in the earliest 
stages. 
•  Questions pertaining to the use of programs are de­
ferred until the program is delivered. 
•  The interface between users and the computer as a 
tool is treated locally (within one program component), 
and often late (the functionality of the program being 
determined first,  and is subsequently being made more 
'user-friendly' to increase acceptance). This attitude is 
characterized  by  the  wide-spread  use  of  'syntactic 
sugar', referring to  the attempt at improving input-

29  Floyd, C.: 'Outline of a Paradigm Change in Software Enginee­
ring" in Bjerknes, et. al  (eds.): Computers and  Democracy - A 
Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987, p. 197. 

Other Ways of Seeing and Doing  I 

203 

output formats by purely syntactic means as a side-is­
sue in programming development.30 

As a remedy to these anomalies Floyd sees a new process-
oriented  paradigm in software engineering. It is intended, 
not entirely to take the place of the first, but to be the pri­
mary  point  of  view. This  new  primary  point of  view in 
software engineering focuses  on software in connection 
with human learning and communication in both use and 
development of the software. The product of this process is 
not a piece of code or an abstract software system, but tools 
or working environments for people. Hence, the quality of 
the product is primarily a  question of  e.g. its relevance, 
suitability or adequacy in practical use situations, which 
cannot  be  reduced  to  just features  of  the  product  like 
reliability and efficiency of programs. 

Viewed  as  a  learning process  software  development 
cannot in a process-oriented approach be reduced to a lin­
ear model  of phases, ordered in time, leading to increas­
ingly formal defining documents with the software  sys­
tem as the final  step. By contrast software development 
has to be an ongoing process of cycles of re-design, re-im­
plementation, re-evaluation  in  the context  of  the labor 
process where the software is used.  In such  design and 
evaluation, design artifacts are primarily used to support 
communication and cooperation in gradually discovering 
the  product, not to make software  development less de­
pendent on people by formal specification of the product. It 
follows that focus in design is on discussions between users 
and designers and that the former should  have good  op­
portunities for trial use of early versions of the software in 
real life like situations. 

In  fact, Floyd's  view  of  software engineering is  sup­

ported by that of  Peter Naur, one  of  the founders of  the 
software engineering tradition. In a  paper  commenting 
on the importance of practical understanding (intuition in 
Naur's terminology) in software development he writes: 

30 Ibid., p. 197. 

204 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

The claim is often made that certain forms, or formal­
izations, will guarantee the absence of flaws of  argu­
ments. What seems to lie behind such claims is the fact 
that by use of certain kinds of formalizations it is possi­
ble to formulate  the connections between statements 
corresponding to a proof in terms of  rules for manipu­
lating the statements. While this property is of  great 
interest as a matter of principle, and also is the neces­
sary  basis  for  mechanical  proof  construction  and 
verification, and occasionally is used in the reasoning 
carried out by people, it provides no guarantee for the 
absence of flaws in the arguments vised in software de­
velopment making use of formalizations. (...) However 
what is the most suitable form or language for any sit­
uation will depend not only on degree of formalization 
of the description, but equally  on the character of  the 
aspect of the world to be modelled and the background 
experience of the programmer who has to establish the 
description. Thus to claim, for  example,  that  mathe­
matical properties of a form of notation have to be deci­
sive in choosing it for software development, implies a 
gross  disregard  for  the  importance  of  human  intui­
tion.'31 

Naur  concludes  that  programmers' experience  is  more 
important than their use of formal methods; these latter, 
he writes 

appear to be useful primarily by providing check  lists 
that may help programmers to avoid flaws  of omission, 
why  the rules of  methods in the areas of  form of  ex­
pression  and  ordering  of  activities  are  of  doubtful 
utility.32 

31  Naur, P.: 'Intuition and Software Development* in Formal  Me­
thods and  Software  Development, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science no. 186, Springer Verlag, 1985, p. 77. 
32 Ibid., p. 78. 

Other Ways of Seeing  and Doing I 

205 

Or put in a more literary way: 

what is the role of semantics in software development? 
Answer: neither that of the composer, nor of the libret­
tist, the conductor, the hero, or the heroine, but that of 
the prompter, who does nothing but tell the actor things 
they know already, but that momentarily have slipped 
from their minds.33 

Naur  also argues against  the idea  of  'correctness' of  a 
program as the matching with strictly defined specifica­
tions of user requirements, simply because such specifica­
tions are beyond what is practically possible. We do no say 
that  a  car  works  correctly,  but  perhaps  that  it  is  in 
working order. We can have a practical understanding of 
what  that  means.  Similarly  with  programs:  the  users 
cannot once and for all specify what is meant by it being in 
working order; it is a matter of practical experience with 
using it in many situations which cannot all be anticipated 
in  a  specification.  Hence,  we  here,  too,  have  a  strong 
argument for process-orientation with user participation 
and experimentation. 

In this sense the new paradigm is also related to an­
other  development  in  contemporary software  engineer­
ing - the emergence of  powerful computer-based design 
artifacts for prototyping in design of computer artifacts. 
Again there is far from one perspective on what proto­

typing is or should be.34 Is it a 4th generation tool (typically 
with a database, a query language, a screen editor and a 
report  generator),  a  specific  prototyping  environment 
(also  including special  programming  languages,  inter­
action with other programming languages, a data dictio­
nary, etc.), or an exploratory programming environment 

33 Ibid., p. 79. 
34 For some classifications see Floyd, C.: 'A Systematic Look at 
Prototyping" in Budde, R. et al. (eds.) Approaches to Prototyping, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin 1984, Bansler, B. and B0dker, K.: Expe­
rimentelle teknikker i  systemarbejdet, DIKU report no 83/7,1983, 
and Flensburg, P.: Personlig databehandling, Studentlitteratur, 
Lund 1986 (dissertation). 

206 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

on  powerful  workstations  (like  Smalltalk-80 or  Lisp / 
Loops)! Is prototyping a design artifact for early sketches 
of a future system, or for realization of small and incomp­
lete but still running first versions of the computer artifact 
to be used? Does a prototype include just a few functions of 
the future use, but in full detail, or does it rather include all 
functions, but with limited functionality? 

All of these are important aspects, but the crucial ques­
tion, given  my theoretical understanding of  design arti­
facts, is  whether  prototyping design artifacts allow  the 
users by  involvement in experiments  with different  pro­
totypes to  gain experience  as a  basis  for  design require­
ments? It is the use of prototypes as paradigm cases and 
reminders, as in the Wittgensteinian approach, that is of 
importance. The question is how well a prototyping design 
artifact can support the creation of imaginative paradigm 
cases of future use situation, and what efforts it takes to 
create these prototypes. 

As powerful design artifacts in this respect, prototypes 
can be used as alternatives or complements to traditional 
textual or graphic more or less formalized  detached de­
scriptions. Integrated with scenarios of future use, the ex­
perimental use of prototypes in design may be an impor­
tant technique in playing the language game of design, a 
game of involvement and by doing,  that defeats some of 
the limits of formalization. 

Obviously we here have a paradigm that opens up for 
creativity and  user  participation in design of  computer 
artifacts, but that does not automatically make it a demo­
cratic approach. Who  decides  which  users are going  to 
participate? When will the process stop, and which proto­
types will be implemented? I will return to such question 
in Part III on Designing  for Democracy  at Work. 

To sum up: I conclude that there are developments in 
software engineering, both theoretically  towards a  new 
process-oriented  humanistic  paradigm, and technically 
towards  some  powerful  design  artifacts  and  environ­
ments for prototyping. They may not be main trends, yet, I 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing I 

207 

find  them fundamental to a future curriculum in design 
of computer artifacts. 

This is not an argument that the former kind of formal 
knowledge in software engineering has become obsolete. 
As Christiane Floyd emphasizes, the new paradigm is not 
a rejection of mathematically based methods, but a shift of 
primary point of  view. Doubtless, we still need correct and 
efficient  programs. But  what is  the value  of  these pro­
grams if they not are relevant, suitable and adequate to 
the user in the vise situation? 

Summary 
I think that  the  paradigm  examples  discussed  in  this 
chapter are good indications, not only of the existence of 
theoretical movements within computer and information 
science that go beyond rationalistic systems thinking, but 
also that they together form an already quite developed 
theoretical base for an alternative art and science of de­
signing computer artifacts. How  this alternative can be 
further developed  by inspiration from  more  mature de­
sign disciplines, such as architectural and industrial de­
sign, I will try to illustrate in the next chapter. 

Chapter 9 
Other Ways of Seeing and Doing II -
External Alternatives 

In this chapter I will consider the inspiration we can get 
by going outside the boundaries of computer or informa­
tion science in looking for paradigm cases for an art and 
science of designing computer artifacts. 

In the first section I will reflect upon  the multi-disci­
plinary attempts to  establish a science  of design  metho­
dology. It will be argued that in an art and science of de­
signing computer artifacts we can learn a great deal from 
reflections  on 'generations' of  design  methodology.  Why 
did e.g. eminent researchers and designers like architect 
Christopher Alexander and industrial designer  Christo­
pher Jones, though starting very much with just as ratio­
nal approaches as Simon, develop  their thinking about 
design in quite different directions? 

Compared  with  computer  and  information  science, 
architecture is  a  relatively  mature art  searching  for  its 
scientific identity. Questions of style, artistic competence, 
and social responsibility in architectural design are , in the 
next section, related to our own field, and a 'catalogue' of 
paradigm examples to learn from is discussed. Conside­
rations that have been important to architectural design 
should be worth reflecting upon for a science of designing 
computer artifacts. After  all, houses  and 'computer sys­
tems' are both social artifacts that play an important role 
in many peoples' lives. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

209 

The Design Methodology Movement 
Design  methodology  in general  is a  'movement' or  re­
search field that has been dominated by architectural and 
industrial design. Leading theorists in architecture like 
Christopher  Alexander  or  in  industrial  design  like  J. 
Christopher Jones have contributed to the movement, but 
important contributions have come from the field  of com­
puter science and  management science as well, not least 
from Herbert Simon. 

In Developments in Design Methodology1  architect and 

design researcher Nigel Cross  has brought together ma­
jor contributions of the movement since its beginning in 
the early 1960s. This collection  of  papers covers  design 
methodology  conferences  between 1962  and 1982,  and 
contributions in the major design journals. Cross 'defines' 
design methodology as:2 

the study of the principles, practices and procedures of 
design in a rather broad and general sense. Its central 
concern is with  how  designing both  is and  might  be 
conducted. This concern therefore includes the study of 
how  designers work  and  think; the establishment  of 
appropriate structures for the design  process; the  de­
velopment  and  application  of  new  design  methods, 
techniques, and  procedures; and  reflection on the na­
ture and extent of design knowledge and its application 
to design problems. 

As Cross sees it, the  movement has progressed  from an 
initial interest in prescription of an ideal design process, 
via  description  of  the  intrinsic  nature  of  design,  into 
observation of the reality of design, and on to reflection on 
the fundamental concepts of design. Cross sees this deve­
lopment  as a  process of  maturation, from  which design 
methodology today can return to its origins, to  the pre-

1  Cross, N. (ed.): Developments  in Design  Methodology, John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Bath 1984. 
2 Ibid., p. vii-viii. 

210 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

scriptum of realistic ideals. However, the understanding of 
design methodology has changed dramatically during this 
development. Many of the contributors have by  practical 
experience, and subsequent theoretical reflection, come to 
abandon their early rationalistic Cartesian positions. 

The design methodology debate has been chronicled in 

three generations.3 

First Generation 
The  first  generation  design  methods  (up  to  the  early 
1970s) are  Cartesian approaches, breaking the  problem 
down into fragments and solving them separately before 
assembling them to a well functioning system. 

Some  very  important  contributions  were  Jones'  A 
Method  of  Systematic Design4  with emphasis on factors; 
Alexander's Notes on  Synthesis of  Form5  and the misfit 
variables; and Simon's The Sciences of the Artificial 6  and 
the structure of ill-structured problems. 

However, in  practice these systems engineering tech­

niques did not prove adequate to the 'wicked' problem of 
design. This was not accepted by Simon, who tried to show 
how 'wicked' or  'ill-structured' problems could  be trans­
formed into problems that could be solved  with methods 
from operations research, systems theory etc. In contrast, 
Alexander had in the early 1970s become totally disillu­
sioned with his own approach based on mathematics, logic 
and a step-by-step process. He claimed his original motive 
for becoming involved with design methods was because 
he  wanted  to  design  beautiful  buildings.  Since  design 

3  Rittel, H.: 'Second-generation Design Methods', and Broadbent, 
G.: 'The Development of Design Methods' in Cross, op. cit. 
4  Jones, J. C.: 'A Method of Systematic Design' in Jones, J. C. and 
Thornley, D. (eds.): Conference  on  Design  Methods, Pergamon 
Press, Oxford 1963. 
5  Alexander, C.: Notes on Synthesis of  Form, Havard University 
Press, Cambridge 1964. 
6 Simon, H.: The Sciences of  the Artificial, The MIT Press, Cam­
bridge 1969. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

211 

methods in no way had contributed to this his advice now 
was to 'forget it; forget the whole thing*. He was at that 
time moving in  the direction  of a  more anti-expert  par­
ticipatory approach. Jones, too, radically changed his per­
spective on design methods in the beginning of the 1970s. 
He  reacted strongly against  'the machine language,  the 
behaviorism, the continual attempt to fix one's whole life 
into a logical framework'. In an attempt  to  resolve  the 
apparent conflicts between rationality and intuition, logic 
and  imagination,  order  and  change,  he  began 
experimenting with art in design (like the music of John 
Cage). Hence, his writings also became more poems than 
articles. 

Researchers have found it hard to demonstrate exam­
ples of  'successful' application  of first  generation design 
methods.  However,  architect  Geoffery  Broadbent  has 
found an illustrative example of what goes 'wrong* when 
these methods are successfully applied. 

I am referring to the most carefully calculated piece of 
architectural and urban design that has ever been built; 
Disney  World  at Orlando, Florida. (...) Among  other 
things, Disney World  represents the most comprehen­
sive  application  of  queuing  theory  anywhere  in  the 
world. On first  arrival, having parked one's car, one is 
picked up almost immediately by a motorized train and 
transferred to the monorail systems-where a system of 
ramps, barriers, and chains ensures that waiting pas­
sengers are distributed evenly along the station plat­
form before  the train  arrives. From  this, through  the 
whole vast system of interrelated 'people movers' to the 
simple  act  of  queuing  for  a  meal  (one  walks  to  a 
counter,  to  be  served  immediately  by  a  Disney-pro-
grammed  girl,  rather  than  walking along  a counter 
and thus being delayed  by other  hesitant customers), 
one is conscious of being subject to the most subtle ma­
nipulation. (...) There is much more to it than that, but 
the crucial  point is  that in  terms of  techniques, and 
more particularly in terms of those attitudes in which 
the 'expert'  knows best, Disney  World  represents the 

212 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

most  complete  realization  of first-generation 
design 
methods applied to the built environment anywhere in 
the world.7 

Second Generation 
When the design approach that gave rise to (Brave) New 
Disney World  was abandoned it was to a great extent to 
open up the design process to include users and lay people. 
In these anti-expert second generation design methods (as 
they were chronicled by architect Horst Rittel) participa­
tion was a key element, and the designer was thought of 
as a midwife or a teacher, rather than as one who designs 
or plans for others. This was based on the assumption that 
expertise in design is distributed among all participants, 
and that the design process had an argumentative struc­
ture in which one had to make up one's mind in favor of, 
or against, various positions on each issue. From the mid 
1970s  such  participative  design  approaches  were  the 
center of design methods debate, and the arguments were 
theoretical, as well as practical and political. Both existen­
tialism and  Marxism had an influence on the formation 
of the design methods of this generation. 

To demonstrate that there also are problems associated 
with the second  generation  design  methods, Broadbent 
gives an example  of  what  can  go 'wrong* with  this ap­
proach, as well. The example is Lucien Kroll's buildings 
for the University of  Louvain. The design methods used 
really  allowed  medical  faculty  and  students  as future 
users to participate in the design, and to have fun doing so. 
The resultant buildings are amazing collages of rubble, 
brick, tile, asbestos sheeting, glass, and glass-reinforced 
plastics, whose random appearance obviously expresses 
the ideal of participation. Visually they are most excit­
ing, but at a more objective level they present a great 
many  problems. The study/bedrooms themselves  are 
inordinately small,  the circulation is extremely com­

7 Broadbent, G.: The Development of Design Methods' in Cross, 
op. cit., pp. 338-339. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

213 

plex and, above all, the building fabric itself is perversely 
opposed to any concept of sensible environmental con­
trol. One section of  La Meme is covered  with Miesian 
curtain wall (is called - for that reason - Les Fascists), 
but it faces south-west, the worst possible orientation for 
such a facade in terms of solar heat gain. The famous 
'solid'  wall  of  l'Ecole  has  almost  exactly  the  right 
amount of  glazing for  a south-facing facade  in these 
latitudes, yet it actually faces due north! All this results 
in gross discomfort for those who have to use the build­
ings.8 

Broadbent sees this as a result of insisting on total partici­
pation and neglecting to insist on exercising the necessary 
expertise  possessed  by  a  well-informed  and  skilled  de­
signer. Hence, in the late 1970s he argues the need for a 
third generation of design methods. 

Third Generation 
As an approach that draws upon the better aspects of both 
first and second generation design  methods he suggests 
(inspired by the philosophy of Karl Popper) that the role of 
the designer is to make expert design conjectures. How­
ever, these conjectures must be open to refutation and re­
jection by the people for whom they are made. 

This brings the design methodology debate to the ques­

tion of what design really is, what designers really do and 
know, and what they should do and know. 

In this debate not only the philosophical position of so­

cial  piecemeal  engineering with  reference  to Popper  is 
suggested. Others argue in accordance with the American 
pragmatist philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce the im­
portance of 'abduction' as the logic of design.9  Abduction 
suggests that something may be, as opposed to deduction, 
which  proves  that something  must  be, and  induction, 
which shows that something actually is operative. A de­

8 Ibid., pp. 341-342. 
9  March, L.: The Logic of Design* in Cross, op. cit. 

214 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

sign proposal is not a logical proposition. Design initiates 
novel forms: its interest is neither in the abstract forms of 
logic nor in the extant forms that an empirical science in­
vestigates. 

There is also the rethought position that what is wrong 
with the mathematical and logical design methods is that 
they are the product  of a mode of  reasoning alien to de­
sign.10 The point is that there is a designing way of think­
ing that is quite different, but appropriate to the ill-defined, 
untamed problems of everyday life that designers tackle. 
This  'innate  capability  of  cognitive  modelling',  as  ex­
pressed through sketching, drawing, construction, acting 
out, etc., is thought of as as fundamental to thought and 
reasoning as the human capacity for language. 

Still others argue the importance for design of the phi­

losophy  of  ordinary  language-games,  as  developed  by 
Wittgenstein.11 This concerns the limits of verbal descrip­
tions in design and the creativity of designers. The point is 
that only a relatively small and perhaps insignificant part 
of design knowledge can  be expressed in verbal  descrip­
tions as propositional  knowledge (as opposed to practical 
understanding).12  Hence,  what  designers (and  users, I 
would like to add) do and know, to a great extent has to be 
experienced in practice, not for some romantic or mystical 
reason, but because it is literally indescribable in linguistic 
terms.13 

Today, participative and creative approaches to design 
are championed  as candidates  to  replace systematic or 
rationalistic design in the movement of design methodo­
logy. This is a critique that comes from inside, from some 

10 Archer, L.B.: 'What Became of Design Methodology?' in Cross, 
op. cit. 
11  Daley, J.: 'Design Creativity and the Understanding of Objects' 
in Cross, op. cit. 
12 See chapter 3 on Language-Games - A Wittgensteinian Ap­
proach. 
13 This is further developed in chapter 18, Skills and the Tool 
Perspective. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

215 

of the most important contributors to a Cartesian design 
approach.  Theory  and  practice  in  architectural  and 
industrial design have moved away from the early ideas 
of  design  as  decomposition  of  complex  hierarchical 
systems, towards an understanding of  the participative 
and creative character of the design process, and towards 
a qualitative understanding of what good design is. How, is 
it possible  that in computer science the early rationalist 
systems  engineering  approach  and  the  program  of 
Herbert Simon is still alive? Should the practical failures of 
rationalistic design  methodologies in other design fields 
not be taken as an indication of a need for a new paradigm 
for an art and a science of design of computer artifacts, as 
well? 

I find  that the disciplinary critique and  alternatives 
proposed  within  computer  and  information  science  (as 
outlined  in the previous chapter), definitely find  strong 
support in theoretical and practical experiences from the 
research field  of design methodology. The direction for an 
art  and  science  of  designing computer  artifacts  that  I 
have suggested  seems to be  well in accordance  with the 
development in other more mature design fields.14 

14 Another reason for why I find  the developments in the three 
generations of design methodology as striking is how well this 
agrees with how my own research has developed. As outlined in 
the Prologue  my first  interest was in rationalistic systems analy­
sis and systems description methods (1969-1972). Partly as a cri­
tique of this approach I then worked theoretically and in actions 
research with participatory approaches  with the aim of support­
ing democracy at work (1973-1979). From then until now, my re­
search, theoretically and in empirical  research projects,  has con­
centrated on skill and creativity in participative design with the 
aim of supporting quality of work. However, this development took 
place in a Scandinavian social and historical environment differ­
ent from that of the design methodology debate. I will return to 
this Scandinavian research situation and political environment 
in the following parts of this book. 

216 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

Architectural Design 
During the years when I have done research on design of 
computer artifacts I have often had the pleasure of coop­
erating  with,  and  receiving  inspiration  from  research 
colleagues in the field of architectural design. 

In my  research in Scandinavia on democratization of 
design of computer artifacts in industrial organizations in 
the mid 1970s I had close contacts with researchers in the 
field  of  architecture. They  worked  with a  participative, 
local activity, trade  union perspective on  design of  work 
environment in industrial sites.  Inspired  by-Alexander, 
some  developed  a  'pattern  language'  on  work  environ­
ment solutions, a tool-kit of  prototypical examples  to be 
used  locally.15  Others  developed  design strategies  and 
methods for  the  work  environment, in  much  the same 
way as we did action research together with local  trade 
unions on  design  of  computer  artifacts.16  Academically 
this design perspective resulted in several dissertations.17 

When my research focus also shifted in the early 1980s 
towards design of computer based tools for skilled work, 
colleagues from the field of architecture were able to con­
tribute with useful inspiration. In particular, I learned a 
lot from the approach taken in a Ph.D. dissertation on de­
sign  theory  by  Jerker  Lundequist.18  Maintaining  a 
Marxist approach as a basis for understanding the social 
and  political dimensions of  the design  process, he  tran­
scended  it  by  incorporating  into  design  theory  the 
thoughts of  the 'second'  Wittgenstein. Hence, it became 

15  Ahlin, J.: Arbetsmiljösanering - förnyelse genom  demokrati­
sering  av  planeringsprocessen, Royal  Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm 1974 (dissertation). 
16 See for example Steen, J. and Ullmark, P.: En egen väg-att 
göra  fackliga  handlingsprogram, Royal  Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm 1982 (dissertation). 
17 See e.g. the examples above. 
18  Lundeqvist, J.\Norm och Modell - samt  ytterligare några be­
grepp inom designteorin, Department  of Architecture, Royal  In­
stitute of Technology, Stockholm, 1982 (dissertation). 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

217 

conceptually  possible  to  grasp  the  practical  skills  of 
professional designers and users, and to reframe  the de­
sign process and  the labor  process designed for, as lan­
guage-games. 

I think that by being concerned with the more mature 
discipline of architectural design as a mirror for reflecting 
research and education in design of computer artifacts we 
could well gain deeper insight and new ideas for our own 
field of design. This is, as will be demonstrated, a position 
shared by several researchers in our own field. 

Styles and Movements in Architectural Design 
In design of buildings as well as computer artifacts a pri­
mary consideration is of  course that they will fulfill the 
purposes they are intended  for. In architectural design 
this assessment is articulated in a design program, which 
gives  the general goals and  constraints for  the design. 
Within  these frames, and  sometimes beyond  them, the 
design to a great extent depends on the individual design­
ers as well as the prevailing social conditions and cultural 
climate.  And  styles  have  changed  in  Western  ar­
chitecture, as we all can notice.  From historicism at the 
beginning of this century, via functionalism beginning in 
the 1920s, to  modernism in the 1950s and  post-moder­
nism in the early 1970s, buildings have been like grand 
statements, transparent functions, and on to postmodern 
playfulness and even cynicism. The focus on buildings as 
objects which express grand or small, international or lo­
cal statements, versus the view of buildings as artifacts 
and elements for human interaction, has shifted several 
times in the modern history of architecture, a situation we 
can observe, both as amateurs in architecture and as ex­
perts in using and living with these artifacts. 

In  particular  two  very  different  styles,  schools  or 

movements in modern architecture may be of special in­
terest in an analogy with design  of computer artifacts -
Bauhaus and Postmodernism. They both represent de­
sign concepts that go far beyond the architectural domain, 

218 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

and they both deal with fundamental aspects of design in 
society today. 

The Bauhaus movement had its origin in Germany in 
the 1920s. This was a  movement  with  strong belief  in 
progress for the new world that industrialism opened up. 
They wanted form and function to be one. Artifacts should 
be transparent as to their functionality. Forms should be 
appropriate to the kind of material that was being used. 
The program was a fusion of the fine  arts with the crafts. 
But  it  was  also  a  social  and  revolutionary  program. 
Buildings and other artifacts should be designed to engen­
der social  change.  By  design  of  progressive  social  and 
cultural values into the artifacts, these were thought of as 
vehicles  for change by  creating the necessary  conditions. 
This is socially a grandiose program from which we can 
learn a  great deal  of  conscious proactive design  of  com­
puter artifacts for a better world. 

Early functionalistic Bauhaus designs like the experi­

mental school-house built at Am Horn in Weimar in 1923 
are good  examples of  the attempt  to  integrate artistic 
competence  and  craft skills  with  industrial  production 
and  user  participation.19  And  products from  the design 
program  for  industrial  production  of  functional  high 
quality furniture for  ordinary  people  are far  from  out­
dated. 

But too analytic a Utopian design of the future can also 
lead to severe mistakes, when the actual social context is 
not taken into account. A warning example is the Pruitt-
Igoe low-income  buildings in St Louis,20  designed in the 

19 The design was based on a draft by the painter Georg Muche, 
chosen by representatives for the students, designed by architect 
Fred Forbat, with the interiors being made in the school's work­
shop. See e.g. Schädlich, C.: Bauhaus i  Dessau 1925-932, Cata­
logue from Banders Art Museum, 1985. 
20 For a further discussion see Jencks, C.: The Language  of 
Postmodern  Architecture, Rizzoli,  New York 1984, and Bannon, 
L. 'Issues in Design - Some Notes' in Norman,  D. A. and Draper, 
S. W. (eds.): User Centered  System Design -New  Perspectives on 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

219 

'international'  style  by  Minora  Yamaski  in  the  early 
1950s. They did  away with traditional streets, gardens 
and semiprivate spaces. Instead they were designed in a 
purist style, based on a clean salubrious hospital metaphor, 
meant to instill the corresponding virtues in the inhabi­
tants. This was an award winning design of good form as 
a  means for  good  content or at least  good  conduct. The 
problem was that it was  totally inappropriate for its in­
habitants. Many  of  them were Southern  migrants with­
out experience of living densely packed in compartments 
with little room for expression of individuality and tradi­
tional social activity. In short time the covered walkways 
became  the site for  vandalism,  drug abuse  and  crime. 
Hence, people started to move out of this nightmare. At­
tempts  to  rehabilitate  the complex  were  in  vain.  Ulti­
mately, in 1972, the authorities literally blew the thing up 
after recommendations from the residents. Do  we  have 
similar positive and negative functionalistic examples in 
design of computer artifacts? That should be worth inves­
tigating. 

Postmodernism in architecture is a quite opposite pro­

gram or set of trends first  developed in the USA in the late 
1960s. The emphasis is no longer on internationalism or 
social revolution, but on small stories, narratives and lan­
guage-games. Buildings are seen as sign artifacts. Bricks 
looking like bricks are no more real than  bricks looking 
like marble, and a department store that looks like a de­
partment store is no more real than one reminding us of a 
church (of  mammon). Instead  buildings are deliberately 
designed  as signs reminding us of  something else. These 
signs may  be  e.g. history of,  or traditions in, the place 
where a house is built, or bits and pieces from the history 
of architectural design. They might be very personal re­
minders of  the architect's own  development  as well  as 
cultural reminders for whole ethnic groups. The artifacts 

Human-Computer  Interaction, Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates, 
London 1986, p. 28. 

220 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

are not intended to be true to any tradition, but playful and 
stimulating. 

Interesting examples include Andrew Derbyshire's de­

sign of Hillingdon Civic Centre in London. The place is a 
veritable collision of low-pitched  roofs and brick all over, 
reminding the  users  of  the vernacular  and  traditional 
building types they know and enjoy. The architect set out 

to  design  a  building  that  spoke  a  language  of  form 
intelligible to its users (its occupants as well as the citi­
zens of the borough) and used it to say something they 
wanted to hear.21 

And  a  study  asking  if  postmodernism  communicates 
showed that the form of the building really was perceived 
as welcoming by its users.22 

A  well  known  warning  example  might  be  Ricardo 
Bofill's housing project in a Parisian suburb. Thousands of 
families live in a palace-like complex. But the inhabitants 
are neither royal nor rich, but ordinary low-paid families 
with a bunch of  kids. The  whole palace is just a  facade, 
which becomes even  more cynical when  there is no out­
door  place for  the  children  to  play  in.  Have  we  corre­
sponding good  and bad  postmodern designs of  computer 
artifacts? That should also be worth investigating. 

I find  both Bauhaus and  Postmodernism in architec­

ture relevant for  design of  computer artifacts. Bauhaus 
because of its proactive approach, the insight that design 
of artifacts is design for future conditions of living, a vehi­
cle  for  change - with  all  the  responsibility  and  moral 
questions that this incorporates. Postmodernism because 
computer artifacts even more than buildings lend them­
selves  to  this kind  of semiotic  design.  What  are  repre­
sented on the screen are signs or metaphors that remind 

21  Derbyshire, A.: 'Building the Welfare State' in Architecture: 
Opportunities,  Achievements, p. 29 (quoted after Jencks, C.: Cur­
rent  Architecture, Academy Editions, London 1982). 
22 Groat, L and Canter,  D.: 'Does Post-Modernism Communicate' 
in Progressive  Architecture, December 1979. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

22L 

the  users of  experiences  and  support  the imagination. 
Hence we had better use this capacity consciously, using 
metaphors and signs that make sense to people  in their 
ordinary lives, and that are fun to play with, artifacts that 
remind the users of their own local stories, and sometimes 
support imaginary transcendence of them. 

But are these kind of examples really relevant for de­

sign of computer artifacts? Maybe  not for such a  science 
in a  narrow sense, but certainly for extending it to, and 
incorporating in it, an art of designing computer artifacts, 
and  for  our  understanding  of  what  kind  of  enterprise 
design of computer artifacts is socially. Style might not be 
scientific, but it certainly plays an important role in design 
of computer artifacts too. 

Today the 'desktop metaphor' is à la mode in interface 

design,  and  'object  orientation' is very  popular  in  pro­
gramming. What is style or art in this, and what is purely 
scientific?  Ten  years from  now  other styles  may  be  in 
vogue. It should be worth reflecting about what was sci­
ence and what was art in the ideas that Alan Kay had, and 
before him Douglas Engelbart, that today are manifested 
as Macintosh style workstations?23 Why did Kay and the 
people at Xerox PARC  design SMALLTALK-80 as they did, 
and which ideas led Kristen Nygaard and Ole Johan Dahl 
to  design  SIMULA  and  basic concepts of  what  today  is 
known as a school of  object oriented  programming?24 To 
my mind  these innovations are just as much artistic cre­
ations of  new design styles as new scientific approaches, 
but that does not make them less important. On the con­
trary they show the importance of artistic competence in 
the field of designing computer artifacts. 

23 See e.g. Kay, A.: The Reactive Engine, University of Utah, 1969 
(dissertation), and Engelbart, D.  C.: Augmenting  human intel­
lect-A conceptual  framework, Stanford  Research Institute, 
Menlo Park 1962. This will be further referred to in chapter 17, 
The 'Toolness'  of  Computer  Artifacts. 
24  Actually the first  conference on the history of programming 
languages was held in Los Angeles as late as in June 1978. 

222 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

By becoming aware of the importance of style, one finds 

new questions arising. Is, for  example, the systems ap­
proach in practice more of a design style, one that requires 
artistic creativity  to perform, than a scientific  method? 
What  was science  and  what  was style  in  the Manage­
ment  Information  Systems  of  the 1960s,  in  the  large 
database approaches of the 1970s, and which are the sci­
entific versus artistic ideas behind the approaches of net­
worked  workstations of  the 1980s? Finally, we can also 
reflect  upon  what might  neither be science nor art, but 
simply marketing by large vendor corporations. 

Certainly an awareness of style, the history of schools 
and their programs, and experiences with different styles 
is important in a curriculum in design of computer arti­
facts. Style may not be scientific in a rigorous sense, but it 
is professionally important to be able to master different 
styles. Furthermore, to reflect about styles and schools in 
design  of  computer  artifacts, as  well  as  to  investigate 
analogies to architectural and industrial design, is a most 
rational endeavor. After all, design styles and artistic ones 
live and die as scientific paradigms do. We had better be 
aware of both, both as tradition and for creative transcen­
dence that can lead to better designs. 

Furthermore,  examples  like  the  architectural  ones 

discussed above also tell us something about the contra­
diction between on  the one hand artistic or design free­
dom, and participation and control by the future users on 
the  other.  Both  the  functionalistic  socially  oriented 
Bauhaus enterprise, and the playfulness suggested by the 
postmodern  designers  may  end  up  in  a  dehumanizing 
chaos  despite  opposite  intentions.  Participation  might 
constrain design freedom and  it might  be hard to recog­
nize the future users. Nevertheless this seems to be just as 
important  as individual  artistic  creativity.  And  future 
users of computer artifacts are easier to identify than fu­
ture inhabitants in buildings. The life cycle  of computer 
artifacts  is after  all  shorter  than  for  example  that  of 
churches. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

223 

In  the  Epilogue,  I  will  return  to  Bauhaus  and 
Postmodernism  relating  the  socially  and  culturally 
proactive enterprise of  work-oriented  design to the post­
modern conditions of  our contemporary Western  culture 
and state of capitalism. 

A 'Catalogue' of Paradigm Examples 
I will end this section on inspirations from architectural 
design with a 'catalogue' of  paradigm examples. In one 
way  or  another  they  all  show  how  experiences  from 
architectural  design  may  be  helpful for  understanding 
design  of  computer  artifacts,  and  for  designing  more 
useful  and  perhaps  even  more  beautiful  computer 
applications.25 

User  Interface - Facade  or  Entranceway? 
The  first  paradigm  example,  concerning  the  design  of 
user interfaces, is due to Kristina Hooper.26 

In architecture there has often  been emphasis on the 

facade of  a building as a principle element. Some archi­
tectural  theorists see  the facade  as the membrane  be­
tween the outside and the inside, with the purpose of ar­
ticulating the relation between the two. Others argue that 
the facade should contain information about the structure 
of the building. What if we, as in current postmodern de­
sign, focus on the interface as a false facade, delighting in 
the lack of necessary relationship between exterior facade 
and interior design, Hooper asks? She concludes that: 

no matter how  beautiful a screen display is, an inter­
face will not be effective unless the functionality of the 

25  A primary source from which several  of the examples have 
been drawn is Norman, D. A. and Draper, S. W.  (eds.): User Cen­
tered  System  Design - New  Perspectives on  Human-Computer 
Interaction, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, London 1986, where 
several of the authors draw analogies between the design of com­
puter artifacts  and architectural  design. 
26  Hooper,  K.: 'Architectural  Design - An Analogy* in Norman 
and Draper, op. cit. 

224 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

system is revealed, preferably directly. In contrast  to 
the architectural domain  where one can walk  into a 
building and then evaluate the informativeness of the 
facade, one is stuck on the screen, vising the tracings 
presented there to infer the structure of the computer 
system.27 

An important critique, but is not the crucial point in fact 
how useful  reminders (postmodern or not) we manage to 
design the screens to be, rather than how well these por­
tray the structure of the computer system? 

Hooper goes on to consider the architectural analogy of 
an interface as an entranceway rather than as a facade. 
Again there are strong architectural traditions: 

Consider  European  cathedrals and  formal Japanese 
gardens: The viewpoint of a visitor is carefully planned 
to reveal the whole place in a very systematic way. In 
the design of interfaces one must also consider carefully 
how one selectively informs a user about a particular 
system, providing well-chosen bits and pieces that con­
stitute a general understanding of the system. Some of 
the metaphors of  entranceways may be  useful in ad­
dressing this issue of selective disclosure to new users of 
a particular computer system.28 

I quite agree that the metaphor might be useful, but not 
primarily  in  relation  to  the  structure of  the computer 
system, which is another metaphor, but in relation to the 
work or communication the user is involved in via the ar­
tifact. 

Participation and  Long-Term Effects 
The  next  example  concerns  the  'distance'  between 
designers and users. 

27 Ibid., p. 14. 
28 Ibid., p. 14. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

225 

Based on the Pruitt-Igoe story, referred to above, Liam 
Bannon29 notices that the Vision' of the designer, and the 
needs and desires of the people designed for, can be dra­
matically different. He relates this to the circumstances 
that the designer often  works for a client  with different 
values than those of  the ultimate inhabitants of a build­
ing.30 He also relates the differences to the situation that 
design teams often perform their work far away from the 
physical and cultural context in which the buildings are to 
be useful. He concludes that: 

obviously, fault does not lie at the door of the designer 
alone, as that person is but one element in a complex 
socioeconomic  system  that  makes  decisions  about 
features of artifacts, but it behooves the designer to dis­
play a thorough understanding of the needs of the peo­
ple that will ultimately live and work around these ar­
tifacts, be they houses or computers.31 

The lesson to be learned from architecture is that a so­
cially concerned approach to the design of computer arti­
facts has to be  based both on  active involvement by the 
people that will be affected by the design and careful at­
tention  to  the longer-term effects our  designs  have  on 
work and society. 

'Seed  of  New Cultures' 
The third example, by John Seely Brown, concerns the 
Bauhaus approach  and "how  we  might design computa­
tional artifacts - that is, to create artifacts that can act as 
the seeds of new perspectives or 'cultures'.32 

29 Bannon, L. 'Issues in Design - Some Notes' in Norman and 
Draper, op. cit. 
30  In the terminology of the systems approach by Churchman dis­
cussed in the previous chapter, we can say that the client is not 
the client  but  the decision-maker. 
31 Bannon, op. cit., p. 29. 
32 Brown, J. S.: 'From Cognitive to Social Ergonomics and Be­
yond' in Norman and Draper, op. cit., p. 480. 

226 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

One of Brown's examples of  design as a proactive tool 
for social change emerged out of an idea of transferring a 
new perspective on interfaces to designers of copiers. The 
actual computer-based artifact he has in mind is a proto­
typing  design  artifact  called  Trillium.33  Rather  than 
spending  months  on  individual  designs,  the  designers 
could, with  the help  of  this tool, in a few days progress 
from a design idea to a functioning artifact. Hence, he ar­
gues, the designers were likely to have invested less ego in 
a particular product, and to be more willing to criticize it 
and change it. 

Trillium as a proactive means of social change did have 

an effect on the subculture of designers of  copiers. How­
ever it can be questioned if the changes were all foreseen. 
As reported by Blomberg, in different sites different orga­
nizational  and  professional  structures  emerged  when 
these computer-based artifacts were implemented in the 
organizations.34 

Another  concrete  example  where  Brown  sees  great 
possibilities  of  a  Bauhaus-like  approach  is to  open  up 
cooperation and learning in groups in organizations. And 
he concludes that: 

building  tools  that  enhance  collaboration  can  bring 
about  the development  of  community  support  struc­
tures that more effectively tap individual resources and 
increase group learning. In order to realize this poten­
tial, we  need to be aware  of the subtle ways in which 
computational artifacts function as cultural artifacts.35 
This  proactive  Vision' from one  of  the people  that con­
tributed to the computer workstation so commonplace to­
day should be worth reflecting about. We know that com­
puter workstations have drastically changed  the indivi­

33 Trillium was designed by Austin Henderson of Xerox PARC. 
34  Blomberg, J.: The Variable Impact of Computer Technologies 
on the Organization of Work Activities' in Proceedings of CSCW 
'86, Austin 1986. 
35  Norman and Draper, op. cit., p. 486. 

Other Ways of Seeing and  Doing II 

227 

dual work assignments for many users. Will the new tools 
have a similar effect on cooperative work? Which Visions' 
should then be guiding, and who should participate in the 
design? 

Social and Political Process 
The fourth example, due to Rob  Kling, concerns how  we 
can  utilize experiences from  the branch  of  architecture 
dealing with  urban  planning to  understand design as à 
social and political process.36 

According to Kling urban artifacts shape the social ter­
rain in which we live  much as computer artifacts shape 
the 'information  terrain' in organizations. The  planning 
of neighborhoods, urban centers, and buildings has much 
in common with the design of  computer artifacts. He ar­
gues that we can learn a great deal from analogies with 
designers of buildings as complex as universities or whole 
cities - not that they always have been successful, but be­
cause there is a long history of traditions and examples to 
study. How do they think about the interplay between the 
artifacts and the people that are encouraged to live with 
these artifacts? 

Another aspect of the analogy is the social and political 
means society  and communities have developed  to plan 
and control urban design projects. The point is that the 
planning and design of computer artifacts, just like build­
ings, takes place in complex, conflicting and pluralistic so­
cial  settings. These  are settings  which  urban  planners 
have  considerable  experience  with  explicitly  designing 
pro-social artifacts for. 

With  this  analogy  we  can  also  reflect  over  our  own 
practice. We  have all worked  or  played in hundreds of 
buildings  designed  by  architects  and  urban  planners. 
What can  we infer from this to the comparatively fewer 
computer artifacts most of  us have had practical experi-

36  Kling, R.: 'Computerization as an Ongoing Social and Political 
Process' in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): Computers and  Democracy -A 
Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

228 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

enee of? How do we make explicit the presumptions of so­
cial life, the ethical and aesthetic considerations, made by 
planners and designers of computer artifacts, so that they 
become as visible to us as the choices made by architects 
and urban planners? 

The Reflective  Practitioner 
My  last  example  in  arguing  for  the  usefulness  of 
paradigm cases from  architecture for an art and science 
of designing computer  artifacts is  more theoretical, and 
relates back to the philosophical discussion in the part on 
Design Philosophy. It concerns what designers really do, 
and  is  drawn  from  The  Reflective  Practitioner - How 
Professionals Think in Action by Donald A. Schön.37 

I think  that Schön's  perspective can  be  described  as 
closely  related  both to  the Wittgensteinian  approach to 
language-games, practical knowledge and  knowledge by 
familiarity, and  to the Heideggerian approach  to under­
standing proficient and expert knowledge in thrown and 
projective situations. 

However, according to Schön, what is typical of profes­
sional practice is reflection-in-action. This is neither com­
pletely detached reflection nor all-absorbing involved and 
thrown activity. It is the kind of research professionals do 
as reflections or breakdowns while they act in thrown si­
tuations. To Schön  this is a  major aspect  of  how profes­
sionals develop new insight. 

One of his cases on reflection-in-action is of special in­

terest to us here. It is from architectural design. He studies 
a situation in a design studio at a school of architecture 
where a student is undertaking a design project under the 
supervision of a master designer. His claim is that the 
kind of generic design process architects follow is shared 
by other design professions. 

What is typical of the design process is designing as a 
conversation with the materials of a situation. A designer 

37 Schön D. A: The  Reflective  Practitioner - How  Professionals 
Think in Action, Basic Books, New York 1983. 

Other Ways of  Seeing and. Doing II 

229 

works in particular situations, uses particular materials, 
and employs a  distinctive medium and language. Every 
move in the language-game of designing is a local experi­
ment, where the initial moves often must be reframed, as 
the changed situation most often deviates from the initial 
appreciation. Hence, it is also a global experiment in re-
framing the whole situation, which might lead to the ap­
preciation of  completely  new ideas. The professional de­
signer responds to the situation's back-talk. This is reflec-
tion-in-action as breakdown of the understanding of the 
situation, the strategies of action, the modeling, etc., that 
have been implicit in the initial moves. 

The language  of  designing  that is  used  for  commu­
nication  and learning in design is a  parallel  process of 
drawing and  speaking about  the design. The verbal di­
mension is full of  deictic  utterances like  liere', 'this' or 
'that'. They  refer  to  pointing at drawings,  making new 
sketches, etc. It is a language of doing, in creating images 
or visions of the future. 

It should  be  obvious  that  this language  is  not  con­

strained to the use of drawings. In our context of designing 
computer  artifacts,  prototypes,  mock-ups, scenarios, or 
even  role plays are  just different  complementary media 
for  the language-game  of  design, and  different  triggers 
for reflection-in-action. They may have the advantage of 
making it easier for users to participate in the design pro­
cess, since they are less abstract and less alienated from 
practical use situations. 

In teaching or giving examples of design there is also an 
intertwined  meta-language  about  design. This is how a 
designer describes features of the design process as he de­
signs, typically as detached reflection about design princi­
ples. 

According to Schön the dimensions of language-games 

of designing typically include: 

the  domains  of  language  in  which  the  designer  de­
scribes and appreciates the consequences of his moves, 
the  implications  he  discovers  and  follows,  and  his 

230 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

changing stance  toward  the situation  with  which  he 
converses.38 

A  professional  designer  masters a  repertoire of  design 
domains which  he draws upon to fulfill constructive, de­
scriptive and normative functions in designing. 

These design domains contain names of elements, fea­
tures, relations, and actions, and of norms used to eva­
luate problems, consequences, and implications.39 

In  architectural  design  these  domains  may  be  siting, 
building elements,  form, organization and space, scale, 
structure/technology etc. In design of computer artifacts 
to be  used in a specific activity  we  could  certainly find 
similar domains. 

The design domains contain the ordering principles or 
rules that the designer uses in early moves in the design. 
However, as the materials of  the situation talk back the 
professional designer knows how to 'soften' or transcend 
these rules to get a good design. 

In the conversation with the materials of the situation, 

the designer  can  never  make  a  move  that has only in­
tended implications. The design material is continually 
talking back to him. This causes him to apprehend unan­
ticipated problems and potentials, which become the basis 
for farther moves. 

Both the repertoire of design domains and  the situa­

tions' back  talk seem to be  what causes the designer  to 
make the right or at least good moves. 

As the professional designer spins out a web of moves he 
also shifts stance toward the design situation. He oscillates 
between involved design of details and detached reflection 
on the totality of the design. This detached reflection of the 
totality may be  seen as a global  reframing of  the whole 
situation. As the design proceeds, the designer also econ­
omizes the designing by shifting stance from explorative 

33 Ibid., p. 95. 
39 Ibid., p. 97. 

Other Ways of  Seeing and  Doing II 

231 

adaption of tentative strategies to involved commitment to 
a specific design. 

Though emphasizing  the specific role of  reflection-in­

action in design, Schön has to admit that there is more to 
it. Commenting on  the  masterful way in  which  the ob­
served architect 'zeroes in immediately on fundamental 
schemes and decisions which quickly acquire the status of 
commitments'40 he concludes that the designer 'seems to 
have  developed  a  feeling  for  the  kind  of  conversation 
which the design situation sets in motion.'41 Hence, reflec-
tion-in-action is just one of the designing ways of thinking 
the professional practitioner performs. Other fundamen­
tal ways of thinking and doing professional design come 
closer to the arational, involved, rapid, fluid, and intuitive 
performance described as typical for proficient and expert 
knowledge in the chapter on the Heideggerian approach. 
A science of design does not have to be based on the as­
sumption that the practice of professional designers is an 
activity congruent with the activity of natural scientists. 
At least the competence of professional architects seems to 
stem from many other sources, and it seems to be better 
understood within other epistemological  and theoretical 
domains. I see no reason why this should not also be the 
case  with design of  computer artifacts. And  I think  we 
have some inspiring paradigm examples to follow from 
the more mature design arts. 

Summary 
I find  that  the  'external  alternatives' from  the  design 
methodology  movement  and  from  architectural  design 
discussed in this chapter are most inspiring paradigm ex­
amples for rethinking computer and information science 
and developing an art and science of designing computer 
artifacts. Hence, in the concluding chapter on a program 

40 Ibid., p. 104. 
41 Ibid., p. 104. 

232 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

for, and a curriculum in, the art and science of designing 
computer artifacts, they will play an important role. 

Chapter 10 
Conclusions: A Subject Matter 
and a Tentative Program 

This part of  the book  has been  a search for the subject 
matter of design of computer artifacts. I have tried to out­
line the subject  matter in  relation  to theory of  what in 
computer  and  information  science  more  commonly  is 
known as the field of systems design, in relation to theory 
of design in a wider context of other design sciences, and in 
relation  to  the  philosophical  positions  argued  in  the 
preceding part on Design Philosophy. 

In doing this, I have tried to demonstrate the fruitful-
ness of an understanding of design of computer artifacts 
in a  language that transcends the rationalistic natural 
science based language of systems, objects, information, 
and data. I have also tried to argue that with such an un­
derstanding of the subject matter, there already exist well 
elaborated and teachable theories and doctrines. 

The Subject Matter 
To sum  up I will recapitulate the outline of some funda­
mental  characteristics of  the subject  matter (designing 
computer artifacts), as discussed in a language close to the 
philosophical positions argued in the preceding part. 

It was suggested that we should understand design of 
computer  artifacts as a concerned  social and  historical 
activity in which artifacts and their use are anticipated, 
an activity  and form of  knowledge that is both planned 
and  creative,  and  that  deals  with  the  contradiction 
between tradition and transcendence. 

234 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

In  designing computer  artifacts  we  should  consider 
them as mediating instrumental  and/or communicative 
activities; as supporting individual and/or cooperative ac­
tivities; as augmenting and/or replacing human activities; 
as function and form that are irrevocably interconnected, 
and where aesthetic and ergonomie aspects may be just as 
relevant as instrumental functionality. 

I have chosen to regard computers as the material  or 
medium out of which computer artifacts can be designed. 
When designing computer artifacts we  utilize this mate­
rial's capacity for symbol manipulation, to design them as 
signs that remind the users of earlier experiences. These 
reminders may be in the tradition of the use of artifacts in 
a  specific  use  activity,  or  they  may  transcend  it  as 
paradigm cases for new ways of seeing and doing. Use is 
fundamental to my understanding of designing computer 
artifacts. Design  concerns the practical rather than  the 
artificial. What we design is not just artifacts, but - by in­
tervention - a changed or reformed  practice. 

I  have  also  suggested  that  rather  than focusing  on 
methods as prescriptions, we should be concerned  about 
norms or rules governing specific language-games of  de­
sign. These  are the norms and  rules which  professional 
designers follow, and sometimes transcend, often without 
being aware of them. Methodological prescriptions, on the 
other hand, are seen as explicit rules that can be used in 
learning a practice or reflecting about it, but they are not 
to  be  mistaken  for  actual  rule  following  in  language-
games of design. To master the norms and rules of design 
in practice also requires learning by examples passed  on 
from  more experienced  designers and  users. Hence, the 
practice of design should be emphasized. 

I have referred to descriptions, models, prototypes, etc., 
as design artifacts. The role of design artifacts in the lan-
guage-game of  design is seen as reminders  and as para­
digm cases for our reflections on existing and future com­
puter artifacts and their use. The use of design artifacts 
brings earlier experiences to mind and it bends' our way 
of thinking about the future. I think it is in this sense we 

Conclusions 

235 

should understand them as representations. Design arti­
facts are  used  to  create  reminders  that we  can  reflect 
upon, and sometimes experience  (e.g. by using a  proto­
type). 

I have preferred to talk about norms or  rules, and  re­
minders  or  paradigm  cases  rather  than  methods,  de­
scriptions and models, to avoid falling back into Cartesian 
dualism  and  the trap of  an epistemology  of  mirror-im­
ages. 

It has also been suggested that an art and science of de­
signing  computer  artifacts should  include  not  only  in­
strumental theories espousing design norms or rules to be 
followed and design artifacts to be used, but also substan­
tial theories giving better understanding of what design of 
computer artifacts is all about. Especially  we should be 
interested  in  theories  relating instrumental aspects  to 
substantial ones. 

A Program in Design 
Given such an understanding of design of computer arti­
facts, I outlined the following candidates for inclusion in a 
curriculum  to be taught in  disciplines dealing with  the 
subject matter: 

1. Social System Design Methods 
This topic covers methods which include the role of sub­
jectivity in design of systems. Theoretically the different 
approaches to social systems design have their origin in 
rationalistic systems thinking, but transcend this frame­
work philosophically by including the subjectivity of  the 
users. The  different approaches are well  developed  and 
they are based  on extensive  practical experience. How­
ever,  these  approaches  are  fundamentally  'pure' 
methodology. Hence a challenge will be to investigate how 
they can  be integrated  with, or supplemented  by, sub­
stantial theory of the social situations in which they are to 
be used. Another challenge is how they can be refined to 

236 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

more specifically  deal with design of  computer artifacts 
and their use. 

2. Theory of  Designing Computer Artifacts 
This  topic  covers  fundamental  theory  of  what  kind  of 
phenomenon the design of computer artifacts actually is. 
It reframes the  rationalistic understanding of  computer 
artifacts. The point of departure is what people do with 
computers in concerned  human  activity  within a  tradi­
tion. This also means an emphasis on differences in kinds 
of knowledge between on  the one hand human practical 
understanding and  experience, and on the other, know­
ledge  representation in  computers  understood  as logic 
machines' or 'inference engines'. 

In  design, focus  is on  concerned  involvement  rather 
than on correct descriptions. Design becomes a process for 
anticipation of possible breakdowns for the users in future 
use situations with the computer artifacts being designed. 
This is anticipation both to avoid breakdowns, and to re­
cover from them. 

Being a  new and fundamentally ontological approach 
to design of  computer artifacts, not  much instrumental 
design methodology  has as yet been developed.  Neither 
has its relation to substantial social theory been exten­
sively investigated. In both respects there are challenging 
possibilities. 

3. Process-Oriented  Software Engineering 
and Prototyping 
This topic is a paradigmatic rethinking of the process of 
designing software much along the lines of the first  two 
topics. The paradigmatic shift of primary point of view is 
from design of software as formal mathematical objects 
derived  by formalized  procedures from  abstract specifi­
cations, towards a process-oriented view. In this new pa­
radigm,  the  software  engineering  focus  is  on  human 
learning and  communication in  the design  process, and 
the relevance, suitability and adequacy in  practical use 
situations of the software being designed, not just on the 

Conclusions 

237 

correctness  and  efficiency  of  the  piece  of  code  being 
produced. 

The relevance of  this view is also accentuated by the 

development  in software  engineering of  powerful  com­
puter-based design artifacts for prototyping, which make 
it possible for prospective users to get experience of future 
computer artifacts by using these design artifacts as a ba­
sis for design requirements. A challenge is to develop pro­
gramming environments for prototyping that can be in­
tegrated with full scenarios, role plays etc., of future use 
situations, and to use these prototypes as design artifacts 
in playing language-games of design as games of involve­
ment and  doing that defeat some of the limits of formal 
descriptions. Another  challenge is to support  the emer­
gence  of  democratic environments for  the  utilization  of 
this approach. 

4. History of Design Methodology 
Another topic for the curriculum in design of  computer 
artifacts is general  reflections  on  design  methodology. 
Computers are  not the only  artifacts that are designed. 
How has design methodology developed in more mature 
design fields such as architectural and industrial design? 
Why has there e.g. been a shift from rationalistic, formal 
and  mathematically  oriented  approaches  towards  both 
more  participatory  approaches  and  more  'design-like 
ways of thinking*? Why have theoretically influential de­
signers reacted so strongly against their own rationalistic 
approach 'to fix the whole of life into a logical framework' 
(industrial designer  Christopher  Jones) that  they  now 
even  advise  us  to  'forget  the  whole  thing*  (architect 
Christopher Alexander) and start to experiment with art 
in the design process? It should be important to every well 
educated designer in our own field to reflect upon the re­
lation between design methodology for computer artifacts 
and the experiences with different generations of design 
methodologies in other fields. 

238 

The Art  and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

5. Architectural and Industrial Design 
as Paradigm Examples 
Still another relevant topic for our curriculum is how de­
sign is carried out in other design disciplines like archi­
tectural and industrial design. We can use design experi­
ences from these disciplines as paradigm examples to re­
flect over  theory, methods and practice in our own field. 
This includes reflections over  the relations between  sci­
ence and art in design, on styles or 'schools' in design, on 
the relation between science and styles in design, and on 
the social relations of designing in complex conflicting and 
pluralistic social settings. 

Styles or schools like Bauhaus (as a proactive approach 
based on the insight that design of artifacts is design of 
future  conditions  of  living,  a  vehicle  for  change)  and 
Postmodernism (as the use of  signs and  metaphors that 
are  joyful  to  play  with)  are  good  examples  of  such 
paradigm cases for reflections over the relations between 
science, art and society in design. The examples may also 
help us to focus on the styles used in design of computer 
artifacts, and they may themselves furnish some inspira­
tion for design of computer artifacts. 

6. Philosophy of Design 
Philosophy, especially theory of  knowledge, and its rela­
tion to design is a topic for a curriculum in design of com­
puter artifacts that is inherent in many of the other topics, 
but that also should have a place of its own. The relevance 
of, and some directions for, such studies were hinted at in 
the preceding part on Design Philosophy. A topic like this 
can be argued for any science, but it is crucial to a science 
of design of computer artifacts, since this subject matter, 
as conceived here, is both interdisciplinary and concerned 
with  basic conditions for  knowledge  production in prac­
tice. 

Conclusions 

239 

7.  Practical design 
With the program outlined it is obvious that a reduction of 
a curriculum in design of  computer artifacts to what can 
be taught and learned as detached theoretical reflections 
is contradictory. Both the philosophical investigation and 
the  examples  from  architecture  and  industrial  design 
point  at  the  importance  of  practical  understanding as 
knowledge by experience, by familiarity, and as reflection-
in-action in design. Hence practical design taught by pro­
fessional designers of computer artifacts and  their use, 
both as experimentation in a master-apprentice relation 
and as investigations into real cases, seems most funda­
mental to our curriculum. 

This practical education should  include examples of, 

and experimentation with, both a wide variety of applica­
tion  domains, and  a  wide range of  design artifacts and 
norms and rules for their use. Hence, application domains 
should not be restricted to traditional administrative sys­
tems, but include new domains e.g. computer support for 
graphic arts, or cooperative work in small groups. Neither 
should design artifacts and methods be restricted to more 
or less formal system description techniques. A new focus 
should be  on design  artifacts that support  involvement 
and experience, like the use of  prototypes and mock-ups, 
exploratory  programming  environments,  scenarios, 
maps, and even role playing. 

A Disciplinary Base for 
an Interdisciplinary Subject Matter 
I do not see these topics of a curriculum in design of com­
puter artifacts as a replacement of what is already taught 
in computer  and information science. But any  discipline 
that teaches and  does research on  the subject  matter of 
design of computer artifacts is strongly encouraged to let 
it take its place by the side of what is already taught, be­
cause it covers some of the fundamental aspects of what 
design of computer artifacts is really about. 

240 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer  Artifacts 

It has been my intention with this part to provide ar­

guments that any discipline that deals with the subject 
matter of design of computer artifacts should be able, the­
oretically and  methodologically, to treat design as inclu­
ding aspects like interventions into practice, as communi­
cation between users and professional designers, as a cre­
ative process, and as a concerned  human activity. And I 
have argued that any discipline dealing with such aspects 
of design will have to transcend a natural science founda­
tion, regardless of  whether the discipline  is called  com­
puter science, informatics or information science. 

The domain of  the subject  matter outlined  is not  pri­
marily theory  of  physical events or logic inferences  in a 
machine, but of concerned human activity within a back­
ground of  tradition and conventions in designing and us­
ing these artifacts. 

I find this subject matter truly interdisciplinary, with 

relations not only  to aspects of  traditional computer  sci­
ence, but  also to theories and  methods  from  social  and 
human sciences such as  sociology, psychology, anthropo­
logy, linguistics and  business administration. Such rela­
tions have only marginally been touched upon in this part, 
though the role of substantial theories and methods from 
these disciplines in a curriculum in  design of  computer 
artifacts is evident. I will return to some of these relations 
in the coming chapters where the social setting and the 
practical situation are more defined. 

Neither  have I discussed  research  methods  for  a  sci­

ence of design of computer artifacts, another obvious topic 
for our curriculum. However I think that many research 
situations bear a family resemblance with the design ap­
proaches discussed  here. What I have in mind is partici­
patory actions research, explorative experimentation, and 
case studies - not as a replacement for detached theoreti­
cal reflection in one or another theoretical context, but as 
their practical and empirical foundation. I will return to 
the topic of  research methods in connection with my em­
pirical cases in the coming chapters. 

Conclusions 

241 

Instead I have tried to focus on a disciplinary base  for 

the  interdisciplinary  subject  matter  of  designing  com­
puter  artifacts. In doing this I have tried to benefit from 
developments in other  more  mature design  disciplines, 
particularly  the theoretical and  methodological  discus­
sions in architectural and industrial design as paradigm 
cases. However, recent developments in computer science 
have provided valuable, contributions, as well. 

There have also been indications that what professional 

designers really do is more art than science.  This chal­
lenge to an art and science of designing computer artifacts 
particularly deserves further investigation. A first step 
could be to explore the  traditional  master-apprentice  re­
lation as one form for education in design of computer ar­
tifacts. A second is to consider the arts as paradigm cases 
for the design of computer artifacts. 

However, the different contributions discussed in this 
part indicate that we already have an intellectually sound 
and teachable disciplinary base for an art and science of 
design of computer artifacts. Much still remains be deve­
loped, especially when it comes to methods. And in many 
respects we have to understand 'the design  process [as] 
hiding behind  the cloak  of'judgment' and  'experience"1, 
that Herbert Simon once started his rationalistic crusade 
against, and for which he has had so many followers. But 
this retreat to practical understanding is for theoretical 
reasons,  not  because  of  intellectual  softness.  Simon's 
rationalistic  systems  engineering approach  may  be  an 
ever so elegant 'intellectually tough, analytic, partly for-
malizable, partly empirical, teachable doctrine about the 
design process',2 but I see no reason for us to retreat to it as 
a paradigm case for an art and a science of design of com­
puter artifacts. 

As compared with the rationalistic  approach the out­
lined program may be a step backwards on the road to­

1  Simon, H.: The Sciences of  the Artificial, The  MIT Press, 
Cambridge 1969, p. 80. 
2 Ibid., p. 58. 

242 

The Art and  Science of  Designing Computer Artifacts 

wards instrumental theory and methodology, but by being 
more fundamental, this may  also allow  us to  take two 
steps forward in designing powerful computer artifacts to 
augment the skill of users rather than replacing them by 
artificial intelligence. 

By taking this road, we will certainly also need to make 

extensive use of many of the theoretical and methodologi­
cal findings  in the  natural science based  research tradi­
tion in the design of computer artifacts. By understanding 
computers as the material we use in design of computer 
artifacts, the importance of  computer science  knowledge 
to design is obvious. An architect that has no understand­
ing of building materials and techniques may design aes­
thetic and socially useful houses, but no one will be able to 
live in them, if they cannot be physically constructed. The 
same holds for designers of computer artifacts. 

The question is not whether the one kind of knowledge 
or the other is needed. Both the research-guiding interest 
in technical control, and  the interest in intersubjective 
communication are fundamental to an art and science of 
designing computer artifacts. The problem is that the in­
terest in intersubjective communication has - hitherto to 
a great extent - been neglected in research and education 
of  our  subject  matter. There  are  good  theoretical  and 
practical reasons for changing this. 

Work-Oriented. Design 
With the outlined art and science of  designing computer 
artifacts an academic setting for work-oriented  design of 
computer artifacts has been established. 

However, as earlier pointed out, work-oriented design 
is also a practical normative enterprise. As such it has the 
complementary  immanent  research-guiding interest  in 
emancipation. 

Firstly, the question of participation must normatively 
be reframed as a question of designing  for  democracy at 
work. 

Conclusions 

243 

Secondly,  the question of  what kind of  artifacts com­

puters are must normatively to be reframed as a question 
of conditions for designing for  skilled work. 

In the coming parts I will turn to my experiences with 

such designing. 

Part III 
Designing for Democracy 
at Work 

'Therfore when I consider and  way in my  mind 
all these common wealthes, 
which now a dayes any where do florish, so god help me, 
I can perceave  nothing 
but certein conspiracy of  riche men 
procuringe theire  owne commodities 
under the name and title of the common wealth. 
They invent and devise all meanes and craftes, 
first how to kepe safely, without feare of lesing, 
that they have  unjustly gathered together, 
and  next how  to hire and  abuse the worke and  laboure of 
thepoore for as little money as may be.' 

Thomas More in Utopia 

Introduction 

The  democratic  ideal  is  a  beautiful  human  invention, 
stating the right for every human to equally participate in 
decisions concerning his or her life. In practice, however, 
this freedom has always been limited. The first  democrats, 
the ancient Greeks, constrained it to free men, excluding 
women and a class of slaves. The modern democratic state 
in capitalistic societies has in theory, and in many practi­
cal affairs, removed these constraints. The representative 
democracy  is  a formal  arrangement  for  securing  deci­
sions in the interest of the majority, and often for securing 
some discretion for minority groups. Still, in many sectors 
of  human life  the democratic  rights remain  merely for­
mal,  without  a  real  content  for  those  concerned,  and 
many sectors are excluded from the practice of this ideal. 
Here I am  concerned  with democracy inside the factory 
gates and office doors — i.e. industrial democracy. 

I have earlier identified  work-oriented design of  com­

puter artifacts not only  with the  technical and  practical 
research guiding interests of  instrumental  control  and 
intersubjective communication, but also with the research 
guiding interest of emancipation. This interest focuses on 
knowledge  and  understanding  for  emancipation  from 
hypostatized forces of history and society and is directed 
towards creating conditions for independent individuals in 
a  society  of  free  cooperation  and  communication.  This 
comes close to the democratic ideal, but there is a supple­
mentary emphasis on the process of democratization. 

Taking this ideal seriously, questions of  the following 
kind arise: Why does democracy stop at the factory gate, 
and how can it be developed to also include our working 
life? What are the practical constraints and possibilities 

248 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

for  democratic design  and  use of  computer  artifacts at 
work? How can research contribute in this direction? 

I have earlier argued for an understanding of design of 

computer artifacts as a concerned social,  historical, cre­
ative and planned activity in which  we try to anticipate 
computer artifacts and their use. How is this related to the 
emancipatory  democratization  ideal  and  the  questions 
above? In this part I will discuss research efforts to deal 
with these questions. In particular, I will reflect upon our 
experiences from  the DEMOS  and UTOPIA  research  pro­
jects. 

Industrial Democracy 
The author and researcher Sven Lindqvist once described 
the relation between the scientific community and people 
at the workplaces in the following way:1 

The modern society is completely dependent on science. 
There  is  no  sector  of  society  that is  not  affected  by 
progress in research and  technology. This is certainly 
also true for the Swedish working class. (...) We must 
seek contacts and intermediate links between the re­
searchers and  the representatives of  society and  the 
workers, and this communication net must be traveled 
in  both  directions.  We  must  know  the  needs  of  the 
working class, and the working class  must know our 
resources. It is this double function that the university 
will try to fulfil through its contact secretariat. (...) The 
trade  unions are  best  acquainted  with  the  workers' 
needs. Therefore, the contact secretariat regards coop­
eration with the trade union  movement as absolutely 
natural. However, there is of course no impediment to 
individual workers or groups of  workers directly  con­
tacting the secretariat. (...) This way even a small local 

1 Lindqvist, S.: Gräv där du står-Hur man utforskar ett jobb, 
Bonniers, Stockholm 1978, pp. 267-268 (my translation). 

Introduction to  part  III 

union,  without  resources  for  their  own  applied  re­
search, can fulfil their research needs. 

The document Lindqvist based his vision on really exists. 
His description was taken from a pamphlet from the ven­
erable University of Uppsala, signed by its president. As a 
researcher Lindqvist was aware of the document; but as 
an author  he used  his 'licentia poetica', changing just a 
few words. Where  the original document said  'corporate 
business', Lindqvist  wrote 'working class', while 'emplo­
yer federations' was replaced  by 'trade unions', and 'ma­
nagement' by  'workers'. The Verfremdungseffekt  he in 
this way created shed some light on the real relation be­
tween research and democratization of working life. 

The research work that we (at the Swedish Center for 
Working Life) carried  out together  with trade  unions in 
the DEMOS  and UTOPIA  project  programmatically  ap­
proached Lindqvist's version  of  the pamphlet. The 'odd-
ness' of  our collective  resource  approach  did  not  come 
from the close contacts with users and their organizations, 
but from who these users and their organizations were. It 
is by  no  means exceptional  that research is directed  to­
wards e.g. technological problems at workplaces and the 
interests of people there. However, with few but important 
exceptions (the Swedish Center for Working Life perhaps 
being the most significant one) the established research 
world  does  not  direct  its  resources  to  the  interests  of 
workers and  their trade unions, and  the emancipatory 
ideal of industrial democracy. Not even in Scandinavia. 

The Trade Unions as Vehicles  for Industrial  Democracy 
In Marxist theory the relations between on the one hand 
workers and  their trade unions, and  on the other hand 
management and capital owners has its origin in the labor 
contract. This is an exchange relation between two kind of 
commodity possessors - capital that owns  the means of 
production and the workplace, and labor that owns its la­
bor power. To produce a profit the capital owner needs to 

250 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

buy labor power; to earn a living the worker needs to sell 
his or her labor power and work at a workplace. 

Due to the labor  contract differences in  interests are 
fundamental. To make a profit capital has an interest in 
lowering the price of  labor and  to exercise  the  right to 
control and divide work. These 'managerial prerogatives', 
often supported by laws, run counter to workers' interests 
both in term of wages and in terms of working conditions. 
Hence,  the  conflicting  interests  concerning  industrial 
democracy. 

The workers'  collective is a  concept developed  by  the 
Norwegian sociologist Sverre Lysgaard.2 By this he refers 
to  the  informal  defense  organization  of  workers  at  a 
workplace. The workers' collective is manifested  as sha­
red  norms concerning  how an individual worker should 
behave in relation to the management or the rationality of 
technical-economic organization,  e.g.  in  relation  to  the 
managerial interest in intensification of work, control of 
the labor process, and rationalizations by use of new tech­
nology. As labor  power, the workers are also part of  the 
technical-economic organization at the workplace, but the 
workers' collective is based on the workers' subordinated 
position  in  the  technical-economic  organization  at  the 
workplace.  The  degree  of  strength  in  the  workers' 
collective comes from  the 'we-feeling* created  by shared 
experiences.  The  basis  for  this  'we-feeling'  is  physical 
nearness  at  the  workplace - which  makes  interaction 
possible; similarity in working conditions - which makes 
the  workers  identify  with  each  other; and  a  similar 
problem situation which they interpret in a similar way. 
The  norms  of  the  workers'  collective  outline  what  it 
means to be a 'good work mate' as well as what it means 
to  be  a  'traitor'.  The  workers'  collective  is  a  'buffer' 

2 Lysgaard, S.: Arbeiderkollektivet, Universitetsförlaget, Sta­
vanger 1961. For a case discussion of the relation between the 
workers' collective and local  trade unions see Svensson, L.: Arbe­
tarkollektivet och  facket-en lokal  kamp för företagsdemokrati, 
Studentlitteratur, Lund 1984 (dissertation). 

Introduction to  part  III 

251 

between the individual worker and  managerial interests 
in the technical-economic organization of the work place. 
However, the workers'  collective has two  major weak 
points in  relation  to industrial  democracy.  Firstly,  the 
workers' collective can only informally defend  the indi­
vidual worker, meaning that it has  no formal  organiza­
tional  power  for  achieving  structural  changes  at  the 
workplace. Secondly, as a defensive organization respon­
ding to  'managerial  prerogatives' it lacks  the ability to 
formulate  and  carry  through  an  offensive  strategy  for 
changes in the direction of industrial democracy. 

The trade union movement, and especially local unions, 
is a formal organization through which such interests can 
be developed and implemented. This does not  mean that 
trade unions always represent the interests of the work­
ers' collective, and indeed  there can certainly be contra­
dictions. How well can the trade unions represent the in­
terests of the workers' collective, and how well is this for­
mal organization suited to uphold the interests of democ­
racy at work, especially when design and use of computer 
artifacts are concerned? 

In a historic perspective, trade unions have served the 
interest of  the workers' collective in  two  ways that are 
important in our context. They have been a strong support 
in negotiating wages for  workers, and  they have been a 
most active instrument for furthering the interest of de­
mocracy in society EIS a whole. 

However, it seems that the design and use of new tech­

nology  requires new  trade union activities. The  reasons 
for this are many. Traditionally trade unions have focused 
on what Åke Sandberg3  calls distribution issues such as 
wages, working hours, and general terms of employment. 
Such issues are characterized by: 
•  relatively well developed union objectives 
•  clearly formulated demands, often quantified 

3  Sandberg,  Å.: Technological  Change  and  Co-determination  in 
Sweden - Background  and  analysis of  trade  union  and  manage­
rial  strategies, Temple  Press (forthcoming). 

252 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

•  demands based  on the workers'  own practical experi­

ence 

•  clearly delimited, short negotiation situations. 
The design and  use of  computer artifacts are in Sand-
berg's terminology typical production issues. They are, on 
the other hand, characterized by: 
•  only vaguely formulated union objectives 
•  demands that are difficult to quantify 
•  practical on-the-job experiences that must be supple­

mented  by  more  theoretical,  technical/scientific 
knowledge 

•  the design processes stretch over long periods of time, 
and it is hard to distinguish clearly defined negotiation 
situations. 

Several of the prerequisites for traditional wage negotia­
tions do not exist here. As Sandberg puts it:4 

Constructive  problem  solving and  the design of  new 
models for work seem to require more deep-seated and 
qualitative aspects to be considered than can be easily 
fitted  within the traditional  trade union strategy. Of 
course, this is deeply problematic for the trade unions. 

How to prepare and conduct negotiations? How to build up 
knowledge  and  formulate  demands?  How  to  ensure in­
ternal union  democracy,  i.e.  that the demands  put for­
ward are in the interest of the members and  have their 
support? These are questions which  will  have to be ad­
dressed in new ways. 

Obviously  decentralization  of  decision-making  and 
participation  in the design  process give  more influence 
and access to important information. But is decentraliza­
tion of decision-making at work, and participation in the 
traditional systems design process, really the answer to 
the questions? The position we took in DEMOS, UTOPIA and 
other collective  resource  projects was that decentraliza-

4  Ibid. 

Introduction to  part  III 

253 

tion of decision-making and  a participative approach  to 
the design process are not sufficient. Fundamentally this 
position goes back to the labor contract, and the different 
interests of  management and  workers concerning indus­
trial democracy. 

Hence, we rejected the harmony view of  organizations, 

according  to  which  conflicts in  an organization are  re­
garded as pseudo-conflicts, to be dissolved by good analysis, 
and  consequently  we  also rejected  an  understanding of 
design as a  rational  decision-making  process  based  on 
common goals. Instead our research was based on a con­
flict view of industrial organizations in our society. In the 
interest of emancipation we deliberately made the choice 
of  working  together  with  workers  and  their  organiza­
tions, supporting the development of their resources for a 
change towards democracy at work.6  We found it neces­
sary to identify with the <we-feeling' of the workers' col­
lective,  rather  than  with  the  overall  'we-feeling'  that 
'modern management' dedicates its resources to creating, 
in order to gain more productivity out of the work force. 
In short: Trade unions were seen as organizations with a 
structure  that  was  problematic  when  functioning  as 
vehicles for designing for democracy at work at the same 
time they were seen as the only social force that in prac­
tice could be a carrier of this ideal. 

What Does Democratization of Design and 
Use of  Computer Artifacts at Work  Concern? 
Fundamentally, industrial democracy concerns freedom, 
another  value-laden  concept.  It concerns  freedom  from 
the limits  to democratization  manifested by the market 
economy  and  the power  of  capital, but it also  concerns 
freedom to in action and reflection practically formulate 

5 See Sandberg, Å.: The Limits to Democratic  Planning -
knowledge,  power and  methods in  the struggle  for the  future, 
Liber, Stockholm 1976 (dissertation), and with special reference to 
the design process Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: 'God utreding ' in 
Sandberg, A. (ed.): Utredning och  ßrändring i  förvaltningen, 
Liber förlag, Stockholm 1979. 

254 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

and  carry  out  this ideal.  Attempts  towards  industrial 
democracy can address e.g:6 
•  the power  of  capital  owners  to control  how  resources 
are used for economic goals, structural changes in the 
company,  investments  in  new  technology,  choice  of 
business idea, product assortment, etc. 

•  the organizational  and  technological  power  to decide 
how  the  production  process  in  general is organized, 
how technology is designed and used, etc. 

•  the power over the workers to decide how  work  is to be 

organized, planned and controlled 

•  the power over the individual's autonomy at  work, e.g. 
choices  concerning which  tools  to  work  with,  and  at 
what pace to work. 

The projects of the collective resource approach that I will 
discuss  in  this  part  of  the  book  concerned  industrial 
democracy in all these aspects. Furthermore, they aimed 
both at a  better understanding of  freedom from 'mana­
gerial prerogatives' and at an active process of freedom to 
develop and implement strategies for democratization at 
work. Design  of computer artifacts was seen in the con­
text of democratization at work. 

The Scandinavian Setting 
Scandinavian countries have, for  quite some  time, been 
well known for their industrial  relations. The following 
should be counted among the more distinguishing aspects: 
•  high level of unionization, 
•  strong national trade union federations, 
•  centralized negotiation systems, 
•  large social democratic parties with strong links to the 
the national trade union federations of blue (and some 

6 See e.g. Dahlström, E.: Bestämmande i  arbetet - Några idékri­
tiska  funderingar kring arbetslivets demokratisering, Depart­
ment of Sociology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg 1983. 

Introduction to  part 111 

255 

white) collar workers, parties which for long periods of 
time have led the governments, 

•  relations between trade unions and employers are to a 
large extent regulated by laws and central agreements, 
•  positive  attitude to  new  technology  from  the central 
trade union  federations, at least since World  War II, 
based on the assumption that jobs lost by introduction of 
new technology would be compensated by active labor-
market  policies  from  the  governments  (there  has, 
however, been some opposition at the local level). 

These factors have probably contributed  to the  relative 
stability of Scandinavian labor relations. 

Another distinguishing fact, at least when foreigners 
look at Scandinavian labor relations, is the high degree of 
democratization.  The  following  remark  after  a  tour  of 
Scandinavia is a typical outsider's view:7 

Democracy [in the U.S.A.] stops at the office door and the 
factory gate. (...) Western Europe is extending democ­
racy  into  working life.  Democratization  of  work  has 
gone further in Scandinavia than elsewhere in Europe. 
Job  redesign  projects, (...) Codetermination arrange­
ments, (...) Health and safety legislation (...) Employee 
representatives on corporate boards (...) 

These are important  historical  prerequisites for  under­
standing the DEMOS and UTOPIA  projects and the emer­
gence of the collective resource approach. But just as im­
portant is  the other side of  the coin.  The Scandinavian 
countries are themselves advanced capitalist economies, 
and also an integrated part of international western cap­
italism. Hence, even if the historical situation is different 
in Scandinavia, the forces of rationalization of  work and 
technology that workers and their trade unions meet are 
basically the same as in other capitalist economies. 

7  Einhorn, E. and Logue,  J. (eds.): Democracy  at the  Shop Floor -
An American Look  at  Employee  Influence in Scandinavia Today, 
Kent Press 1982, pp. 5,11,12. 

256 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

Laws on Democratization of Work 
The 1970s  were  the  decade  when  democracy  at  work 
truly appeared  on the agenda, an intensive debate  took 
place in trade  unions, and a  number of  new labor laws 
were enacted.8 

In Norway employees obtained  the right to elect one 
third of the members of the so-called 'company assembly'. 
In 1975 the first  collective agreement on development and 
introduction of  computer-based systems was concluded, 
giving the trade unions the right to appoint so-called data 
shop stewards.  In 1977  the  Norwegian  Work  Environ­
ment Act gave workers extensive rights to stop production 
that was dangerous to their health. New codetermination 
procedures for work environment issues were established, 
and a system of sanctions was defined for when an em­
ployer did  not fulfil  the new work environment  require­
ments. 

The Swedish 'work  democracy  package' in  the 1970s 
also contained several new acts, and existing legislation 
was revised. The work democracy  package included  the 
Act  concerning  Labor  Representatives  on  Company 
Boards  (LSA),  the Companies  Act  (ABL)  concerning fi­
nancial  information,  the  Act  concerning  the  Status  of 
Shop  Stewards (FML),  and  the  Work  Environment Act 
(AML). 

Finally, and most important, the Joint Regulation Act 
(MBL)  concerning  the  workers  and  their  trade unions' 
right to codetermination in production issues such as de­
sign and  use of  new  technology  and  work  organization 
was enacted in January 1977. It was this law that Prime 
Minister Olof  Palme described  as the greatest  reform in 
Swedish society since  the introduction  of  the  universal 
right to vote. In practice, however, there turned out to be 
no such dramatic change, and hence there was great dis­
appointment  among  many  active  union  members  that 

8 For an overview and several perspectives see e.g. Fry, J. (ed.): 
Towards a Democratic  Rationality -Making the Case  for Swedish 
Labour, Gower, Aldershot 1986. 

Introduction to  part  III 

257 

had received the impression that this was the decisive step 
towards democracy at work. 

However, MBL meant new conditions for design and use 

of computer artifacts. Article 11 stipulates that the em­
ployer has to negotiate with the local union before making 
major changes in production. Article 12 give the union the 
right to initiate negotiations on any production issue. Arti­
cles 18 and 19 stipulate the right for unions to have access 
to documents management refers to in negotiation, and to 
receive continuous information  on production issues, fi­
nancial situation, and guidelines for personnel policy. 

These were really important changes in the conditions 
for introduction and use of new technology, but there was 
also  drawbacks.  When  trade  unions  and  management 
cannot reach an agreement in negotiations the employer 
has the exclusive right to make decisions.  Furthermore, 
what 'major changes' meant turned out to be a most dis­
putable issue, as did whether the obligation to give infor­
mation also included early plans for e.g. the introduction 
of a computer-based system. 

Finally, Article 32 should  be  mentioned. This article 

concerns  the  right for  trade unions  to  negotiate agree­
ments on 'the management and  assignment of  working 
duties, and  the conduct  of  the operation at large'. The 
number of  this article was by  no means random, since it 
concerned the same fundamental issue as Article 32 in the 
Swedish  Employers'  Confederation  (SAF's) Statutes  re­
quiring its members to retain the right of decision when 
entering collective agreements. If collective codetermina-
tion  agreements  (MBA)  have  been  achieved  the unions 
have 'priority  of interpretation' of  issues covered  by the 
agreement until a dispute is settled in negotiations. This 
gives the trade unions a possibility to postpone decisions. 
However, the main idea with Article 32 was that central 
agreements should be negotiated, and on the basis of these 
agreements  local  agreements  should  be  developed.  In 
1978 the first  central collective agreement on codetermi-
nation (MBA-S)  was reached in the public sector, but not 
until 1982 was an agreement reached in private industry. 

258 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

By this time the forms of codetermination had  certainly 
been developed and made more concrete, but at the same 
time the trade unions democratization offensive had to a 
significant extent faded out. What started as a trade union 
response to local demands for democratization in the late 
1960s,  often  expressed  as  'wildcat'  strikes  concerning 
work environment and introduction of  new technology, 
had  received a form sanctioned  by  parliament, national 
trade union federations, and  national employers' federa­
tions. 

The 'wildcat' strike  by  the workers' collective  of  iron 
miners at the LKAB mines in the north of Sweden was the 
starting point for these democratization reforms, reforms 
that  not  only  concerned  democratization  of  the  work 
place, but also internal trade union democracy. The DE­
MOS and UTOPIA  projects took  place in the midst  of  the 
practical implementation of these reforms. 

Structure of This Part 
In  this part I will  discuss  my  two empirical  cases,  the 
DEMOS and the UTOPIA  project, focusing on them as ap­
proaches to designing for democracy at work. 

In chapter 11, From  Socio-Technical  Satisfaction  to 
Collective Resources, I will sketch the background for the 
research strategy chosen, and the emergence  of  the col­
lective resource approach. 

In chapter 12, The DEMOS Project, and chapter 13, The 
UTOPIA Project, the projects themselves are presented. I 
will outline the research objectives, the theoretical foun­
dations, the  research approaches, and give examples of 
activities and results. For each of  the projects I will also 
provide some post hoc 'evaluations'. 

Finally, in  chapter 14, Reminders  on  Designing  for 
Democracy at Work, this part is concluded with a number 
of 'theses' on design of computer artifacts in the context of 
industrial democracy. 

Chapter 11 
From  Socio-Technical 
Satisfaction to 
Collective  Resources 

"The socio-technical approach as created  by  members of 
the Tavistock  Institute aims to provide  a set of  precise 
guidelines for creating democratic organizations that are 
excellent  in  both  human  and  production  terms/  Enid 
Mumford  stated  in  a  recent  paper.1  And  in a  research 
overview of design of computer artifacts for, by and with 
users it was not  without reason concluded  that 'without 
exaggeration it can be said  that the work of Enid Mum-
ford has greatly influenced the discussion about user par­
ticipation in  the behavioral sciences in  the seventies.'2 
Furthermore,  the  socio-technical  approach  was  at  the 
beginning of  the seventies often also connected  with at­
tempts to attain industrial democracy in Scandinavia. 

Not only did the socio-technical approach address the 
issue of industrial democracy in Scandinavia; it was also 
developed  with  special  reference  to  design  and  use  of 
computer artifacts. Hence, it may appear as a  paradox 
that some Scandinavian researchers and trade unions in 
the  early 1970s  developed  the  collective  resource  ap­
proach to democratization of design and use of computer 

1  Mumford, E.: 'Sociotechnical System Design - Evolving Theory 
and Practice', in Bjerknes, et al (eds.): Computers and  Democ­
racy -A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987, p. 70. 
2 Kubicek, H.: User Participation in System Design' in Briefs et. 
al. (eds.): Systems Design  for, with, and  by the Users, North-Hol-
land, Amsterdam 1983, p 4. 

260 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

artifacts as an alternative in opposition to the socio-tech-
nical tradition, rather than within that tradition. In this 
chapter I will  try to  explain why. I will  also outline  the 
emergence  of  this  alternative  collective  resource  ap­
proach,  focusing  on  the  pioneering  research  work  by 
Kristen  Nygaard  and  other  researchers  from  the  Nor­
wegian Computing Center in cooperation with the Nor­
wegian Iron and Metal Workers Union. 

The Socio-Technical Approach 

Origin of the Socio-Technical Approach 
The origin of the socio-technical tradition is one of the best 
known social science experiments after the Second World 
War. Researchers from the Tavistock Institute of Human 
Relations in London 'rediscovered' an old  work tradition 
in the North  West Durham coal fields.  The transforma­
tion of this tradition into a new type of work group orga­
nization,3 and the later theoretical reflections in which the 
socio-technical approach was outlined, suggested  an al­
ternative more  productive and human way of organizing 
work and technology than the Tayloristic detailed division 
of labor.  Notably, Bamforth, one of the researchers, 'had 
been a  coal miner before joining the Tavistock Institute 
and it was through a visit which he made to his old pit in 
South Yorkshire  that the notion  of  autonomous groups 
brought itself to the attention of the researchers.'4 

This practical background, it seems, was a good base for 
understanding the  role of the workers'  collective and  of 
trade  unions  in  democratization  of  the  work  place. 
However, in the later theoretical development the Tavis­
tock  researchers came  to  focus  on  ideas  from  general 
systems theory, especially the biological notion of organic 
wholes. However, applying this organic view to organiza­

3 Trist, E. and Bamforth, K.: 'Some social and psychological con­
sequences of the longwali method of coal getting1 in Human Rela­
tions, no 4,1951. 
4 Mumford, op.  cit., p. 63. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

261 

tions,  using  analogies  drawn  from  the  human  body, 
rather seems to imply that trade union demands for ra­
dical  organizational  changes  must  be seen  as diseases 
threatening a  healthy organizational system,  than as a 
healthy democratic sign. 

The basis for the socio-technical analysis is simply to 
regard work as a socio-technical whole. In designing the 
production system one has to investigate both the techni­
cal  system and the social  system and their interrelations 
on work  group level. The four stages of the original socio-
technical analysis are:5 
•  tracing the outlines of the technical and social system 
and identifying key variances (a variance is defined as 
a deviation from some standard or from some specifi­
cation), 

•  analysis of the systems' mutual dependencies, focusing 

on the key variances, 

•  a description of the company and its environment, 
•  proposals for change. 

In design the fundamental criterion is to control variances 
as close to their point of origin as possible.6 

Quite early the socio-technical approach was taken up 
and further developed in Norway7, and from there spread 
to Sweden in different  kinds of  codetermination experi­
ments.8 

In  the  Norwegian  version  of  the  socio-technical  ap­
proach  the researchers developed  the  well-known  psy­

5 Emery, F. (ed.): The Emergence of  a New  Paradigm of Work, 
Centre for Continuing Education, The Australian National Uni­
versity, 1978. 
6  Cherns, A.: 'The principles of socio-technical design' in Human 
Relations, no. 29,1976. 
7  Thorsrud, E. and Emery, F. E.: Mot en ny  bedriftsorganisation, 
Tanum, Oslo 1970. 
8 For an overview see Sandberg, T.: Work Organization and Au­
tonomous Groups, Liber Förlag, Uppsala 1982 (dissertation). 

262 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

chological  job  requirements and  the group  autonomy 
criteria. 

The psychological job requirements were:9 
1.  The need for the content of the job to be reasonably 
demanding  (challenging)  in  terms  other  than  sheer 
endurance and yet providing some variety (not neces­
sarily novelty). 
2.  The need for being able to learn on the job and go on 
learning (which implies known  and appropriate stan­
dards, and knowledge of results). Again it is a question 
of neither too much nor too little. 
3.  The need for some area of decision-making that the 
individual can call his own. 
4.  The  need  for some  minimal  degree  of  helpfulness 
and recognition in the work place. 
5.  The need to be able to relate what he does and what 
he produces to his social life. 
6.  The need to feel that the job leads to some sort of de­
sirable future. 

The criteria of group autonomy were:10 

1.  The group can influence the formulation of its goal, 
including: a) qualitative aspects (...) and b) quantitative 
aspects (...) 
2.  Provided that established goals governing relation­
ships to the subordinate system are satisfied, the group 
can govern its own performance in  the following way: 
a) the group can decide where to work (...) b) the group 

9 Emery, F. and and Thorsrud, E.: Democracy  at Work: The  Re­
port  of  the  Norwegian  Industrial  Democracy  Program, Martinus 
Nijhoff, Leiden 1976, p. 14. 
10  Gulowsen, J.: 'A measure of work-group  autonomy' in Davis, 
L. and Taylor, J. (eds.): Design of  Jobs, Penguin,  Harmondsworth 
1972, pp. 376-378. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

263 

can decide  when to work  (...) c)  the group can decide 
which other activities to engage in. 
3.  The  group  makes the necessary  decisions  in  con­
nection with the choice of the production method. 
4.  The  group  makes its own  internal distribution of 
tasks. 
5.  The group decides on its own membership. 
6.  The group  makes its own decisions with  respect to 
two crucial matters of leadership: a) the group decides 
whether it wants to have a leader with respect to inter­
nal questions, and - if it does - who this leader shall be; 
b) the group decides whether it wants a leader for the 
purpose of  regulating boundary conditions, and - if it 
does - who this leader shall be. 
7.  The group members decide how the work operations 
shall be performed. 

These criteria obviously address questions of  democrati­
zation of work, but their relations to the theoretical foun­
dation of  the socio-technical approach are far from obvi­
ous. Was the socio-technical approach really a strategy to 
implement these criteria? And if so, would they form the 
first  steps in a process of  continuing democratization of 
work? 

The Socio-technical Approach in Scandinavia 
The Norwegian Industrial Democracy Project was a joint 
project  between  the  Norwegian  Federation  of  Trade 
Unions (LO) and the  Norwegian Employers' Confedera­
tion (NAF).  It was initiated around 1960,  approximately 
ten  years after the initial Tavistock  socio-technical  ex­
periments, based  on the Tavistock  experiences and con­
ducted in cooperation  with  researchers from Tavistock. 
The leader of the experiments, Einar Thorsrud, summa­
rized the background in the following way:11 

11 Thorsrud and Emery, 1970, op. cit., p. 9 (my translation). 

264 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

At  the  end  of  the fifties  the  growth  in  many  areas 
seemed to come close to the limits set by the natural re­
sources. Matters were quite otherwise for the resources 
which depend on human initiative  and creativity (...) 
Both economic considerations (...) and a growing unrest 
in  the  left  wing labor  movement  contributed  to  the 
creation of strong interests (...) 

Between 1964 and 1967 four experiments on work orga­
nization were carried  out.12  The new  work organization 
solutions were all of group production type. They included 
some  planning activities, but  were  primarily concerned 
with changes in job distribution and wage systems. 

However, the experiments did not create much interest 

among the  workers involved.  From one of  the four com­
panies Thorsrud reported that the workers lost interest in 
all of it'13 when it turned out that management was not 
interested in going into further  discussion on  the  more 
important issues. And in another company the attitude of 
the workers 'gradually turned into resignation, since no 
important improvement in their situation seemed to come 
about.'14  The  socio-technical  ideas  did  not  really  dis­
seminate in Norwegian working life. 

Though developed in Norway, the real diffusion of the 
socio-technical approach in industry happened in Sweden. 
Thoralf  Qvale,  in  one  of  the  evaluations  of  the  socio-
technical approach to democratization  in  Norway, gives 
the following explanation:15 

Apart from the researchers there are very few persons 
trying to convey experience from one company to ano­
ther. In Sweden 'job satisfaction and productivity' have 
been  the  slogans,  and  a  network  of  employers/pro­

12 These four experiments are described in Emery and Thorsrud, 
1976, op. cit. 
13 Thorsrud and Emery, 1970, op. cit., pp. 72-74, (my translation). 
14 Ibid., p.  99 (my translation). 
15  Qvale, T.:'A Norwegian strategy for democratization of indus­
try" in Human Relations, no 5,1976, p. 468. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

265 

duction engineers have taken care of  the diffusion. In 
Norway  the slogans  were  Industrial democracy  and 
participation', and the union networks were expected to 
play a central part. As explained, ideological  support 
has  come  from  the  top  of  LO,  but  the  practical 
involvement from the individual  unions' officials has 
systematically been lacking. 

In the late 1960s in Sweden, the rapid technological and 
structural change was conceived as a problem both by the 
trade  unions (dequalification  of  work, lack  of  influence, 
safety and health problem) and by the employers as per­
sonnel  problems  (recruitment,  turnover,  absenteeism) 
and  as  production  problems  (efficiency,  planning  and 
quality  problems due  to  the Tayloristic organization  of 
production). Especially problematic for the Swedish Em­
ployers'  Confederation  (SAF),  but also for  the Swedish 
Federation of Trade Unions (LO), were 'wildcat' strikes at 
many workplaces, demanding not only higher  wages but 
also democratization.16  Given this background the socio-
technical experiments in  Norway seemed  most interest­
ing to both parties on the labor market. 

Experiments were initiated by  the central unions and 
employer organizations jointly both in the private and the 
public sectors. Increased job satisfaction and higher pro­
ductivity were seen as equally important goals. Several of 
the experiments  that started in the late 1960s came up 
with interesting ideas on  work  organization and demo­
cratic participation. But the practical implementation was 
a different story, as summarized by Åke Sandberg:17 

However the second  phase of  deciding upon an actual 
program  of  change  made  manifest  differences  of  in­
terest: management was primarily seeking solutions to 
personnel problems and possibilities for better control of 

16 See e.g. Dahlström, E. et. al.: LKAB och demokratin, W & W, 
Stockholm 1971. 
17 Sandberg, Å.: From Satisfaction  to Democratization - On soci­
ology and  working life  changes in Sweden, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1982, p. 6. 

266 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

the wages, whereas unions viewed the experiments as 
part of a strategy for democratization and union influ­
ence at various levels. After conflicts between mana­
gement and researchers in several of the experiments, 
the interest  of  employers  in  socio-technical  changes 
with participation of sociologists of  work  was very li­
mited. 

Instead most of  the Swedish socio-technical experiments 
were carried out without involvement of independent re­
searchers. The  projects  were  controlled  by  local  mana­
gement and coordinated by the Technical Department of 
SAF. The employers were obviously satisfied with the so-
cio-technical approach, but not with the joint experiments. 
LO was also skeptical to the joint work, as expressed in a 
program document:18 

This method of working proved difficult to implement. 
Later, when the conflict of views between the two sides 
with  regard  to industrial democracy development  be­
came  more  manifest,  the  problems  grew  greater. 
Within the private sector SAF (the Swedish Employers' 
Confederation) drew its own conclusions from this fact 
and set up its own development projects with the aid of 
its Technical Department. In its development projects, 
SAF  stressed the individual, in a  form  which compli­
cated collective solutions and the possibilities available 
to the trade union movement. 

In 1975 SAF launched a new socio-technical strategy. The 
Technical  Department of  SAF  coordinated  the 'new fac­
tory' project, which aimed at more stable production sys­
tems based on the principle of coordinated  independence 
of small sub-systems,19 

18 LO: Codetermination on the Foundation of  Solidarity, Prisma, 
Stockholm 1977, p. 61. 
19 For a summary see Aguren, S. and Edgren, J.: Annorlunda 
fabriker - Mot en ny  produktionsteknisk  teori, The Swedish Em­
ployers' Confederation, Stockholm 1979. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

267 

This principle was not new - it really came from basic 
socio-technical theory - but the strategy was a  different 
one. The  production technology was not taken as given, 
but as something that should be designed to fit the control 
of semi-autonomous groups rather than individuals. Spe­
cifically,  the  changes  were  restricted  to  the shop  floor 
production level. The vertical division of labor was not at 
all  altered.  Management's  overall  control  was  rather 
strengthened. The  world-wide  known  production  tech­
nology at the Volvo Kalmar plant is as good an example as 
any.20  Participation for democracy  was in  no sense in­
cluded in the aims of the design.21 This is one of the rea­
sons why in the late 1970s LO refused to accept a joint so-
cio-technical program for 'new factories'. 

In summary it can be concluded that the socio-techni-
cal tradition in Scandinavia was theoretically developed in 
Norway,  but  practically  diffused  in Sweden.  When  the 
socio-technical approach was  diffused to industry it was 
under the control of management and in forms that fitted 
managerial interests. Thomas Sandberg found, in com­
paring the diffusion in  Norway and Sweden, that there 
are two important criteria for success: the projects must 
be  initiated  and  carried  out  locally,  and  they  must  be 
planned and managed entirely by management.22 If these 
are the  prerequisites for  diffusion of  the socio-technical 
approach its importance for industrial democracy  must 
be questioned. 

20 See e.g. Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: Företagsstyrning och  lönta-
garmakt - planering, datorer,  organisation och  fackligt  utred­
ningsarbete, Prisma, Stockholm 1979. 
21  For a more detailed critique of SAF's "new factory' concept see 
e.g. the contribution by Jan Kronlund in Produktionslivets för­
nyelse - teknik, organisation,  människa,  miljö, conference  in 
Uppsala, The Swedish Work Environment Fund, 1978. 
22 Sandberg, T., op. cit., p. 173. 

268 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

Socio-Technical Design of Computer Artifacts 
When the socio-technical  approach, in  the early 1970s, 
was introduced in Scandinavian systems design research 
it was  neither as a  diffusion from  the Norwegian  theo­
retical development  nor from  the Swedish  practical in­
dustrial experiments.  Once again it was imported from 
England, this time in the form developed by Enid Mum-
ford  and  other  researchers  at  Manchester  Business 
School. 23 

The  socio-technical  approach  certainly  had  a  chal­
lenging impact  on  research  on  design of  computer arti­
facts in Scandinavia,24 but there was also an early critique 
of  ideology from  the emerging collective  resource  tradi­
tion.  For  example,  the  socio-technical  systems  design 
method, as presented  in an early  paper  by  Mumford,25 
was  regarded  as anti-trade  union  and  even  anti-demo-
cratic.26 

In the paper by Mumford  it was suggested that union 
power and influence was to be measured in order to con­
struct organizational  profiles, and  how 'indications will 
come from examining the group's past behavior and from 
noting the degree of  militancy of  the union to which its 
members  belong.'27  Given  this knowledge  'the levers of 
manipulation which are at the planners' disposal for al­
tering attitudes and behavior are as follows: education, 
information,  participation,  compensation,  negotiation, 

23 Mumford, E and Ward, T.B.: Computers: Planning  for People, 
Batsford, London, was published as early as 1968. 
24 The tradition was developed in Scandinavia by e.g. Bo Hedberg 
(Sweden), Niels Bj0rn-Andersen (Denmark) and Rolf H0jer 
(Norway), who all had contacts with Enid Mumford. 
25  Mumford, E.: A Comprehensive  Method  for Handling the  Hu­
man  Problems of  Computer Introduction, Manchester Business 
School, 1970(?), mimeo. 
26 For a more detailed critique of the report see Ehn, P.: Bidrag till 
ett kritiskt  social  perspektiv  på datorbaserade  informationssys­
tem, Department of Information Processing, Stockholm 1973, pp. 
29-32. 
27  Mumford, 1970, op. cit., p. 8. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

269 

command.'26  'Good fit'  between  management  demands 
and employee expectations is accomplished by changes of 
the  employees'  understanding, attitudes and  behavior. 
This  version  of  the socio-technical  approach seemed  to 
have very little to do with industrial democracy. 

The first  academic 'confrontation' between  the socio-
technical approach  and the emerging collective  resource 
approach to design and use of computer artifacts in Scan­
dinavia  occurred  at  an  international  conference  on 
alternative organizations that took place outside Gothen­
burg in 1974.29 In a report evaluating the conference we 
concluded  that  there  clearly  were  two  different  ap­
proaches to the social aspects of design of  computer arti­
facts, based on different political perspectives:30 

According to [the socio-technical] approach, one should, 
on the one hand, try to convince management and de­
signers that it is necessary to consider "human factors' 
when designing information systems, and on the other 
hand provide them with useful 'tools' for this aim. Dif­
ferently phrased, the intention seems to be that direc­
tions  for  humanized  information  systems  are  to  be 
given  by  socio-technical  experts. The  problem,  given 
this  approach,  can  be  summarized  in  the  following 
question: How do we design systems to fit people? 

The  attending  representatives  favoring  trade  union 
interests opposed this approach. They emphasized the 
importance  of  the  employees  themselves  having the 
right to determine the content of humanization by real 
and  meaningful  participation  in  the systems  design 
process. In other words: What is aimed for are not gifts 

28 Ibid., p. 10. 
29  Alternative Organizations: The Impact of Computers and Au­
tomation on Management, Structure and Work  Design, Hindås, 
July 1974. 
30  Ehn, P. and Göranzon,  B.-.Perspektiv  på  systemutvecklingspro­
cessen, Department of Information Processing, University of 
Stockholm, 1974, pp. 15-16 (my translation). 

270 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

from management and  designers, but  participation in 
and influence over the process. For this aim 'tools' have 
to be developed. The problem, given this [collective re­
source] approach, may be summarized in the following 
question: How do we  make it possible  for  people to de­
sign their own  systems themselves? 

Theory and  Practice 
However,  the  critique  of  the  socio-technical  approach 
should not be seen as a complete dissociation from all as­
pects of  the socio-technical approach. Many  of the 'tools' 
that have been  developed  are extremely  useful in  ana­
lyzing work organization and production technology; and 
the  job  requirement  and  group  autonomy  criteria  are, 
when  taken  seriously,  really  a  challenge  to  design  for 
democracy at work. The  problem is that these  require­
ments seem to have disappeared in the practical applica­
tion of  the approach.  In theory and  practice this can be 
understood  in  terms  of  questionable  harmony  assump­
tions concerning the social  forces of  production  and  the 
distribution of power. The critique is basically not one of 
design  methods,  but  one  of  theory  and  practice  in  the 
context of democratization of work. 

The main features of the socio-technical approach have 
indeed  changed  in a  much  more  participatory and  less 
manipulative  direction  during the last  decade,31  hence 
making  it  more  instrumental  for  democratic  design. 
However, this is - in theory and  practice — how we  met 
the socio-technical approach in the early seventies when 
trying to formulate a  research  approach  for  democrati­

31  Se e.g. Gustavsen, B.: Workplace Reform and  Democratic Dia­
logue' in Economic and  Industrial  Democracy, vol 6, Sage, Lon­
don 1985. Concerning design of computer-based systems see e.g. 
Hedberg, B.: 'Using Computerized Information Systems to Design 
Better Organizations' in Bj0rn-Andersen, N.  (ed.) The  Human 
Side ofinformation Processing, North-Holland, Amsterdam 1980, 
and Mumford, E.: Designing  Human  Systems, Manchester 
Business School 1983. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

271 

zation  of  design  and  use  of  computer  artifacts  in  the 
workplace. 

As we understood it, democratization of design and use 
of  computer-based systems in  the Scandinavian  setting 
had  to  be  based  on  strong local  union  involvement.  In 
practice the socio-technical approach had failed to support 
this. This  position  was also gaining terrain within  the 
trade unions. In  the first  action  program  on  industrial 
democracy and  computers  from LO (the Swedish national 
trade  union  federation)  the situation  and  the strategy 
were outlined in the following way:32 

The workers and the trade unions are not satisfied with 
managers  and  their  experts  who  say  they  develop 
systems for  planning and  control  which  take human 
beings into consideration, by paying attention to needs 
for self-realization and the social  impact of  technical 
systems, etc. On the contrary, the unions must work for 
a situation that makes it possible for workers to develop 
their  own  organizational  and  knowledge  resources. 
This creates the capability to scrutinize and influence, 
via  negotiations,  the  various  aspects  of  corporate 
planning and  control,  and,  by  extension,  to  develop 
worker controlled systems. Thus, the present situation 
in organizations makes increasing demands upon  the 
commitment  and  knowledge  of  the  workers.  The 
crucial  point  is  whether  these  demands  become 
absorbed in an employers' strategy for decentralization 
and so-called autonomous groups, or whether they will 
be developed  within a workers' strategy for democra­
tization, transcending the level of  the work  organiza­
tion. 

We had to look for an alternative based on a historical, so­
cial and political understanding of the Scandinavian situ­
ation, an alternative where the trade unions could play a 

32 LO - Handlingsprogram  fór företagsdemokrati  och data, 
Swedish Federation of Trade Unions, Stockholm 1975, p. 30-31 (my 
translation). 

272 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

major role. These were basic assumptions in the emerging 
collective resource approach. 

The Collective Resource Approach 

Origin of the Collective Resource Approach3* 
By  the end  of  the sixties  a  new  platform for industrial 
democracy was established in  Norway: a new law stated 
that in  all companies with more  than 250  employees a 
company assembly should be established, where one third 
was elected by the employees and two thirds by the share­
holders.  This  assembly  should  then  elect  the company 
board by proportional vote. This legislation was seen by the 
unions as a necessary supplement to the socio-technical 
industrial  democracy  experiments,  about  which  the 
Norwegian  Iron  and  Metal  Workers  Union  (NJMF) in 
1970 said:34 

The  codetermination experiments, (...) show  that op­
portunities exist for the development of a new and bet­
ter work situation for the individual human being. But 
if one fails to make this kind  of  initiatives part of  a 
whole they will  not contain the opportunities for cre­
ating a real democratic situation. 

The unions wanted to be accompanied by the new legisla­
tion  intense  educational  activities,  and,  based  on  the 
experiences from  the first trade  union  courses  dealing 
with the impact of computers, it was concluded that plan­
ning, control and data processing were key areas in this 
context. Furthermore, it seemed  to the unions that the 
existing knowledge  in the area did  not  reflect  workers' 

33 This introduction to the collective resource approach is based on 
Ehn, P. and Kyng K.: The Collective Resource Approach to Sys­
tems Design' in Bjerknes G. et al. (eds.): Computers and  Democ­
rat-A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 
34 Quoted after Nygaard, K and Bergo, O. T.: Planlegging, 
Styring og Databehandling, part 1, Tiden Norsk Forlag, Oslo 1973, 
p. 171. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

273 

interests, and it was believed that workers would run the 
risk  of  acquiring  a  management  perspective, if  educa­
tional activities in this area were entirely based on existing 
knowledge. 

The NJMF Project 
In 1970 the Norwegian  Iron and  Metal Workers Union 
(NJMF) decided to initiate research of their own. In coop­
eration with  researchers from  a governmental  research 
institute  (the  Norwegian  Computing  Center)  who  had 
taught  the  abovementioned  courses  on  the  impact  of 
computers,  an  application  was  prepared  for  the  Royal 
Norwegian  Council  for  Scientific  and  Industrial  Re­
search.  After  some  initial  resistance  to  this  'political' 
application, money was granted from January 1971, and 
the project was completed in August 1973. 

When the NJMF project was first  set up the design was 
quite traditional: A steering committee, a project group 
and associated local unions at four different work places. 
The  associated  local  unions  were  to  act  as  reference 
groups. The  project group  consisted  of  two  researchers 
and two staff  members from the national union, and ac­
cording  to  the  research  plan  the  researchers  were  to 
carry out a number of investigations in close cooperation 
with the two other members of  the project group. These 
investigations included: 
•  a study of  two or  three computer-based  planning and 

control systems, 

•  a  survey  of  the goals of  the  union  in  areas such  as 

working conditions and control of organizations, 

•  formulation  of  demands  on  computer-based  systems 

based on the survey, and finally 

•  an evaluation of the need for knowledge within NJMF in 
the areas of planning, control and data processing, and 
possibly development of teaching material. 

However, as the project progressed it turned out to be im­
possible for the union people involved to actively use the 
project in the daily work at the factories, the local unions, 

274 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

or the national unions. There was no connection between 
the work in the project and the action possibilities of the 
workers and the union. The original project design had to 
a large extent been copied from traditional research used 
by  managers and  management consultants in a context 
where the goals are clear and means have been discussed 
for decades.  For the unions the situation  was different. 
There  had  been  no extensive  discussions  on  planning, 
control and  computer artifacts and  there were no estab­
lished or clear goals. If the project was not  redesigned it 
seemed likely that it would fail for much the same reasons 
as the socio-technical codetermination experiments, from 
a union  point of  view, had  failed: there was no strategic 
whole in which the partial results from the project could 
be applied. 

A New Strategy 
In the fall of 1971 a new research strategy was developed. 
This happened at the same time as, and under influence 
of, the development of the highly successful strategy of the 
Norwegian  anti-European  Economic  Community  (EEC) 
movement. An important aspect of the new strategy was 
reflected in the new definition of result:35 

as a  result of  the project  we  will  understand  actions 
carried  out  by  the  Iron  and  Metal  Workers'  Union, 
centrally or locally, as a part of or initiated by the pro­
ject. 

In  this strategy  knowledge  was  acquired  when  actions 
had made the need for new knowledge clear. It was real­
ized that successful initiatives at the national level had to 
be based on discussions and actions at the local level. The 
revised  strategy towards design and  use of computer ar­
tifacts aimed at creating a process which would build up 

35  Nygaard, K.: 'The Iron and Metal Project: Trade Union Parti­
cipation' in Sandberg, Å. (ed.) Computers Dividing  Man and 
Work, Swedish Center for Working Life, Malmö 1979, p.98. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective Resources 

275 

knowledge and activities at all levels, with the main em­
phasis at the local level. 

The steering committee  played  a  central  role in  the 
discussions leading to  the revision of  the strategy,  and 
from  then on  the committee was instrumental in deve­
loping the strategy as well as in diffusing the ideas of the 
project within the trade union movement. 

The new strategy was finished  and presented in a re­

port in January 1972, and the spring was used to produce 
a first  version of a textbook  presenting a  union view on 
planning, control and computer artifacts based on the ex­
periences gained so far. 

Probably the most important change was the new role 
to be played by the local unions. It was decided, as a part of 
the project, to try out the work practices that the people in 
the project  believed  would  become commonplace in the 
future: that the local unions themselves investigate their 
important problems at the workplace and in the relation 
between the workplace and the local community, and that 
in  this  work  they  use  external  consultants  as  well  as 
consultants and other resources provided by the company. 
At each of the four work places a number of investigation 
groups, consisting of union members, were formed. These 
groups began a process of 
•  accumulating knowledge about planning, control  and 

data processing, 

•  investigating  selected  problems  in  this  area,  which 
were considered to be of special importance by the local 
unions, and 

•  taking  actions  directed  at  management  in  order  to 

change the use of new technology. 

All the local  unions internally chose  the  problems they 
wanted to work with. The groups always began with dis­
cussions of practical workplace problems, problems which 
everybody was familiar with. Attempts to analyze and to 
solve these problems led to requirements for  new know­
ledge and an educational process was started. 

276 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

The groups met regularly, 2-3 hours at least twice a 
week, and between the meetings the members did a lot of 
"homework', in preparing proposals, discussing with fel­
low workers, etc. In addition to this the groups partici­
pated in different kinds of educational activities. The work 
of  the  researchers  now  concentrated  upon  supporting 
these groups. 

One investigation  group made evaluations of  some of 
the computer-based planning and control systems in the 
company,  including  an  on-line  production  information 
system  under  development.  The  other  investigation 
groups evaluated  experiences from  participation in the 
planning of a new plant, made  proposals for  reorganiza­
tion  of  one  of  the main assembly lines, and  a company 
policy action program for the local union. 

Some Results 
A few examples from Kongsberg Våpenfabrikk can illus­
trate the content of the work in the investigation groups: 
•  In their analysis of  the computer-based  planning sys­
tem CLASS  from IBM,  the investigation group showed 
how the use of CLASS inevitably led to overtime. 

•  A number of  proposals were  made for a new planning 

system  under  development  at  the factory.  These  in­
cluded  how  to  use  display  terminals  for  shop  floor 
planning, as opposed to the data entry terminals of the 
IBM system. 

•  Changed  work  organization  in  connection  with  nu­
merically  controlled  machines,  including  shop  floor 
programming, was also investigated.36 

As an important part of  their work the researchers pro­
duced  the  previously  mentioned  textbook  on  planning, 
control and computer artifacts. The first  version was used 
in the initial knowledge-gathering process in the local in­
vestigation groups, and experiences from their work were 

36  Nygaard, K. and Bergo, O.T.: En vurdering av styrings- og  in-
formasjonssystemet  KVPOL, Tiden Norsk Forlag, Oslo 1975. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective Resources 

"ZU 

used in the  revision  of  the book.37  The book  was a key 
source  in  developing  trade  union  courses on  planning, 
control  and  data  processing in  the Scandinavian  coun­
tries.38 

One of the most tangible, and certainly the most widely 
studied and publicized outcome of  the NJMF  project was 
the data  agreements. These agreements primarily  regu­
late the design and introduction of  computer-based sys­
tems,  especially  acquisition  of  information.  The first 
agreement , a local one, was signed  at the  beginning of 
1974. It was followed in April 1975 by a central agreement 
between the Norwegian Trade Union Federation and the 
Norwegian  Confederation  of  Employers.  The  central 
agreement was soon followed  by a large  number of  local 
agreements and  the election  of  numerous so-called  data 
shop stewards, a new kind of shop steward introduced in 
the central  agreement. Among other things the central 
agreement stated:39 

Through  the  shop  stewards  the  management  must 
keep the employees orientated about matters which lie 
within the area of  the agreement, in such a  way that 
the shop stewards can put forward their points of view 
as early as possible, and before the management puts its 
decisions into effect. The orientation must be given in a 
well-arranged  form  and  in  a  language  that  can  be 
understood by non-specialists. It is a condition that the 
representatives of the employees have the opportunity 
to make themselves acquainted with general questions 
concerning the influence of computer-based systems on 
matters that are of importance to the employees. The 

37  Nygaard, K. and Bergo, O.T.: Planlegging, Styring og 
Databehandling, part 1, Tiden Norsk Förlag, Oslo 1973. 
38 The project is not very well documented, but in addition to the 
above mentioned reporte and books a good English reference is 
Nygaard, K. and Bergo,  O.T.: The Trade Unions — new users of 
research' in Personal  Review, no 2,1975. 
39 General  agreement  on Computer  Based  Systems, Norwegian 
Employers Federation and Norwegian Federation of Trade 
Unions, 1975. 

278 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

representatives must have access to all documentation 
about software  and  hardware  within  the area of  the 
agreement. 

The Collective Resource Approach in Scandinavia 
The NJMF  project inspired several new  research projects 
throughout  Scandinavia,  and  the development  of  a  re­
search tradition of cooperation between researchers and 
workers and their trade unions - the collective  resource 
approach. In Sweden the DEMOS project on 'trade unions, 
industrial democracy and computers' started in 1975.40 A 
parallel  project  in  Denmark  was  the  DUE  project  on 
'democracy, education and computer-based systems'.41 As 
the NJMF  project  these projects emphasized  democrati­
zation of the design process. 

Although growing, the extent and impact of  these ac­

tivities did not meet the initial expectations. It seemed that 
one could  only influence  the introduction of the technol­
ogy, the training, and the organization of work to a certain 
degree. From a union perspective, important aspects like 
the  opportunity  to  further  develop  skill  and  increase 
influence  on  work  organization  were  limited.  Societal 
constraints, especially  concerning power  and  resources, 
had  been  underestimated, and  in addition  the existing 
technology constituted significant limits to the feasibility of 
finding  alternative local  solutions which  were desirable 
from a trade union perspective. 

As  an attempt to  broaden  the scope of  the available 
technology we decided to try to supplement the existing 
elements of  the collective  resource approach with union 
based efforts to design new technology. The main idea of 

40 See chapter 12, Case I: The DEMOS  project. 
41 The DUE project is described in Kyng, M. and Mathiassen, L.: 
'Systems Development and Trade Union Activities', in Bj0rn-An-
dersen, N. (ed.) Information  Society,  for Richer,  for Poorer, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam 1982. For practical use the DUE pro­
ject group wrote the textbook: KLubarbejde og EDB, Fremad, 
Copenhagen 1981. 

From Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources 

279 

the first  projects, to support democratization of the design 
process, was complemented by the idea of designing tools 
and  environments  for  skilled  work  and  good  use quality 
products and services. To try out the ideas in practice, the 
UTOPIA  project was, in 1981, started in cooperation  be­
tween  the  Nordic  Graphic  Workers'  Union  and  resear­
chers in Sweden and Denmark with experiences from the 
'first generation' of collective resource projects.42 

The NJMF, DEMOS, DUE and UTOPIA projects are by no 

means  the  only  projects  of  the  collective  resource  ap­
proach, nor is it restricted to the design and use of  com­
puter artifacts. Some other  projects within or related to 
this Scandinavian tradition are: 
•  The Dairy Project, which was conducted by architects, 
but used methods and  perspectives similar to  the DE­
MOS and DUE projects.43 

•  The PAAS project, which besides contributing to a theo­
retical understanding of  changes of skills when com­
puter artifacts are used, also contributed to methods for 
trade union design work.44 

•  The Bank Project, which was conducted by researchers 
originally from the socio-technical tradition, although 
they  worked  closely  with  trade  unions  and  with 
methods and perspective very similar to the collective 
resource projects.46 

•  The TIK-TAK project worked with local trade unions in 
the public sector to develop union resources in relation 
to 'office automation'.46 

42 See chapter 13, Case II: The  UTOPIA Project. 
43 See Steen, J. and Ullmark, P.: De anställdas Mejeri, Royal  In­
stitute of Technology, Stockholm 1982. 
44 See e.g. Göranzon, B.: Datautvecklingens Filosofi, Carlsson & 
Jönsson, Malmö 1984. 
45 See e.g. Hedberg, B. and Mehlmann, M.: Datorer i  bank, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1983. 
46 See e.g. Foged, J. et al.: H&ndbog om klubarbejde, edb-projekter 
og  nye  arbejdsformer, HK kommunal, Århus 1987. 

280 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

•  The  Carpentry  Shop  project,  which  worked  with 
methods and a design perspective similar to the UTOPIA 
project but within a low tech' area.47 

•  The Florence project, focusing on the work situation of 

nurses,  is another  'second  generation'  collective  re­
source  project  designing  computer-based  environ­
ments for skill and quality production.48 

These are examples of different, but  by far  not the only 
collective resource projects. Nor is the approach limited to 
Scandinavia today. Especially in Britain, despite a very 
different trade union structure, there are several projects 
working with similar perspectives and  methods.49 In the 
coming two chapters I will discuss our contributions to the 
collective  resource  approach  via  the  DEMOS  and  the 
UTOPIA projects. 

47 See e.g. Sjögren, D. (ed.): Nyhetsblad  från  Snickeriprojektet, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1979-83. 
48 See e.g. Bjerknes, G.  and Bratteteig, T.: 'Florence in Wonder­
land — Systems Development with Nurses' in Bjerknes, G. et al. 
(eds.): Computers and  Democracy, Avebury, 1987. 
49  See e.g. Williams, R.: 'Democratising Systems Development-
Technological and Organisational Constraints and Opportunities' 
in Bjerknes, G. et al. (eds.): Computers and  Democracy,  Avebury, 
1987. 

Chapter 12 
Case I: The DEMOS Project 

The DEMOS  project (Democratic Planning and Control in 
Working  Life - On  Computers,  Industrial  Democracy, 
and Trade Unions) began in July 1975, with a duration of 
four  years. It  was financially  supported by  the Bank of 
Sweden  Tercentenary  Foundation,  The  Swedish  Work 
Environment Fund, and at the end by the Swedish Center 
for Working Life. The Swedish  Trade Union Confedera­
tion  (LO)  supported  the  project,  with  its 'data-council' 
acting as an advisory group for the project. 

The project was carried out by an interdisciplinary re­
search team (with competence in computer science, soci­
ology,  economics  and  engineering) in cooperation  with 
workers and  their trade unions at four different enter­
prises (a  daily  newspaper,  a  locomotive  repair shop,  a 
metal factory, and a department store). 

This cooperative effort concerned the unions' possibili­

ties to influence design  and use of  computer artifacts at 
the local level in the companies. The  emphasis was on 
what the unions could  do to safeguard  and  promote its 
members' interests in having meaningful work  when the 
technology, the work organization, and the supervision of 
work is altered. As a complement to these local activities 
the project also sought  to examine obstacles and  limits 
confronting this democratization process. 

The overall research goal was to make a contribution to 
efforts aimed at establishing a more democratic working 

282 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

life. The more detailed  objectives of  the DEMOS  project 
were stated as making contributions to:1 
•  the theoretical development of an alternative totality of 
theories, methods and procedures for planning, control 
and computer use; 

•  the development of  methods and  procedures for inter­

disciplinary research with trade unions; 

•  the  production  of  knowledge  related  to  planning and 
computer  use  as  demanded  by  workers  and  their 
unions; 

•  the development  of  procedures for  planning and  the 
investigation and  analysis of  activities which  can  be 
used within trade unions. 

This was clearly a  highly ambitious  research  program, 
and  in  practice the local studies at the different  work­
places dominated the first  three years of the project. The 
production of study materials, a textbook and articles pre­
senting the findings  dominated  the last part. More fun­
damental theoretical and  methodological reflections star­
ted in this period, but were to a great extent carried out 
after the conclusion of project. 

Research Methods 
The trade union connection and the objective of support­
ing democracy at work had consequences for the research 
methods chosen. To us the commission-oriented  work re­
search then dominant in Scandinavia seemed  to produce 
results as the basis for decisions by management, rather 
than being useful to those ultimately affected by the re­
search findings.  Therefore we saw a need for a research 
approach where content and  procedures were compatible 

1  Ehn, P. et al.: Demokratisk  styrning och  planering i  arbets­
livet - utgångspunkter  för ett  forskningsprojekt  om datateknik, 
fackförening  och  företagsdemokrati, Demos report no 1, TRITA-
IBADB-1023, Department of Information Processing, Stockholm 
1975. 

The DEMOS  Project 

283 

with the  workers' interests and opportunities for  action. 
Action research was an obvious choice. 

In the DEMOS project action research meant that local 
unions themselves through the use of investigation groups 
made inquiries into  the  conditions  of  their  own  enter­
prises. The idea was that we as researchers should take 
part in these investigation groups  as 'resource persons'. 
That is, our academic competence and time should be at 
the groups' disposal. The starting point  of  the research 
should,  however,  be  the  workers'  own  experience  and 
competence. 

Inspired by Paulo Freire's Pedagogy of  the Oppressed!2 
and the approach taken by  the NJMF  project in  Norway 
the idea was to start the work in the investigation groups 
not with detailed analysis of  the specific  computer arti­
facts being designed and used in the work place, but with 
everyday problems such as time pressure, lack of contact 
between fellow  workers, alienation, and  work  environ­
ment problems. Such a discussion could  point at connec­
tions with broader but more abstract problems such as the 
pay system, principles for work organization, long range 
planning and technology investment  policy. From inqui­
ries into such conditions some problems would  be ameli­
orated via demands presented at local negotiations, while 
other conditions would appear to require collective actions 
on a higher level e.g. as central investigations, new laws 
and negotiations on agreements. The perspective would be 
broadened  to include  important questions of  power and 
technology in working life. This way it was thought that 
the  workers  and  the  research  group  could  learn  from 
each other while together building up a new understand­
ing essential for democratization of working life. The un­
derstanding acquired in the investigation groups should 
elucidate and widen the possibilities for action. Through 
education and central unions this knowledge would  then 
be disseminated to other workers, in other workplaces. 

2 Freire, P.: Pedagogy of  the Oppressed, Herder & Herder, New 
York 1971. 

284 

Designing  for  Democracy at  Work 

Besides being 'resource  persons' in the investigation 
groups we as researchers should also conduct more tradi­
tional theoretical studies which could both be informed by 
our practical experiences in the investigation groups and 
at the same time be brought back for reflections in these 
groups. The theoretical tradition we leaned towards was a 
Marxist approach, in the beginning especially inspired by 
theories on democratic planning,3  and labor process the­
ory.4 

The interplay between practical action oriented inves­

tigations and theoretical reflective elucidations was what 
we referred  to as practice  research. This was the base of 
our research approach. 

The Investigation Groups 
The four  different workplaces in  connection with which 
the main  part of  the project  work  was carried  out were 
chosen after visits to about 25, and discussions with local 
union representatives there. We tried to find workplaces 
meeting the following vaguely formulated criteria: 
•  There should be an acute problem that the local union 
wanted  to  work  on,  and  the  problem  should  be  of 
general scientific interest within our research field. 

•  The local union itself should be committed to developing 

both  independent  union  knowledge  and  broad  acti­
vation of its members. 

3 Especially the work by Åke Sandberg, later published in English 
as Sandberg, Å.: The  Limits to  Democratic  Planning -
knowledge,  power and  methods in  the struggle  for the  future, 
Liber, Stockholm 1976 (dissertation). 
4 In the beginning especially inspired by Braverman, H.: Labor 
and  Monopoly Capital - The Degradation of Work  in the Twen­
tieth Century, Monthly Review Press, New York 1974, and his 
theses on the dequalification of work as capitalistic rationaliza­
tion. Later by Friedman, A.: Industry and  Labour, Macmillan 
Press, London 1977, and his theses on direct control and respon­
sible autonomy. 

The DEMOS  Project 

285 

•  The concrete problem should  be such that it could  be 
developed  into  an  analysis  of  strategic  questions 
concerning limits and possibilities for democratization. 

At the four selected sites investigation groups were estab­
lished. These  investigation  groups were, in  cooperation 
with the local  union, organized  to include  both workers 
with a long trade union tradition, and 'ordinary workers' 
with limited trade union experience. According to the re­
search plan, the investigation groups studied  their own 
workplaces, using the  researchers as resource  persons, 
and developed  action plans to support local and  central 
negotiations on design and use of computer artifacts. In­
teresting and activating many union  members into deal­
ing with these issues concerning the future of their work­
place was also part of the intentions for the investigation 
groups. 

Investigation groups  were, as mentioned,  ultimately 
established  at  a  metal  factory,  a  department  store,  a 
newspaper and a repair shop. 

At the metal factory, the rolling mill at a big steel plant 
in Oxelösund, the group was responding to management's 
attempt to develop advanced computer-based systems for 
production  planning and  control.  The  local  union  was 
afraid that the new system would dequalify their jobs and 
also make the workers more isolated from each other.5 

In the big department-store PUB in Stockholm the ini­

tial problem  was a planned computer-based system for 
registration of  working hours, sales, and  personal data. 
The union saw a danger of increased  control of  the wor­
kers.6 

At the newspaper, the Svenska Dagbladet in Stockholm, 
the typographers were facing the transition from lead and 

6 The work at the metal factory is reported in Perby, M.L. and 
Carlsson, J.: Att arbeta i  valsverket, Swedish Center for Working 
Life, Stockholm 1979. 
6 The work at the department store is reported in Erlander, B.: Så 
här var det  på PUB, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 
1980. 

286 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

Linotype  production  to  computer-based  text  processing 
systems. The union wanted to investigate staffing prob­
lems, changes in  work  organization  and  how  this  new 
technology was to be introduced, before it was introduced.7 
In the repair shop, the State Railroad locomotive repair 
shop  in  Örebro,  management  planned  to  introduce  a 
computer-based  work  measurement  system. The  union 
had no experience with computer technology and wanted 
initially  to  use the 'resource  persons' basically as com­
puter  experts  to  check  whether  the  information  from 
management was correct.8 

Clearly, not all  our methodological expectations were 
met. In the metal factory  the investigation group  really 
meant  an  activation  among  the  members  concerning 
problems with  planning and introduction of  new techno­
logy,  but  the  work  in  the  investigation  group  was  not 
really taken seriously by the local union committee. At the 
department store it turned out to be difficult to go from the 
initial problem investigations to the more action oriented 
activities. At the newspaper there was a  built-in conflict 
between trade union activists who wished the work to de­
velop fast into concrete actions, and other members that 
saw the group more as a study group to learn more. Fi­
nally, at the repair shop the group was, after the initial in­
vestigations, split  up into  a smaller investigation group 
(basically with members from the trade union committee) 
and a more general study group. At all workplaces there 
was a conflict between using personnel resources for the 
investigation work and for  other trade union  work. This 
gives rise to questions of principle concerning e.g.: 

7 The work at the newspaper is reported in Ehn, P., Perby, M.L., 
Sandberg, Å.: Brytningstid, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1984. 
8 The work at the repair shop is reported in Ehn, P. and Erlan­
der, B.: Vi vägrar låta detaljstyra oss, Swedish Center for Wor­
king Life, Stockholm 1978. 

The DEMOS  Project 

287 

•  the combination of broad activity among the member­

ship  with  trade  union  action  oriented  investigation 
work; 

•  the interplay between knowledge needed for here-and-
now  negotiations and  development  of  long term  per­
spectives and action plans; and 

•  the formulation  of  'problems' in cooperation  between 

local unions and researchers/designers. 

This will not be further developed  here, but after the DE­
MOS  project such questions were addressed in a  special 
project.9  Instead I will  turn to examples and  theoretical 
reflections  illustrated  by  these  examples.  Since  I  was 
working as 'resource person' in the investigation groups 
at the newspaper and at the repair shop I will use them as 
examples. But first a sketch of the theoretical perspective. 

Theoretical Perspective 
Marxist  labor  process  theory  was  theoretically  funda­
mental to the DEMOS  project. On  the one hand, we were 
more users of such theory than really developing it. On 
the other hand, the work in the investigation groups con­
stituted interesting cases for  application and reflection, 
and hence a concretization, especially for understanding 
design of  computer artifacts. The theoretical  perspective 
outlined below  reflects this 'dialogue'; i.e. it reflects our 
reading of theory 'digested' via the work conducted in the 
investigation groups. 

In accordance  with Marxist theory we saw the design 
process as part  of  a larger organizational  development 

9 After the DEMOS project one of the members, Åke Sandberg, ini­
tiated  the METHOD project to investigate methods problem with 
our approach. This was done both as a comparative study of 
different action oriented trade union research projects, and as 
reflections of the theoretical  foundations for action research. This 
study is documented in Sandberg, Å. (ed.): Forskning  för  föränd­
ring - Om metoder  och förutsättningar för  handlingsinriktad 
forskning i  arbetslivet, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1981. 

288 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

process. Furthermore, this process of organizational de­
velopment and change was seen in a broader context than 
traditional  organizational  development,  including  and 
emphasizing trade union activities as well as societal con­
straints and opportunities. 

A central concept was that of labor processes. In short, a 
labor process, in the Marxist tradition, is a process to pro­
duce use values; specific products or services of some kind. 
These use values  are produced by people using artifacts 
(specific machines, tools, techniques etc.) to refine objects 
of  work  (specific 'raw  materials'; goods, services, ideas, 
etc.). Planning as well as execution are fundamental parts 
of human work in this process. The division  of labor  be­
tween different groups of  people, their qualifications for 
accomplishing different tasks, and the quality of  the use 
values being produced are key aspects of the labor process 
in the context of democratization of work. 

The design process reflects, at least conceptually and so 
far in most cases also practically, a fundamental division 
of labor, the division between planning and execution. In 
the design  process, technology and use values, as well as 
skill requirements and organizational options for another 
labor process, the use process, are 'frozen'. In the use pro­
cess work is executed given the constraints and opportu­
nities set by the design process. Looked at the other way 
around, the characteristics of a given use process also set 
constraints and opportunities for the design process. 

The design process as well as the use process are sepa­
rate labor processes, and at the same time parts of a 'total' 
labor  process.  In  this  perspective  an  understanding of 
changes of labor processes must be related to the totality as 
well as to the separate parts, to the division of labor be­
tween different groups  of  workers within the labor  pro­
cess of design, to the division of labor between the design 
labor process and the use labor process, and to division of 
labor within the use labor process. 

Given this basic understanding, it is no wonder that the 
debate and  research in  the  mid-1970s emanating from 

The DEMOS  Project 

289 

Braverman's work10 came as a great relief and to a large 
extent formed  our  general  understanding of  work  and 
technology. Braverman  utilized Marx's analysis of labor 
processes  under the capitalist  mode  of  production, and 
was able to formulate useful theses on principle driving 
forces for change of technology and work today. 

In summary, the main theses were that the Tayloristic 
way of organizing work  was the most adequate form for 
division of labor and use of technology in capitalist enter­
prises. Hence, there was an overall tendency by manage­
ment to divide the labor process into planning and execu­
tion  activities.  By  taking away  the  planning activities 
from the shop floor and concentrating them in the hands 
of  management, workers  would  be easier to control  and 
replace and cheaper to buy. Computer artifacts seemed to 
be the appropriate technology for the ultimate realization 
of these basic capitalist interests. Braverman himself pro­
vided striking illustrations for the theses from shop floor 
as well as from office labor processes that had been auto­
mated,  and  the  theses  certainly  affected  our  view  on 
planning and control systems. Others, elaborating on the 
same theses, provided illustrations and important contri­
butions to the understanding of  the labor process of  de­
signing computer artifacts.11 

However,  there  were  also  practical  and  empirical 
anomalies that  could  not be explained  by these theses. 
Work was not deskilled in all cases. More collective forms 
of work organization than the Tayloristic were sometimes 
proposed by management. And it happened that workers 
gained from  the introduction  of  new technology.12  How­

10  Braverman, op. cit. 
11  Important contributions were given by Greenbaum, J.: 
'Division of Labor in the Computer Field' in Monthly Review, vol 
28 no 3,1976 and by Kraft, P.: Programmers and  Managers - the 
routinization of computer  programming in  the United  States, 
Springer Verlag, New York 1977. 
12 In chapter 18, Skills and the Tool  Pespective I will return to the 
contemporary theoretical Marxist discussion on qualifications 
and technological  change. 

290 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

ever, the Marxist  approach was  most  useful for  under­
standing: 
•  the relation between capital accumulation and mana­

gerial control, 

tance, 

•  the role of class struggle at work  and  workers' resis­

•  the importance of the specific economic, social and his­

torical situation in which a change takes place, 

•  the role of the existing technology and labor processes. 
This holds for the design process as well as the use process 
and their relations. Here I will not go into a detailed pre­
sentation of the labor process tradition and its result,13 but 
only present some theses that have been important for our 
understanding of  opportunities and  constraints for  de­
signing for democracy. 

In a Marxist approach capital accumulation or gene­

ration of profits is understood as the basic driving force in 
changes of labor processes. This means that changes that 
are, at least in the long run, contradictory to this interest 
are most unlikely to occur. Trade union demands that go 
further also have to take into account changes of the eco­
nomic system. 

From a Marxist perspective intensification of work and 
use  of  new  technology  may  be  understood  as two  basic 
strategies  for  capital  accumulation.  This  means  that 
when  a  labor  process  changes,  trade  unions  must  be 
aware of the risk that e.g. new planning and control sys­
tems may intensify work  beyond  acceptable limits. The 
main reason for introducing new  technology is in  many 
cases its ability to intensify work. Especially when  tech­
nology has been stable in an industry for some time there 
is a  tendency to lower skill  requirements and intensify 
work. However, when really new technology is introduced 
this may imply increased requirements for skill, especially 
in the first  period, where experience with the equipment is 

13 por references see chapters 3, Emancipatory  Practice -A 
Marxist approach and chapter 18, Skills and the Tool  Perspective. 

The DEMOS  Project 

291 

sparse. In any case, trade unions will hardly be able to re­
sist, at least in the long run, new available more produc­
tive technology, especially if other companies introduce it. 
This  reveals  the  importance  of  conscious  trade  union 
strategies for design of new technology. 

Direct  control  and  responsible  autonomy  can, in a 
Marxist  approach,  be  understood  as  complementary 
strategies for capital accumulation. This means that even 
if direct control, the Tayloristic detailed division of labor 
(intensified, unskilled, cheap labor) in the short run is the 
most obvious strategy for capital accumulation it is not the 
only alternative. Opposition from workers and their trade 
unions to detailed  control (strikes, high labor turnover, 
absenteeism etc.)  may imply such  high production costs 
that alternatives are more  profitable. Besides, possible 
economic advantages of using a skilled work force are lost. 
This produces an opening for complementary strategies, 
by  Friedman labeled  responsible  autonomy.14  They are 
based on some local responsibility, some development  of 
skills and some cooperation among workers. This may for 
instance explain some of  the employer interest in socio-
technical experiments. 

To trade unions these strategies are an opportunity for 
better working conditions, and at the same time a threat. 
It may well end up in competition between small groups of 
workers where  common interests and solidarity are lost 
sight of, and where the overall control of the labor process 
remains firmly  in the hands of management. This is even 
more obvious when considering the fact that the different 
strategies may be applied  to different groups of  workers 
within the same company. Friedman suggests that one of 
the determining factors in management's choice  of stra­
tegy towards a group of workers is whether that group is 

14 The concepts used here are based on Friedman, op. cit. They 
have later been developed with special reference to the computer 
field  in Friedman, A. and Cornford, D.: 'Strategies for Meeting 
User Demands - An International Perspective' in Bjerknes, G. 
et. al (eds.): Computers and  Democracy -A Scandinavian Chal­
lenge, Avebury, 1987. 

292 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

central or peripheral to management's interests in capital 
accumulation and control.  Skilled workers or workers in 
areas with labor shortage may for instance be approached 
differently  than  migrant  workers,  women  and  other 
weak-resource groups. 

However,  the actual outcome  of  these tendencies  to­
ward rationalization of labor processes is not determinis­
tic. It depends on  a number of factors such as available 
technology, the  economic situation,  the power and stra­
tegy of workers and their trade unions, etc. Hence, funda­
mental to a Marxist approach is not only the attempt to 
understand the objective side of  societal tendencies, but 
also the subjective side of interests of different groups or 
classes in society. In a Marxist approach towards under­
standing technology  and  work, class  struggle is an im­
portant aspect of actual changes in labor processes. Here, 
this concerns not only the use process designed, but also 
the design process and possible integrations in the future. 

Example 1 : 
The Locomotive Engine Repair shop 
In 1974, the State Employees' Union was informed by the 
State Railway's central administration that a computer-
based planning system, ISA-KLAR, would be introduced in 
its work shops - among other  places in Örebro. It repre­
sented the management's alternative to piecework wages, 
which the union had gotten rid of after a long struggle. 

ISA-KLAR  involved interviewing workers at the work­

place  to determine in detail how  they carried  out their 
jobs. The employees' knowledge of their jobs was collected, 
then  used  by  the  company  management.  Work  tasks 
were broken down into small steps, stored in a computer 
and coupled  with an MTM  database which was compiled 
from several big companies. 

The DEMOS  Project 

293 

The following illustrates the work tasks from the loco­

motive repair shop produced by ISA-KLAR: 

1.  Get tools X and Y 
2.  Go to the carriage 
3.  Crawl into position 
4.  Remove the cotter pin 
5.  Remove the washer and bolt 
6.  Repeat moments 3-5 for the other bolts 
7.  Remove 
In addition to the specification of detailed work steps and 
the  time  and  sequence for  them, information  was  also 
stored concerning the tools that should be used. Company 
management wanted to use data of this type as a basis for 
designing the workplace. In this way, possibilities were 
created for the future control and direction of  employees 
with automatic work orders and instructions. 

At the repair shop in Örebro, built in 1901, the main 
task is engine maintenance. At this repair shop the gene­
ral system was to be adapted  to local and  practical cir­
cumstances and thus tested. 

Management project groups were formed with at least 

one trade union representative in each group. 

Contacts were established with the DEMOS group, when 
the union had participated in the work with ISA-KLAR for 
almost two years without really having had any influence 
or information.16 

The Union  Investigation Work 
In  March 1976,  the  union  established  an investigative 
group with 14 participants. With  the support  of  resear­
chers from the DEMOS  project, it was to investigate ISA­
KLAR  and work  planning in the locomotive shop. It was 

16 Barbro Erlander and myself were the two 'resource persons' 
from the research group in the repair shop in Örebro. Our work 
there, from  which this summary is extracted, was reported in 
Ehn and Erlander, op. cit. 

294 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

also supposed to provide information and support for the 
union representatives sitting in the project groups. 

In the initial discussion between the local union and re­
searchers from  DEMOS,  the  researchers  were  asked  to 
serve as 'data experts' checking the timings of the various 
tasks  that  were  to  be  incorporated  into  the  computer-
based  system for  work  measurement. However,  we  did 
not consider such an activity consistent with our research 
perspective. 

In subsequent discussions between the researchers and 

the union it was generally acknowledged that the key im­
plication of the system - that the work being done on the 
shop floor  could  be dequalified - was a  far more signifi­
cant issue for the investigation than merely an attempt to 
adjust particular timings. 

The  problem  under  investigation  was  then  reformu­
lated so  as to focus on the full range of  production plan­
ning. 

It was further agreed that the union should conduct its 
own investigation, using the researchers as a  medley of 
resources.  Some  of  the  ways  in  which  the  researchers 
could contribute 'expertise' would be, for example, to ana­
lyze the computer-based system and  to provide a struc­
ture for the investigation work. 

The  investigation  group  from  the  trade  union  was 
formed  after  a  number  of  discussions  had  been  held 
between  the  local  union  committee  and  the  research 
group. 

The basic investigation work went on until June 1977, 
and during this period the group met about twice a month. 
This work was then followed  up for  another year  by the 
local union committee and the researchers. Experiences 
were  summarized  and  'transformed'  by  the  union  into 
demands for  local  agreements  of  codetermination  and 
rationalization. 

As a first  step, the investigation group issued a report 
describing the current work situation, pointing out what 
was good and what was bad. This description was then to 
be used as a base for the union's strategy for future work 

The DEMOS  Project 

295 

regarding planning, control, and computer use as well as 
a base for collective agreements within the Joint Regula­
tion Act (MBL). It should be stressed that the investigation 
was initiated before the introduction of MBL. 

The Workers' View Of  the Work  Place 
In the accounting of the current situation, issues such as 
the work  environment and the planning were described. 
The report stressed  that the changeover from piecework 
to a system  of fixed  monthly  wages  was  extremely  im­
portant, not only in terms of group solidarity among the 
workers and of job satisfaction, but also in relation to the 
quality of production. 

The lack  of  planning and uneven  rate of  work on the 
engines had  created  major  problems, and  the fact  that 
neither the tools nor the spare parts were handled effec­
tively had  been a great source  of irritation at all  work­
shops. Too  much  time was taken up searching for  tools 
and spare  parts. The  poorly  maintained  work  facilities 
had  caused a  number of  problems in  the work environ­
ment.  Some  examples  were  outside  draughts and  also 
working positions that were damaging workers' health. 
The uncertainty as to the consequences of  ISA-KLAR  did 
not  make  the working conditions any better, and  there 
was great dissatisfaction about the lack of information. 

Further  Investigation Work 
At the same time as the current work situation was de­
scribed, a  more thorough analysis was  performed of the 
ISA-KLAR system. 

The purpose of this system (its technical construction, 
etc.)  was  described  in  various  documents,  and  it  was 
mainly the researchers who conducted this investigation. 
The results of this study were discussed continuously in 
the investigation group. 

296 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

Some activities in the investigation group were carried 
out based on the systems approach of West Churchman.16 
For instance, in planning the work in the group the pur­
pose (e.g. an alternative proposal to ISA-KLAR or an action 
program  for  the  union)  was  related  to  resources  like 
economy and time, available information, the researchers, 
etc. This was, in turn, related to the environment in the 
case, e.g.  managerial prerogatives. Measurement  of  per­
formance  was discussed  in terms of  working conditions 
and  democratic  participation  in  design  work.  The 
decision- maker was discussed in terms of the local union 
committee or  the investigation group. Finally, the client 
was discussed in terms of the workers in the repair shop 
in  Örebro,  all  repair  workers  of  the  State  Railroad's 
different  repair shops, or the central union in its  work 
with laws and agreements. These discussions created a lot 
of tension in the group, but were also very important for 
its progress. 

The investigation was completed by studies of various 
topical questions which were also important for the trade 
union.  For  this  reason,  a  study  group  was  formed  on 
planning, control  and computer  use. Among  the topics 
discussed in the group were  the principles of Taylorism, 
and these were compared to the current work situation at 
the SJ work shops. It also included basic facts on comput­
ers, design, planning methods, etc. One purpose of  these 
meetings was to broaden the discussions and to elicit views 
from as many members as possible. 

One demand of the union - presented in various ma­

nagement project groups - was that the problem with the 
planning, the material administration and the work or­
ganization be solved before the discussion about computer-
based time measurement be carried on. As time went by, it 
became obvious that the union's chances of  influencing 
the design of production planning by participation in the 
project groups were more or less illusory. Camouflaged by 

16  Churchman, C. W.: The  Systems Approach,  Delta, New York 
1968. 

The DEMOS  Project 

297 

technical discussions, the management of SJ  and its con­
sultants continued to develop  ISA-KLAR. The basic ques­
tion - how the planning in the shops was to be conducted 
in the future - never appeared on the agenda.  Through 
this fact, and the analysis of ISA-KLAR, the union's inves­
tigation group came to the conclusion that the system had 
to  be  stopped  until  an  agreement  on  codetermination 
could be reached that would regulate the design and use of 
this kind of systems. The local union demanded, and got, 
central union support for this position. Management offi­
cially accepted the position of the union. 

Instead  management  appointed  so-called  planning 
groups,  which  were  to  'construct  and  test  a  planning 
model' for two different items in the production process 
(components on  bogies and  work on certain types of en­
gines). Each of the planning groups consisted of two repair 
workers, a supervisor, and a production technician. 

The investigation group of the union collaborated with 
the two  planning groups. The union participants in the 
planning group  were  appointed  from  the investigation 
work around  ISA-KLAR and the investigation group sup­
ported its members in the planning groups. In practice the 
repair workers themselves did the design work. A techni­
cian was asked to look over the proposals, and minor ad­
justments were made. 

The Propositions of the Bogie Workers 
Although the planning groups had very little time at their 
disposal they still managed to present concrete  proposi­
tions on  changes in  work  organization as well as other 
conditions. 

The basic idea in the proposition was that repair wor­

kers should be flexible  between the rates of work. These 
are pre-demolition, demolition, test of cracks, welding, in­
stallation, mounting of wheel axles, and final  installation. 
Flexibility meant that all repair workers were to partici­
pate in the entire work cycle, from demolition to final in­
stallation, and they should all be able to handle all the ex­
isting tasks. The main principles were thus skill, training, 

298 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

and  job  rotation.  In  the  proposition  special  stress was 
placed  on the teams' right to plan their own  work. This 
was  considered  necessary  not  only  as  a  move  toward 
democratic work organization, but also as a  measure fa­
cilitating production. 

In  connection  with  the  proposition  on  a  new  bogie 

workshop, demands were put forward, and  possible im­
provements of methods was discussed. 

The repair workers claimed that their proposition had 
demonstrated  that  they  could  have  a  well-functioning 
work  place without  ISA-KLAR,  and the local  union  con­
tended that their way of working with rationalization can 
serve as a model for other workplaces as well. 

Demands of Rationalization 
The local union's experiences in investigation work and its 
awareness  of  SJ's role in  the ISA-KLAR  project  were in 
May  1978  assimilated  in  a  number  of  demands  that 
served as a basis for local  agreements on  rationalization 
and codetermination on design and use of computer arti­
facts. The demands were adjusted to MBL and to a central 
collective agreement on  codetermination. Among  the de­
mands were: 
•  that long term planning be conducted by SJ for (among 
other things) technical development, training, and staff 
policy; 

•  that the repair and revision work be carried out within 

SJ; 

•  that  rationalization  not  lower  the  requirements  for 

skilled repair personnel; 

•  that rationalization not result in work measurement of 
individuals or groups or in incentive payments of any 
kind. 

With  special  regards  to  the design  process, it was  de­
manded: 
•  that directives for a project be negotiable before it starts; 
•  that design methods are approved by the union; 

The DEMOS  Project 

299 

•  that investigations in the design work not only include 
technical  and  economic  considerations,  but  also 
changes in employment, work environment, work  or­
ganization, and possibilities for cooperation, codetermi-
nation, and development in the daily work; 

•  that  the  union  get  the  necessary  resources  for  con­

ducting a parallel independent investigation; 

•  that the cost for these resources be calculated as part of 

the investment in the rationalization; 

•  that participation by trade union  representatives and 
users be a natural aspect of the design work, and that it 
be planned to allow this; and 

•  that participants receive what the union regards as the 

necessary training to participate in the design work. 

Just after DEMOS 
What did the local union win or lose by participating in the 
DEMOS  project?  For one  thing, it gained  experience in 
planning and in conducting its own investigations, inde­
pendent of management; it also learned to cooperate with 
researchers/designers in resolving union problems. 

In addition, the union came to understand a great deal 
about  production  planning  generally,  and  about  com-
puter-based work measurement specifically. The experi­
ences in investigation work, as well as in production plan­
ning,  entered  into  the discussion  at other  repair  work 
shops in SJ. 

Our report on the work, Vi  vågrar låta  detalj styra oss 
(We are Opposed to Detailed Control),17 was distributed to 
all members in Örebro. A new study group on work shop 
planning, based on the report was set up by the local union. 
But the struggle over planning at the work place was 

far from finished.  As a result of the union opposition, ISA­
KLAR  was not implemented. This was an important vic­
tory for the union. But on the other hand, no immediate 
changes took  place in response to the propositions of the 
bogie  workers, and  no agreement was  reached on code-

17  Ehn and Erlander, op. cit. 

300 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

termination  with  regard  to  rationalization  and  use  of 
computers. The  ultimate power to plan was  not shifted 
from management to union. No real codetermination was 
achieved. 

Ten Years After 
What was the impact of the DEMOS investigation work at 
the  repair shop in  Örebro in  a  longer  perspective?  We 
ourselves did  not conduct such evaluations, but a  report 
from a  now ongoing democratization project at the State 
Railroad give some rather positive indications. In the re­
port its is stated that:18 

1976 was a remarkable year. The repair shop in Örebro 
began to participate in the DEMOS project. (...) The im­
portance of  the  DEMOS  project  for  developments  in 
Örebro reminds one of the story of the hen and the egg. 
Obviously  the  researchers  had  great  influence.  To­
gether with the local union they created a frame of re­
ference that still is alive. It is also obvious that the local 
union already, at this time, had a well developed strat­
egy, and  this was perhaps a condition for starting the 
DEMOS  project in Örebro. (...) The core of  the debates 
from the 1970s is still alive and useful. Developments 
have,  however,  not  been  according to  the  prognoses 
from the 1970s. An important reason is of course that 
the debates took  place. However, from a trade union 
point of view, the  strategy must be developed to deal 
with the new reality. The strategy from the 1970s con­
cerned a defense against the threat of that time. Today 
the threats look different. The new strategy must iden­
tify  these  new  threats, and  perhaps  the  union  must 
change part of  the frame of  reference that  was estab­
lished in the DEMOS period. 

18 The report is based on interviews. The quotations are from a 
draft by Brulin, G. and Ulstad, C.: DESAM  vid halvlek  (forth­
coming) (my  translations). 

The DEMOS  Project 

301 

And  on the investigation  work  with the work  measure­
ment system the report says: 

The struggle forced  the union to develop an offensive 
strategy. The union could not just say no to the propo­
sals from  management. DEMOS  meant an opportunity 
to develop the union's competence in relation to control 
systems, computers, work organization and skills. 

As a  reflection on interviews concerning  the changes in 
the production process today, the investigators find it 

interesting to note that the rather unstructured alter­
native presented a long time ago has more  and  more 
been  developed  into  a  coherent  view  on  production 
planning. Today this union view also gets some support 
from  management.  (...) The  message  from  the  man­
aging director concerns many things that we can rec­
ognize from the trade union work with DEMOS and col­
lective agreements on design and use of computer ar­
tifacts. It is not  an exaggeration to say that the man­
agement philosophy on efficient organization  now has 
caught up with the one the union developed in the mid-
1970s. 

As a comment on the draft for a collective agreement on 
design and use of computer artifacts that the investigation 
group developed the report says: 

It was written 10 years ago, but is still largely valid. 

And the report sums up: 

The trade union work in Örebro from DEMOS  onward 
has given a trade union perspective that perhaps is best 
formulated in the title of the DEMOS report: We are Op­
posed  to Detailed Control. The collective agreement on 
design and use of computer artifacts created conditions 
for a dialogue with  management. The  repair shop  in 
Örebro got a new managing director with a view on ef­
ficient  organization that, to a great extent, overlaps the 
trade  union  perspective.  In summary, as we  under­
stand it, what  happened and is happening in Örebro 

302 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

can be  explained  by  the abovementioned  three moti­
vating forces: a trade union perspective, use of the the 
collective  agreement  on  design  and  use  of  computer 
artifacts, and a real dialogue with management. 

If this report is right, the DEMOS project at the repair shop 
in Örebro did not just produce yet another research report 
on computers and democracy at work. 

Example 2: 
The  Newspaper 
In January 1976, a  project for  the introduction of  com-
puter-based  text  processing was initiated  at  the  major 
daily newspaper Svenska Dagbladet in Stockholm. At that 
time photosetting had already been in operation for many 
years  parallel  to  lead  composing.  However,  the  major 
change, the scrapping of lead, still lay ahead of the graphic 
workers' union at Svenska Dagbladet. 

Graphic  production  and  the  manufacture of  newspa­

pers  had  been  carried  out  in  approximately  the same 
manner for several hundred years. Work in the compos­
ing room of a newspaper has, for example, to a great ex­
tent been a craft. 

In  the  mid-1970s,  however,  graphic  workers  found 
themselves  in  the center  of  a  technological  revolution. 
Within a short decade, they went from a traditional craft 
to a situation in which computers are central to the entire 
production process. Text entry, proof-reading, image pro­
cessing and subsequently  page  make-up, all  were  now 
done via computer display terminals from  which the fi­
nished text was  produced on a photosetter linked  to the 
computer-based system. 

The labor process no longer consisted of a series of work 
stages in  which  the material gradually  was  refined  by 
hand with the assistance of  machinery. Instead  the 'raw 
text' fed  into  a computer-based  system  was  now  auto­
matically  transferred - hyphenated  and  justified - to  a 
photosetter. 

The DEMOS  Project 

303 

As a result of this new technology, the graphic workers' 
control  over  their  work  was  threatened. An  increasing 
number  of  decisions  were  programmed  into  the  ma­
chines, e.g. the standardization of advertisement formats. 
To a great extent production speed was determined by the 
machinery. 

In short, the  new  computer-based  technology threat­
ened graphic workers in three areas: control over the la­
bor process, dequalification of work, and employment. 

The Union  Investigation Work 
In the beginning of 1976 contacts were also established 
between  the  graphic  workers'  local  union  at  Svenska 
Dagbladet and the DEMOS research group.19 

An investigation group was formed at a union meeting. 

The subject of the group was determined as 'new technol­
ogy',  but it was an open  question as to  how  the group 
should organize its work and which questions to focus on. 

The group was set up to include graphic workers with 
different skills. It also included members of the local union 
committee as well  as members with little union experi­
ence. Around twenty workers were active in the group. 

An  agreement  was  negotiated  with  management  on 

the conditions for  the investigation. The  agreement in­
cluded  the  right for  the group  to  meet  during working 
hours, the researchers' access to the workplace, and  the 
group's access to information, such as the right to inter­
view management and technical experts in the company. 
The investigation work  was planned in two steps - an 
investigation of what was good and bad in the current si­
tuation at Svenska Dagbladet, and a future oriented study. 
In the study of the current situation the idea was to uti­
lize the different experiences that the participants had to 
formulate  demands  for  change.  The  group  should  not 

19 Maja-Lisa Perby, Åke Sandberg and myself were the 'resource 
persons' from the research group working with this case. The 
presentation of this case is based on our report: Ehn, Perby, Sand-
berg, op. cit. 

304 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

narrowly look at the current technological change at the 
newspaper, but create a  general understanding and for­
mulate general  demands that were supported  by  many 
members. 

In three months, and with the researchers as 'resource 

persons',  the group  had  produced  a  report  which  high­
lighted problems as well as positive qualities in the current 
work environment, work organization, training, etc. The 
report concluded that: 
•  In  the composing  room,  and  at  the  lithographic  de­

partment, work was still to a high degree, carried out as 
a craft. Work  environment  problems  had  to  do  with 
heat and gas from the lead, heavy lifts, and dangerous 
chemical  products  used  in film  processing and  plate 
making. 

•  At the other technical departments (stereotyping, prin­

ting, distribution) the workers were more like machine 
operators. Work was often monotonous, and heavy lifts 
were a dangerous aspect  of  the work environment in 
all these departments. 

•  Time pressure was seen as a problem at all the techni­

cal departments. 

•  At  all  departments  work  was  organized  in  teams. 
However, it was only in the composing room  that this 
meant planning by the team and systematic job  rota­
tion (among skilled workers, i.e. the female teletypists 
were excluded). 

•  Composers  and  lithographers  performed  work  that 
required craft skills  and long practical training; they 
also were the only group that had a strong professional 
pride.  Especially  in  the  composing  room  this  repre­
sented a  problem, since  there was a division of  labor 
between  on the one  hand, craft-trained  male  compo­
sers, and on the other hand, female teletypists with only 
typewriting and on-the-job training. 

•  In spite of  time pressure and work environment prob­
lems most graphic workers got on well with their work 
at Svenska Dagbladet. Especially  the fellowship  with 

The DEMOS  Project 

305 

their closest work mates was seen as very positive. The 
composers, however, did also really like their work (i.e. 
the composing work). 

In the next step technical and organizational alternatives 
were to be outlined. Here the investigation group was to 
look into what plans management  had, and  reformulate 
the problems and potentials highlighted in the first study 
into concrete design proposals that could be negotiated by 
the union  committee. This step  turned  out  to be  much 
harder to take, and  after another four month the group 
stopped without really having been able to fulfill the task 
of formulating concrete design demands. 

There were at least three reasons for this 'failure'. One 
had to do with our design methods. Discussions were not 
enough to envision future possibilities and constraints. We 
had no method to transform the ideas from the initial in­
vestigation into concrete visions of the future. As a result 
several participants found the investigation work boring, 
and the trade union committee found it too abstract. 

Another problem with the investigation group had to do 

with the union's scarce  resources. In praétice the investi­
gation work not only created new resources, it also sapped 
resources from other trade union activities. Many active 
members participated in the group, and this took most of 
their time for trade union work. 

Finally, the union had a lot of 'burning'  here-and-now 
problems with the introduction of new technology  which 
they wanted to use their most qualified members to work 
with. 

As a consequence  of  this, the investigation  work was 
reorganized, and  was continued in other organizational 
forms during the next  two years that  the union partici­
pated in the DEMOS project. 

Several smaller groups were established  that investi­
gated various issues as a basis for negotiation with man­
agement. Some of these groups were 'pure' union design 
groups, others were joint management and union groups 
where the union  members worked  full time with the in­

306 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

vestigation. In parallel to this some, not very active, gen­
eral union study groups were established. The researchers 
from  DEMOS  worked  as 'resource  persons' for  some  of 
these groups and for the union committee. 

Management's Design Proposal  and  the Union Response 
Management's design project for scrapping lead in favor 
of full computer-based text processing started in January 
1976. For  this project  management  had  hired  external 
consultants. The union was well represented in the project 
group formed to carry out the study. However, this group 
only met three times  and the actual design was carried 
out entirely by experts from the consulting firm. The con­
sultant's study provided an overall proposal for the intro­
duction of new technology to the composing department. 

The proposal, delivered after four months, included the 
computer-based system to be implemented, and a plan for 
its  implementation.  Though  formulated  in  technical 
terms the proposal meant drastic changes in work orga­
nization, including the controversial issues of  division of 
labor between journalists and graphic workers. 

At its best, union participation in the project group re­

sulted in only marginal adjustments. For example, in the 
final  proposal  management  had  eliminated  statements 
such as 'the editorial text is entered by journalists'. The 
technological solution, however, was not altered. The lar­
gest number of display terminals were in the editorial de­
partments, as had been suggested in the the original sys­
tems proposal. 

In this situation, and with the support from the DEMOS 
researchers, the union formulated a strategy to deal with 
the  design  situation. The  strategy  was  discussed  at  a 
membership meeting, and then in June 1976 formulated 
as a letter to the managing director of the company. The 
union wanted time to prepare themselves for negotiations 
on directives for  a  new investigation of  consequences of 
the new technology for work organization, skill require­
ments, etc. This study was to complement the consultants' 
report. 

The DEMOS  Project 

307 

In the letter  the union stated  that 'in SDK  (the local 
union) we are not against the new technology. However, 
to take a stand we must get resources  to  understand  the 
consequences of the changes and what this means to the 
graphic workers. Such consequences are not mentioned in 
the consultants' report.'20 

What the union wanted time to prepare negotiations on 

included: 
•  new forms for decision-making in the design process so 
that their demands could be taken into consideration, 
including the right to negotiations whenever found ne­
cessary by the union during the design process, and 

•  a new investigation that gave a detailed picture of what 
happens to the graphic workers in the whole company, 
not only in the composing room. 

Among the more detailed demands for participation in the 
design process were mentioned e.g. education of members 
in design  work  and  computer-based  text  processing  so 
that they actively could participate in the design process, 
and  resources for seminars and  conferences  to support 
the work in the DEMOS investigation group. 

Questions to be negotiated about the actual design in­
cluded  e.g.  work  environment,  work  organization,  op­
portunities for contacts between workers, education, and 
demarcations between different groups of workers. 

Upon receipt of the letter, the management retreated 
from their initial proposal. They no longer made reference 
to a total solution but instead applied an approach of pre­
senting one machine at the time. 

Initially, the union attempted to stand fast on the de­
mands put forward  in the letter, but gradually  they re­
turned  to  dealing  with  various  issues  after  they  had 
arisen. Half a year after sending the letter, the union al­
tered its demand for an overall solution to only demanding 
negotiations prior to the introduction of any new machi­
nery. 

20 ibid., pp. 105-107. 

308 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

In 1979, and  after  many  rounds of  negotiations, the 
transition from lead  composing to computer-based  text 
processing was completed.  By  then  the local  union  had 
done its own  investigations in  working hours, e.g. con­
cerning education  and  manning of  the  new  equipment. 
Union representatives had also participated full-time, and 
with as many representatives as management, in a pro­
ject suggesting the new work organization and the layout 
of the composing room. 

No one was fired,  and an agreement securing employ­

ment was reached in negotiations. An education program 
to  maintain and  develop the composers' and  the telety­
pists' skill was also agreed  upon after negotiations, but 
proved, in practice, hard to fulfill. Directions for the future 
work organization were still an open question. 

The union was, however, not really able to influence the 
choice of  technology and  therein one of the fundamental 
preconditions for  work  content  and  work  organization. 
The development at Svenska Dagbladet must be viewed 
against the technical developments in the entire graphic 
branch. This limit to democratization at the workplace 
was one of the experiences that led to the UTOPIA project 
and our attempt to really design computer-based alterna­
tives for skilled work in the printing industry.21 However, 
before leaving the experiences from the DEMOS  work at 
Svenska Dagbladet our reflections about the content of a 
union strategy will be discussed — the need for a compre­
hensive union view. 

A Comprehensive Local Union View 
Basic  problems  with  a  union  strategy for  dealing with 
technological change came to light in the study at Svenska 
Dagbladet. These  problems concerned  differences  of in­
terests between  different groups of  members, technical-
economic bindings, and existing technology. 

21  See chapter 13, Case II: The UTOPIA project  and chapter 15, The 
'Tool  Perspective' - An Example. 

The DEMOS Project 

309 

New technology changes the division of  labor between 
different groups of workers. In newspapers this is not only 
a question of graphic workers versus journalists, or wor­
kers at  the newspaper versus technical  staff from com­
puter companies, it is also an internal demarcation pro­
blem for the graphic unions. 

The  technology  in  the  composing  room  was  empha­
sized in the suggested design at Svenska Dagbladet. How­
ever, the changes meant that the stereotype department 
would  be  drastically  reduced  and  several  lithographic 
tasks would  also disappear. The union wanted, as men­
tioned earlier, to negotiate a comprehensive solution for all 
technical  departments.  When  management  refused  to 
negotiate about such a solution, the union came to settle 
for a solution for the composing room alone. The negative 
side of  this strategy  was that the stereotypers  and  the 
lithographers to a great extent were left to solve their own 
work  organization  and  demarcation  problems after the 
new  technology  had  been  introduced  in  the composing 
room.  The  positive  side  was  the  training  program  for 
teletypists that was negotiated. It gave the teletypists the 
opportunity during working hours and at full pay to im­
prove their graphic skills to  a level of qualified graphic 
work. 

The 'technical-economic'  bindings posed  a hard prob­

lem for the union at Svenska Dagbladet. For example how 
should  the  union  act  when  management  wanted  to  re­
place the old photosetters? The union shared the opinion 
that the old ones had to be replaced, but they also knew 
that the new 'generation' of photosetters at the same time 
was an investment in the new computer-based system on 
which  no agreement  had  been  reached in negotiations. 
More  generally  it  was  known  that  the  management 
board  had  approved  an  investment  plan  for  complete 
transition to computer-based text processing, and yet the 
union  was  'forced'  to  negotiate  on  the  introduction  of 
single machines at different departments without a com­
prehensive view of the consequences for the members at 
different departments. 

310 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Finally  the union  faced  the existing  technology as a 
problem for a comprehensive view. Did  alternatives that 
fulfilled the union demands on the technology exist? Could 
the local union at Svenska Dagbladet influence the tech­
nological  change  in  the  newspaper  industry?  Negative 
answers to such questions pointed in the direction of sup­
port from central union levels - a union technology policy 
for  the  graphic  industry - a  complementary  central 
union strategy for changing social conditions and for re­
search  and  development  of  technological  alternatives. 
This  problem  with  existing  technology  was  also,  as 
mentioned,  an  important  factor  in  our  own  shift  of 
research strategy, from support of a defensive local union 
approach, as in the DEMOS project, towards support for a 
proactive  approach  by  designing  organizational  and 
technological  alternatives  for  skill  and  democracy  at 
work, as in the UTOPIA project. 

Towards a More Democratic Rationality 
Below I will summarize our reflections from  the DEMOS 
project concerning possibilities and constraints for  more 
democratic design processes in Scandinavian working life. 
The  reflections are  formed  by  the  practice  research  ap­
proach taken. Hence, they reflect our interpretation of the 
'interplay' between Marxist labor process theory, and our 
practical  experiences  with  designing for  democracy  at 
work.  First, I  discuss  the  limits to  democratization  in 
terms of  managerial  strategies  for  rationalization —  the 
potential changes of the labor process understood as a val­
orization  process  for  accumulation  of  capital.22  Then I 
discuss local trade  union efforts to counteract  this ratio­
nality — a rationality of the oppressed.23 

22 See chapter 3, Emancipatory  Practice -A Marxist  Approach. 
23 These reflections on strategies were first  summarized in Ehn, 
P. and Sandberg,  Å.: 'Local  Union  Influence on Technology  and 
Work Organization — some results from  the Demos  Project' in 
Briefs, U. et al. (eds.): Systems  Design  for,  with, and fry the Users, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam 1983. See also Sandberg,  A.: Techno-

The DEMOS  Project 

311 

Rationalization Strategies for 
Capital Accumulation 
One important reason why  the union was successful in 
preventing the introduction of  the computer-based  work 
measurement system into the locomotive work shop was 
that it was in no way going to effect or alter the actual ar­
tifacts of production. Within the graphic branch, however, 
computer-based systems are themselves production tools. 
Within the locomotive repair shop, the intention was not 
to alter the production process; instead, the supervision 
and control of the work and material was to be altered. In 
all probability it was this factor that made it easier for the 
union to successfully reject its introduction. Other alter­
natives existed  which were as profitable. In  the graphic 
branch  example,  however,  there  were  no  equally  prof­
itable alternatives available on  the  market. The  maxi­
mum intensity  of  the use of  labor  power  (the locomotive 
repair shop) and  the constant introduction of  new  tech­
nology which increases the productivity of the work force 
(in  the  newspaper)  are  two  central  components  in 
management rationalization efforts. 

Rationalization and  new technology change and shape 
the labor process. As will be illustrated, rationalization can 
be  directed  toward the  worker  as human labor, toward 
the artifacts  that  the  worker  works  with, or toward the 
work  objects  that  the  worker  refines. What  is of  impor­
tance is that regardless of  the  focus of  rationalization, it 
has consequences  for  both the  organization and  the con­
tent of  work. 

Several of the most basic rationalization strategies are 
summarized  in  the  illustration  below.24  In the DEMOS 

logical  Change  and  Co-determination in  Sweden - Background 
and  analysis of  trade union and  managerial strategies, Temple 
Press  (forthcoming). 
24 This Marxist interpretation of 'the frontiers of capital accumu­
lation' was inspired by Björkman, T. and Lundqvist,  K.: Från 
Max till Pia, Arkiv, Malmö 1981 (dissertation). 

312 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

project we found it useful  to distinguish between mana­
gement rationalization strategies for the use of production 
technology, and for the design  of  such technology.  One 
reason for this distinction is that the unions' possibilities 
and strategies for dealing with technological and organi­
zational changes completely differ in these two areas. 

Rationalization Strategies Directed at Human Labor 
The  classic  strategy  employed  by  management  for  in­
creasing profits has been to lengthen the  work  day with­
out a corresponding increase in wages.  In the Scandina­
vian  countries,  as in  other industrialized  nations,  this 
strategy is primarily  of  historical  interest. As  early as 
1900,  for  example,  typesetters  succeeded  in  pushing 
through  the  eight  hour  work  day  even  though  other 
groups still worked 9-10 hours per day. 

Nevertheless, rationalization measures aimed  at low­

ering the  price of  labor and increasing its intensity to the 
greatest extent continue to be widely employed. They are 
used in both cases  to break  down the labor process into 
simple tasks. In some situations, it has been  possible to 
separate out certain of  these tasks which can be perfor­
med by those  with less training and education - thereby 
employing cheaper labor. With the assistance of the com-
puter-based  planning system  in  the  locomotive  repair 
shop in Örebro, the work cycles would have been divided 
up so that more skilled labor could have been replaced by 
unskilled and minutely directed labor. In such situations, 
skills  would  not  be  sought, and  nor  would  training be 
provided. Another example of this process is the division of 
labor between composers and teletypists. The  degree to 
which company management succeeds with this strategy 
of  paying lower wage rates to unskilled labor depends of 
course on  the union's response. The union prevented  the 
introduction  of  the computer-based  planning system  in 
the repair shop. As a result of the union's demands, tele­
typist wages are at the same level as for the average male 
graphic worker. 

The DEMOS Project 

313 

Even  though company  management  may not succeed 
directly in lowering the  price  of  labor  by  means  of  the 
minute division of work tasks, such an approach often of­
fers the possibility of increasing work intensity. It is easier 
for  a  company  to  supervise  and  control  workers  who 
carry out a few simplified  tasks. In the case of  the com-
puter-based  work  measurement  system  in  the  repair 
shop, it would have béen possible for the company to give 
repairmen  detailed  instructions.  An  example  from  the 
composition  department  is  performance  measurement 
and piecework wages for the teletypists. 

Rationalization of Artifacts and Objects of Labor 
Within the framework of the existing technology it is pos­
sible for a company to reduce its machinery, raw materi­
als and general plant costs. One rationalization strategy in 
this respect is to economize on the use of plant space. This 
often  occurs in  connection  with  changes in  technology. 
For example, with the introduction of new technology  in 
the newspaper the company drastically reduced the space 
allocated for the composing department. Thus, one of the 
pre-conditions for a good  work environment and  organi­
zation was affected. 

The increased  utilization of  machinery is another  ra­

tionalization strategy. An example of this is the fact that 
newspaper composing departments often take on outside 
work to fill in the idle periods that occur in the production 
of a newspaper. This affects work  organization and con­
trol, and perhaps, work intensity as well. 

The reduction of  material costs is yet another possible 
area for rationalization. One example is the introduction 
of block setting in order to make better use of expensive 
photosetting paper. This alters the work organization of 
paste-up work. 

Rationalization as Design of New Artifacts 
and Objects of Labor 
Competition between companies results in continual de­
velopments of work artifacts and objects. The result of this 

314 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

steady technological development  is that fewer  workers 
are required to produce the same product quantity. Labor 
productivity  can be increased by  means of  the introduc­
tion of  various forms  of  mechanization and automation. 
Constraints on the organization and content of  work are 
also built into the artifacts. 

A historical example  of increasing the  productivity of 
labor in this way  was the replacement of  the composing 
stick with the composing machine. A current example is 
the introduction of  computer-based  text and image pro­
cessing. To a greater extent the work is performed by un­
skilled graphic workers. Entire departments (e.g. stereo­
type and plate preparation departments) disappear when 
plates are engraved by laser beams directed by a compo­
sing department computer. 

Rationalization Strategies in Practice 
The rationalization strategies outlined above are theoreti­
cal 'ideal types'. In practice, a union will typically be con­
fronted with a mixture of these strategies. 

Furthermore, the specific rationalization strategy cho­

sen by  the company  management in a given situation is 
also  dependent  on  the  technological  limitations  (for 
example,  paper  paste-up  presupposes  advanced  photo-
setting).  Further,  the  company's  economic  resources 
available for investment must also be considered. Finally, 
it is also dependent upon union strength and strategy. 

How can  the union deal with  management's rational­

ization strategies for  design  and  use  of  technology  and 
work organization? How can the union confine  rational­
ization to socially acceptable and union supported forms? I 
now  turn  to  the  overview  of  our  reflections  on  such 
counter-rationality design strategies for democratization 
by the oppressed. 

Rationality of the Oppressed 
The technology and work organization in a company of­
ten  changes gradually - generally at the same  pace  as 

The DEMOS  Project 

315 

new machinery replaces old  through normal wear. How­
ever, more rapid and thorough changes frequently occur 
with the design of new production technology. 

Whichever of these situations prevail, the union needs 
to have a good overall grasp of developments to be able to 
see the connection between various changes  which  may 
be occurring simultaneously. It is essential that studies 
carried out in the light of such changes illuminate issues 
of  importance to the union  (such  as employment,  work 
organization,  work  environment)  so  that  the  conse­
quences for the entire personnel and all departments are 
brought to light and possible conflicts can be resolved. The 
union must acquire a grasp of the ongoing technological-
economic  developments  and  the  available  'negotiating 
room' for union influence and the alternatives that exist. 

What can the union do at the local level? How can one 
best work within the union in the face of technological and 
organizational changes? 

On the basis of  experiences from  the DEMOS  project 
three design strategies which the union can apply will be 
discussed: Union  participation in the companies' project 
groups; a  model  for  independent  union  design  work  in 
connection with the companies' studies - the negotiation 
model; and  as  a  third  alternative,  perhaps  the  union 
should  not  become  engaged  in  the  company  manage­
ment's design work, but instead focus its efforts primarily 
on the mobilization and  ideological education of its mem­
bers. 

Project Participation 
Today, design work in companies is often carried out by a 
project group with the assistance of experts. The group is 
established by the company's management. It is increas­
ingly  common  to  include  representatives from  the  de­
partments concerned.  Not infrequently, the  union is of­
fered a position in the project groups. This participation 
can provide the opportunity of becoming involved even at 
the idea stage of the project. However, the union's chances 
of exerting significant influence through such traditional 

316 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

project work  are very limited. We found participation in 
project groups appointed  by  management to be a trade 
union problem because: 
•  the appointed project group  participants are often not 

trade union representatives, and if they are 

•  the  union  representatives have  no  real  means of  ex­
erting power  coupled  to their  project group  participa­
tion, and hence there is 

•  the risk that the  union will  become integrated into a 
generally  unaltered  employer  decision-making  pro­
cess, especially since 

•  the union  representatives will  often have to comment 
on alternatives and  approve decisions  without  really 
having a chance to explore the questions from a trade 
union perspective; besides, 

•  the return for giving management access to 'shop floor 

information' is unclear, and 

•  trade union participation can, in fact, be part of a ma­

nagerial strategy  to  make it easier  to implement  the 
changes planned by referring to the fact that the union 
has been involved; and finally, 

•  language, attitudes and values of  management's tech­
nical  and  organizational  design  experts  have  a  ten­
dency to spread, and in fact by the end of the project it 
often happens that 

•  the trade union representative is offered some kind of 
expert position, and in this way the union loses access to 
information which its representative inspite of it all ac­
quired while participating in the project work. 

There is the risk that the union will become integrated in 
a generally unaltered employer's design process. 

The Negotiation  Model' 
Against such a background, is there any reason why  the 
union should at all  participate in  the company's  project 
groups?  Yes,  given  certain  pre-conditions.  To  remain 
completely outside such groups would close the door to a 
vital source  of  information. In our  view (i.e.  that of  the 

The DEMOS  Project 

317 

DEMOS project) the most important pre-condition for such 
participation was that parallel to the company's project 
group, an independent union effort takes place to enhance 
understanding,  or  for  mobilization  around  union  de­
mands. 

This involves a clear distinction of the relationship be­
tween the parties in the design work, but it does not con­
flict  with  demands  for  democratization  of  decision­
making in  the day-to  day work  in the organization.  On 
the contrary, we found  that a  demarcation  of  the rela­
tionship between the parties in the design work is a pre­
condition  for  the  democratization  of  cooperation  and 
planning in the work organization.25 

A  model for  the development  of  union  resources and 
negotiations was created in the DEMOS project. As its basis 
we stated that:2® 

the main purpose of this negotiation model is to serve as 
a form within which the union may develop knowledge 
and realize its demands in a democratic, efficient man­
ner; a second objective is to facilitate what in planning 
theory is seen as preconditions for 'quality in investiga­
tions' - for  example,  critical  analysis,  alternatives, 
openness. Also, from this point of view it is desirable for 
the union  to make its own investigations and  prepare 
its own alternatives. 
More  specifically,  the  purpose  of  the  model  and  the 
style of organizing union work is: 
•  to allow the local union to obtain its own knowledge 
in new areas, by making its own investigations; 

25 This aspect of the relation between democracy and bureaucracy 
is further discussed in Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: 'Att påverka det 
påverkbara' in Tre år med  MBL, Liber,  Helsingborg 1980. 
26 Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: 'Systems Development — On strategy 
and ideology" in DATA no 4,1979, p. 52. 

3L8 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

•  to decrease the risk of the union being overpowered 
by  management  when  participating in  management 
project groups; 
•  to develop a basis for negotiations which is well sup­
ported by union members; 
•  to  ensure  that  the  working  procedure  itself  con­
tributes to activating and increasing the participation of 
union members. 

According to the model, independent  union design  or in­
vestigation  groups  work  in  parallel  with  the company 
management project groups and provide a basis: 

•  for  discussions  at  membership  meetings  and  union 

•  for  union  representatives  in  the  company  project 

study groups; 

groups; and 

ment. 

•  for  the union's  position in  negotiation  with  manage­

Hence, participation in management's project groups is a 
process of gathering information and  discussing alterna­
tives, whereas  major  decisions  are  taken  in  formal 
negotiations  between the local  union and  management. 
The union's position in these negotiations is based on pro­
posals from the union design group and broad discussions 
with  the  membership.  In  addition  to  the  union  design 
group, other potential resources for the local union in this 
design  process  are  support  from  central  levels  of  the 
union, workers' consultants, or researchers. Study groups 
concerned with the actual problem area, for instance with 
work organization, may serve as reference groups for the 
design groups and for the external experts. 

In  practice, including  many  more  local  unions  than 
those  participating in  the DEMOS  project,  the strategy 
proved workable and most useful. However, there is a risk 
that what has been described can become an investigation 
based on the employer's terms with union representatives 
as hostages. One reason the union representatives easily 

The DEMOS Project 

319 

can  acquire  (or  appear  to  acquire) 'co-responsibility' is 
that they often  have a  rather  unclear  mandate (as op­
posed  to the situation, for example, with wage  negotia­
tions). They must operate on the basis of the general trust 
of  the  members, a  trust  which  assumes  that they  will 
come to grips with a complicated problem area  while, at 
the same time, maintaining an appreciation of the inter­
ests and wishes of the members. They are forced to inde­
pendently evaluate and adopt positions on various issues. 
Participation and co-responsibility means that it is more 
difficult for them to stand on the outside, to show a lack of 
solidarity'  with  the design  decisions  which  they  them­
selves participated in. 

Another  most  important  obstacle  is  the  limited  re­
sources at the local union's disposal. This strategy is ex­
tremely resource-consuming from the trade union's point 
of view, and even if it does its best the local union cannot 
really compete with management, even  if the union  de­
sign  work  has  the  advantage  of  being  based  on  many 
members' experience. 

Another aspect of  the limited resources has to do with 

priorities. Design  of  new technology and work organiza­
tion is a new and certainly very important issue for local 
unions, but there are other issues  which are just as im­
portant  and  even  more  crucial to  their ultimate demo­
cratic objectives, such as daily contact with the members 
and broad studies. A central question for a local union is 
thus how important the change in  technology and  work 
organization is for the members, and whether it should 
participate and make its own investigation or not. 

Given  its limited  resources,  the  trade  union  design 
groups in most cases have to desist from full participation 
in  the design  process. A  realistic  approach  might  be  a 
'shadow investigation' covering aspects of specific interest 
to  the  union  such  as  changes  in  qualifications,  work 
organization,  work  environment  and  employment.  A 
complementary action might be to require supplementary 
investigations  from  the  management  design  group 
specifically addressing these issues. 

320 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Our practical experience also indicates that some of the 
problems connected with a strategy based on participation 
only, affect this approach as well. This is true, for example, 
as regards the risk of the trade union representatives ac­
quiring a  technical expert language and  a  management 
view on the problems. In some cases these representatives 
even make a career for themselves and leave their  work 
mates behind. Of course, this makes those aspects of the 
strategy that aim at securing internal union democracy 
key elements of the strategy - aspects such as broad dis­
cussions  at  meetings  of  members  and  study  groups  to 
activate a well informed membership. It has also been ob­
served that some employers attempt to counter this strat­
egy because they find it too militant, too time and resource 
consuming, or simply too threatening to have a really well 
informed union. 

Practical experience  also indicates that local  unions 

need external resources and support in their design acti­
vities. Such basic resources are workers' consultants and 
central union officials who have access to the  workplace 
and information on the planned changes in order to sup­
port the local union and its design groups. 

But because of the limited resources at the unions' dis­

posal,  and  the  associated  problems  involving  internal 
union democracy, still other strategies for designing tech­
nology and work may be recommended. One such strat­
egy that some unions have been practicing is a modifica­
tion of the traditional strategy of wage negotiations. 

Mobilization Around Union Demands 
Rather than making its own investigations concerning a 
specific project, the union can emphasize the development 
of fundamental union principles, such as the right of the 
already employed workers to operate the new technology, 
and their right to qualified training and education. Once 
such basic principles have been established through nego­
tiations, perhaps the actual design can be carried out by 
participation in management's project groups. Àn essen­
tial  prerequisite  for  these  negotiations is a  long-term 

The DEMOS  Project 

321 

union activity formulating these fundamental principles, 
e.g.  the  development  of  local  union  action  programs. 
Furthermore these long-term activities should be carried 
out in such  a  way  that the members can  be  mobilized 
around  the fundamental  principles in times of concrete 
negotiations. Another prerequisite for the strategy is that 
management  really has the resources, competence, and 
will to carry out the investigatory work spelled out in ne­
gotiations, e.g. concerning the consequences for qualifica­
tions and required complementary education. 

Besides the fact that these prerequisites are not always 
present, there are other risks in this strategy. While the 
union is involved in working out fundamental principles 
and  negotiating them, the company  may  take concrete 
steps which make it either difficult or impossible to realize 
these fundamental principles. The strategy also implies 
the risk that the union will fail to accumulate the techno­
logical and design competence which would enable it to 
determine  whether  or  not  management's  proposals for 
new technology  and organization are in accordance with 
the union's basic principles. 

Nevertheless, this modified traditional mobilization and 
negotiation approach is a good  alternative candidate for 
local trade union strategy concerning the design and use 
of new technology.27 

Choosing a Strategy 
The three strategies outlined above (participation only, 
investigation and  negotiation, and  mobilization and ne­
gotiation) all have their problems. They may be seen as 
empirically based 'ideal types', and in practice there will 
be combinations. However, in the context of democratiza­
tion it is important that the problems associated with each 
strategy are kept in mind, either as restrictions or as li­

27 Examples of this strategy, based on experiences from Dagens 
Nyheter, another major newspaper in Stockholm, are given in 
Ehn, Perby, Sandberg, op. cit. 

322 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

mits to  be overcome.  Some of  the conditions  which  may 
have an influence on the choice of strategy include: 
•  actual resources available for the local union in a spe­

cific situation; 

•  management's resources and strategy; 
•  relations to other unions in the company; 
•  degree of  harmony  or  conflict  between  management 

and the local union in the specific area of change; 

•  type of change and the union's experiences with it; 
•  type  of  change  and  how  important it is to  the  work 

force; and 

•  degree of harmony or conflict between different groups 
of  workers and  different trade unions in the specific 
area of change. 

The last point has, in practice, turned out to be crucial to 
the success of  trade union efforts to influence  new tech­
nology and  work organization. This is because new tech­
nology tends to imply changes in the labor process which 
make  traditional  division  of  labor  between  different 
groups of  workers obsolete. For instance, changes  often 
affect the distinction between planning and execution of a 
specific task. Since jurisdictions between different unions 
are often based on the division of labor within  the tradi­
tional labor  process, especially  between  blue and  white 
collar workers, the changes in the labor process are a po­
tential source for demarcation  disputes. When  not over­
come, these disputes have in practice been severe obstacles 
to the development and use of collective resources to sup­
port the shaping of more democratic work organizations. 
This problem is also true for different groups within  the 
same  union. There is a  tendency  that stronger  groups 
within  the  union  support  solutions  at  the  expense  of 
weaker groups of workers. The stronger groups are often 
skilled and  male dominated groups, or groups which in 
the short run benefit from a specific change in the labor 
process, whereas the weaker are often unskilled or female 
groups, or groups which are specifically threatened by the 

The DEMOS  Project 

323 

specific  changé.28  Hence, to be successful  a local  trade 
union strategy has to be based on solidarity between the 
different groups  of  workers involved,  a solidarity  which 
goes beyond  the traditional division of labor in the labor 
process  and  the  traditional  jurisdictions  between  the 
unions involved. 

Such a solidarity could for instance be based on princi­

ples like: no one group of workers should be the victim of 
the  new  technology.  Furthermore,  appropriate  educa­
tional programmes offered to all groups which are invol­
ved over a longer period of time. 

And a Fourth Strategy 
Local union efforts are important and a  basis for democ­
ratization in working life. But there are limits to local in­
fluence. 

There is a need for a coordination of local efforts, a long 
term,  comprehensive  and  offensive  struggle  through 
central organizations - not simply  a reaction to local is­
sues. If this is not done there is a risk that interest will be 
lost at the local workplaces. The local union can be over­
whelmed and the offensive for democratization of  work­
ing life can appear to be little more than interesting rhe­
toric. 

There is a need for collective solutions to local problems. 
For instance, existing technology may hinder realization 
of  local  union demands. This brings  me  to  the UTOPIA 
project, and a fourth strategy for really designing techno­
logical alternatives for, by, and with the ultimate users, as 
will be discussed in the next chapter. 

28 See e.g. Dilschmann, A. and Ehn, P.: Gränslandet  , Swedish 
Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985, Ehn, Perby, Sandberg, 
op. cit., and Ekdahl, L.: Att  bli  maskinens herrar, Swedish Cen­
ter for Working Life, Stockholm 1984. 

324 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Dissemination of the Results 
and Further Directions 
Our experiences from the DEMOS project were, as part of 
the project idea, shared with workers and trade unionists 
in several ways. 

On the basic level, the researchers together with the 
investigation groups at the four participating work sites 
wrote reports  on the local  work  that were distributed to 
the membership of the local union.29  These reports were 
discussed  at  union  meetings and  seminars (They  were 
also distributed to management). 

A textbook for  trade unions on computers, trade union 

activities and design work  was written to make our  re­
flections useful to other workers than those from the par­
ticipating work sites.30 (The fact that the textbook also be­
came used at many universities all over Scandinavia was 
not a planned result, but certainly an encouraging one.) 

Based  on our material the first  Swedish trade  union 
course  on  computers  and  planning from  a  trade  union 
perspective was designed in cooperation with the Swedish 
Confederation of Trade Unions (LO).  In addition we trav­
eled to union meetings all over Sweden to discuss our ex­
periences. 

On a central  union level the experiences from the DE­
MOS project were disseminated in two basic areas - laws 
and  agreements on democracy  at  work  and trade  union 
research policy. Our experiences were used in discussions 
with  LO  on  formulating demands for  central  collective 
agreements on design and use of  computer artifacts, ad­
justed  to  the  then  newly  enacted  Joint  Regulation Act 
(MBL), and  to highlight the limits of MBL  with regard to 
democratic  participation in design  and  use of computer 

29 Ehn and Erlander, op. cit., Ehn, Perby, Sandberg, op. cit., Er­
lander, op. cit., and Perby and Carlsson, op. cit. 
30  Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: Företagsstyrning och  löntagar-
makt - planering, datorer,  organisation och  fackligt  utrednings­
arbete, Prisma, Stockholm 1979. 

The DEMOS  Project 

325 

artifacts. The experiences from DEMOS were also used in 
discussions about  problems with  research conducted in 
cooperation between researchers and  workers and  their 
local trade unions, including discussions of problems with 
researcher access to the workplaces, the local unions' and 
the researchers' access to information, and  the workers' 
and local union's resources for participation in research 
work. 

The contact with the research community  was carried 

out as an intensive dialogue with other Scandinavian re­
search projects that in different research fields tried to 
develop  a  research  strategy for  democratization  of  the 
workplace  in cooperation  with  trade  unions.31  This in­
cluded  researchers  with  backgrounds  in computer  sci­
ence, sociology, architecture, engineering, and industrial 
administration. In the field  of design and use of computer 
artifacts the DEMOS  project was one of the main projects 
giving form  to  what  we  have  labeled  the  collective  re­
source approach. This approach and the experiences from 
the DEMOS  project are now  part of a wider ongoing dia­
logue with the  research community, and, of  course, sub­
ject to further reflections.32 

31 Several of these projects were mentioned in chapter 11, From 
Socio-Technical  Satisfaction to Collective  Resources. 
32 Besides ongoing 'reporting' on the results at research seminars 
and as papers at conferences, and besides being a basis for new 
projects considering e.g. action research methods,  conditions for 
democratization of working life, and design of computer artifacts, 
two 'documents' showing a change in the dialogue between DE­
MOS  and other projects of the collective resource approach and 
other research approaches in the field  may be of historical inter­
est. In 1978 an IFIP  conference focusing on Scandinavian experi­
ences with participation and computers was held in Copenhagen. 
No researchers from the collective resource projects in Scandi­
navia were invited. Ås a response to this we produced a 'white 
book' on our research experiences and sent it to the conference 
organizers as a contribution to the lacking 'dialogue'. Later our 
contribution was published as Sandberg, A. (ed): Computers Di­
viding Man  and Work - Recent  Scandinavian Research on  Plan­
ning and Computers  from a Trade  Union Perspective, Swedish 
Center for Working Life, Malmö 1979. In 1985 the academic eli-

326 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

One such fundamental  reflection  concerns creativity 
and practical skill in design. In the light of  the first two 
parts of  this book  the  Marxist  emancipatory  approach 
taken in the DEMOS project was in a way far too rational. 
There was a strong emphasis on participation and  deve­
lopment  of  collective  resources  in  design  of  computer 
artifacts, but the design methods and the design artifacts 
applied were rather formalist. Focus was on the forms for 
democratic  participation  in  design, and  less on  how  to 
make it possible for the ultimate users of the design to ex­
press their  competence in the design  process, and  have 
fun while doing this. 

The Wittgensteinian approach of organizing design as 
a  language-game  with  family  resemblance  with  other 
language-games  that  the  users  participate  in  at  work 
gives a philosophical ground for such rethinking. And so 
does the Heideggerian approach  towards understanding 
human ready-to-hand use of artifacts. 

Other ways of seeing and doing discussed in Part II, like 
the idealized design suggested by Ackoff, prototyping, the 
ideas of  future  workshops, and 'postmodern' approaches 
taken  in architectural  design are challenges  to develop 
democratic design processes that are both more creative 
and more fun to participate in. We took a  minor step in 
this direction when we began the UTOPIA project and the 
design of new technology together with graphic workers. 

mate had changed. That year we organized an international con­
ference on the 'development and use of computer-based systems 
and tools in the context of democratization of work'. The confer­
ence gathered participants representing many different research 
traditions on the issue, not least the collective resource approach. 
This more  open dialogue was published as Bjerknes, G., Ehn, P., 
Kyng, M.  (eds.): Computers  and  Democracy -A Scandinavian 
Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Chapter 13 
Case II: The UTOPIA Project 

UTOPIA  was a Scandinavian  research  project  on  trade 
union based design of, and training in, computer techno­
logy  and  work  organization, especially  text  and  image 
processing in the graphic industries. (In the Scandinavian 
languages UTOPIA  is an  acronym for Training, Techno­
logy, and Products from a Quality of Work Perspective). 

Graphic  workers  and  computer  and  social scientists 
worked together in the UTOPIA  project. Besides working 
directly in  the project group, the Scandinavian  graphic 
workers'  unions  followed  and  supported  the  project 
through a reference group consisting of  representatives 
from Sweden, Denmark, Finland and  Norway, appointed 
by the Nordic Graphic Workers' Union (NGU). 

The project was carried out at the Swedish Center for 
Working  Life,  at  The  Royal  Institute  of  Technology, 
Stockholm,  and  at  Aarhus  University  in  Denmark.  At 
various stages the project cooperated  with the computer 
supplier  Liber/TIPS  and  the  newspaper Aftonbladet in 
Stockholm. 

The project began in 1981, and lasted for four years. An 
average of fifteen  people participated in the work, though 
most did so on a part-time basis. The total input amounted 
to 15 man-years. The project was financially  supported by 
the  Swedish  Center for  Working  Life.  Other financial 
sources were the Swedish Board for Technological Deve­
lopment, the Royal  Institute of  Technology, and Aarhus 
University.1 

1 This overview of the UTOPIA project is partly based on our sum­
mary report.  UTOPIA project group: An Alternative in Text and 

328 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

The Strategy 
The strategic background  of  the UTOPIA  project can  be 
found in our research program from 1980: 

The experience gained by organized labor  and the re­
search conducted by trade unions during the 1970s into 
the ability to influence new technology and the organi­
zation of  work at local level highlighted a  number  of 
problems. One fundamental experience gained  is that 
the 'degrees of freedom' available to design the content 
and organization of work which utilizes existing tech­
nology is often considerably less than that required to 
meet  trade  unions  demands.  Or  expressed  another 
way:  existing  production  technology  more  and  more 
often constitutes an insurmountable barrier preventing 
the realization of trade union demands for the quality of 
work and a meaningful job.2 

Furthermore, the difficulties  the unions experienced  in 
influencing technology at its introduction were among the 
concerns  of  the  project,  especially  because  'turn-key' 
systems  were  purchased  by  management  in  more  and 
more  cases  where  management  would  otherwise  have 
designed systems locally.  With these 'turn-key' systems 
came standard  organization  of  work. Furthermore, the 
standard training offered  by the suppliers was often in­
sufficient. Due to the distance between the designers and 
the users these issues were hard for local unions to influ-

Images, Graffiti no 7, Swedish Center for Working Life, 1985. In 
parts this is also based on our overview in B0dker, S. et al.: 'A 
Utopian Experience' in Bjerknes, G. et al. (eds.) Computers  and 
Democracy -A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 
2  See Ehn,  P., Kyng, M., and Sundblad, Y.: Training, Technology, 
and  Product  from the  Quality of Work  Perspective, A Scandina­
vian research  project on union based  development of  and training 
in computer technology and  work  organization, especially  text 
and  image  processing  in the  graphic industry. (Research pro­
gramme of UTOPIA), Swedish Center for Working Life, Stock­
holm 1981, p. 7. 

The UTOPIA  Project 

329 

enee. Trade unions were facing a design process for which 
the strategy outlined in, for example, the DEMOS  project 
had to be complemented. As we saw it, 

the question of what the trade unions can do to influ­
ence technology can be partially answered by looking at 
what  is  already  being  done.  Attempts  are  made  to 
reduce the negative effects of technology on employees 
by  demanding  reforms in legislation  and  concluding 
agreements. Efforts are made to mobilize forces at local 
level through the implementation of  broad-based pro­
grams. Training is demanded  in order to obtain  and 
retain control  over new  technology and  to counteract 
degradation of  work. Demands are being made on  the 
actual utilization of  technology and the work  organi­
zation associated with it. Demands have also been initi­
ated on suppliers of production technology primarily in 
respect of the physical working environment. However, 
this strategy could  best  be  described  as a  defensive 
action. This project is working on a supplementary and 
as  yet  untried  offensive  strategy:  The  trade  union 
movement itself draws up the technological and  trai­
ning alternatives and takes sole responsibility for their 
implementation and development at local level.3 

To support the local unions in their struggle for influence 
on technology, training and organization of work, we saw 
the need for an offensive, long-term strategy conducted by 
the central unions. The trade unions at the central level 
had  to  assume  responsibility  for  working  towards 
collective solutions  to the local demands in the areas of 
training, technology and organization of work, in addition 
to giving central support for  actions taken at the local 
level. 

However, enormous  resources have  been  invested  in 
the new  technology utilized  by companies. When, on the 
other hand, a trade union presents demands for possible 
technological alternatives,  the question of  whether such 

3 Ibid.. p. 8. 

330 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

technology exists and is feasible comes up, together with 
the question of whether designing an alternative is realis­
tic, economically, for one single company. 

To conduct a trade  union technological design project 

was seen as one contribution to resolving these two prob­
lems. The  UTOPIA  project could  hopefully contribute to 
changing the trade union's range of possible actions at the 
local level. Instead of defending the status quo, an offensive 
strategy  was  to  be  developed  for  another  type of  tech­
nology and improved products. We would seek for a type 
of technology that improves the quality  of work and the 
products, a type of technology that is not inflexible but dy­
namically  changeable  at  individual  workplaces  as  the 
employees develop their skills. The project would enable 
this by the design of  technology and  training programs 
combined with sociological and historical analyses of  the 
prerequisites for the alternatives, and an understanding of 
the forces acting on technological development nationally 
and internationally. 

The aim of the project was to produce a 'demonstration 
example' showing that trade union design of technology is 
a feasible strategy under certain favorable conditions. We 
did  not,  however,  intend  to  produce  a strategic design 
model that is generally applicable regardless of the appli­
cation domain. Nontheless, the idea was that the project 
could constitute an important source of inspiration for the 
development of strategies on technology policy in different 
application domains where e.g. the economic, technical or 
trade union conditions are different. 

The more specific aim of the UTOPIA  project was to de­
sign computer support and  professional education for in­
tegrated text and image processing. This design was to be 
based on the principles of 
•  quality of work and products, 
•  democracy at work, and 
•  education for local development. 

331 

The UTOPIA  Project 
Research Approach 
and Theoretical Perspective 
Our theoretical perspective in  the UTOPIA  project was a 
continuation of the Marxist approach taken in the DEMOS 
project. Labor  process theory  was still important for un­
derstanding technological change, and so was the interest 
in  emancipatory  practice  for  democratization  of  work. 
There was, however, a  shift in focus. Now the emphasis 
was  on  trying  to  design  computer  artifacts for  skilled 
work, to  really  design 'utopian' alternatives  and  reflect 
about a strategy for this 'utopian' design process, as well as 
a strategy for implementation of the 'utopian' alternatives 
in reality. By  a proactive approach we  were investigating 
social, political, technological and methodological limits to 
a  more democratic design  process and  the design of  skill 
enhancing  computer  artifacts  in  the  interest  of  the 
ultimate users. 

Close cooperation with the users was still very impor­

tant, but the political conditions for doing this 'utopian' 
design locally at one or several work sites in Scandinavia 
did not exist. The work had to be carried out in a research 
environment, but with skilled graphic workers and trade 
unionists participating directly in the research group. 

Close  cooperation  with  the  Nordic  Graphic  Workers' 
Union  (NGU)  was  also  important.  A  pre-condition  for 
'implementing' the 'utopian' alternative technology, work 
organization, and training was that the union found  the 
alternatives interesting enough, and that they could give 
concrete  examples  in  negotiations  with  the  employer 
federations,  and  in  mobilization  of  the  membership 
around these alternatives. Negotiated agreements and a 
better understanding of technological alternatives at the 
workplaces were seen as a necessity for  practical imple­
mentation. NGU played a key role with respect to both as­
pects. 

In addition  we saw an ongoing dialogue with graphic 
workers throughout Scandinavian workplaces during the 

332 

Designing  for Democracy  at Work 

project as essential to the strategy. To this end a magazine 
called Graffiti was created.4 

The Research and Design Process 

Building Scenarios and a 'Knowledge Platform' 
In the first  phase of the UTOPIA  project  we investigated 
existing technology, working practices, and training in the 
graphic  industries,  as  well  as  the  prerequisites  for  de­
signing alternatives. 

A major aspect in this first phase of the project was the 
mutual  learning  process  in  which  the  participants -
graphic  workers,  and  computer  and  social  scientists -
established a common  'knowledge platform' for their fu­
ture work. 

In cooperation with NGU, the UTOPIA project organized 
a three day workshop where graphic workers from all the 
Nordic countries participated. The aim was to give  more 
substance  to  the  research  goal  stated  in  the  research 
program. 

Joint visits to newspapers, technical exhibitions, suppli­
ers, and research laboratories in Scandinavia and abroad 
to collect information were a major activity. Especially a 
study  of  the  development  of  technology  and  working 
practices in  American  newspapers came  to  play an im­
portant role as the antithesis of a desired development.5 

Another  activity  in  this phase  consisted  of  so-called 
'quality workshops'. In these workshops graphic workers, 
graphic designers, and journalists participated in discus­
sions of good use quality of graphic products.6 

Based  on  the investigations  various  scenarios  were 
outlined as possible alternatives for the future work in the 

4 During the project seven issues of Graffiti were produced and 
widely distributed. 
5 See Dilschmann, A. and Ehn, P.: Gränslandet, Swedish Center 
for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 
6 See Graffiti no 2, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 
1982. 

The UTOPIA Project 

333 

project,  e.g.  'pre-press  production',  'the  graphic  work­
shop',  the newspaper  production  plant', 'image  process­
ing in 1990', and 'the automated paradise'. The work  re­
sulted in suggestions for the design of either of the follow­
ing: pre-press  production  of  newspapers, or the graphic 
workshop. 

Ironically, the scenario of the graphic workshop which 
we as researchers favored  was thought of  as less impor­
tant by the graphic workers. This scenario came close to 
what today is known as desktop  publishing, one of  the 
most expanding domains in graphic production. Instead it 
was decided  to concentrate on pre-press newspaper pro­
duction, since this was seen as the technological front line, 
and a domain concerning many graphic workers. 

In the research group many difficulties had to be over­
come. The graphic workers, who were used to rapid con­
crete  results in their daily work, found  that work  pro­
gressed too slowly and was too abstract. It also became ap­
parent that we had underestimated the costs of developing 
technical alternatives on our own, especially if we were to 
work with integrated newspaper production.7 

Vendor Cooperation 
After about 18  months the UTOPIA  project  was approa­
ched  by  the Swedish  state-owned  printing concern  and 
computer supplier Liber through the Graphic Workers' 
Union in Sweden. This provided  an incentive to delimit 
the project and  make it more concrete. Liber  wished  to 
examine the possibilities for cooperation around the com­
pany's design  project TIPS  (Text and  Image Processing 
System), a $10 million project for designing an integrated 
computer-based  system  for  text, image,  and  full  page 
make-up for newspaper production. 

As we saw it, Liber was interested in cooperating be­

cause it had to acquire a substantial share of the domestic 

7  In Ehn, P.: UTOPIA-projektet (Status rapport (fas I) och arbets­
plan (fas II», Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1983, 
the early phases of the project are described in detail. 

334 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

market in order to be successful in marketing, and this 
would require attentiveness to the demands for techno­
logy and training posed by the Scandinavian trade unions 
for  graphic  workers.  In  the UTOPIA  project,  the aim of 
which  was  to  formulate  such  requirements  and  try  to 
technically realize them, Liber/TIPS found a natural dis­
cussion partner. 

After final  discussions with the board of the NGU, a co­
operation agreement  was signed  in late 1982. The  basic 
idea of  the agreement  was that the  TIPS  project  should 
exploit the competence of the UTOPIA  project (work orga­
nization, quality of  work, training, human-computer  in­
teraction, graphic skills, etc.) in its design work. In this 
way the  UTOPIA  project  obtained the opportunity  to try 
out  many of  its ideas.  The cooperation  would  also offer 
valuable experience in exercising influence  over a large 
technical development  project. However, the agreement 
did  not force  Liber in the TIPS  project  to follow  the  re­
quirement specifications  of  the  UTOPIA  project.  Corre­
spondingly, the agreement gave the UTOPIA  project com­
plete  freedom  to  cultivate and  inform  others about  its 
viewpoints, and  about requirements which  the TIPS sys­
tem might not fulfil. 

The cooperation with TIPS had many consequences for 
UTOPIA. The project came to focus on page make-up and 
image  processing  for  newspapers;  and  not  only  the 
Swedish Center for  Working Life, but also the Swedish 
Board  for  Technical  Development  was  now  willing  to 
support the UTOPIA project's development of requirement 
specifications. 

'The  Design Workshop' 
During the next year the UTOPIA project concentrated on 
requirement specifications. This, however,  called for the 
development of working practices so that the researchers 
and  graphic  workers  together  could  formulate  the  re­
quirements. To this end we established a design workshop 
with design tools to simulate different kinds of page make­
up, image processing, and the surrounding organization, 

The UTOPIA Project 

335 

thus making it  possible  for  the graphic workers in  the 
project to develop requirements and wishes on a concrete 
level  by  actually  carrying  out  the  page  make-up  and 
image  processing  on  simulation  equipment.  As  re­
searchers we could contribute by pointing out possibilities 
and  limitations  of  equivalent  real  equipment,  and  by 
structuring the experience in requirement specifications. 
This design-by-doing  approach  was not applied from 
the beginning. We started out by using traditional, more 
or less formalized description methods ranging from sce­
narios to data flows. However, these were too abstract and 
did not function very well as a vehicle for communication 
with the graphic  workers. The situation  was drastically 
improved  when we built a mock-up  to simulate  compu-
ter-based page make-up. 

Workstation  Mock-Ups 
The  principle  behind  the  mock-up  was  simple.  Using 
sheets  of  paper,  matchboxes,  some  plywood,  etc.,  one 
"builds' a workstation with a 'high-resolution display^ a 
'mouse', etc. 

The process in which this equipment was used is one in 
which  the work  with the computer-based  tools, such  as 
page make-up, is done simultaneously with the creation of 
the needed display images drawn on  paper. The graphic 
worker  and  the  designer  work  together.  The  graphic 
worker does the page make-up step by step. For each step 
the corresponding display image is drawn on paper. The 
product is a series of snapshots simulating the work done 
while using the workstation. 

The designer takes part in the process by pointing out 
possibilities  and  limitations  of  the corresponding 'real' 
equipment,  and  by  collecting  and  structuring  the  de­
mands  and  wishes  formulated  by  the  graphic  worker 
while doing the make-up work. 

In addition to experimenting with the display images, 

experiments with  the interaction devices can  be conduc­
ted by means of the mock-ups. 

336 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

This kind of design-by-doing simulations turned out to 
be a very good  way to  get started. First of all it enabled 
skilled workers to take an active part in the design pro­
cess. The method is quite cheap, as expensive equipment 
or  time-consuming  programming  is  unnecessary.  New 
features of the workstation can be designed and added as 
they are needed. 

Another  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that  experi­
ments are not limited to available equipment. Both equip­
ment that just does not happen to be at hand, for example, 
for  economic  reasons,  and  future  computer  equipment 
can be simulated. We could, for example, play with super 
high-resolution display screens big enough to show a real 
size newspaper page. 

The mock-ups were later given  a more  realistic exte­

rior. The interaction devices were still made out of paper 
and plywood, but color slides projected on a screen were 
used to simulate the graphic display screen. Applying the 
color slides made it look more realistic, and it was much 
easier to  redo the simulation sequences, meaning that it 
was easier to have the graphic workers sit down and try 
out the design. 

A  real  computer  workstation  with  a  high-resolution 
screen and a tablet with a 'puck' was also employed to ex­
periment with and illustrate aspects which were difficult 
to  simulate  with  the  mock-ups,  such  as  co-ordination 
between puck  movements and display changes, and the 
readability of text in different sizes and resolutions. This 
workstation  did  not  provide  any  real  prototyping 
environment. But the fact that the graphic workers tried 
to  use  real  computer  artifacts,  helped  them  relate  the 
mock-ups to the 'real' applications that were to come out 
of the process. 

Compared  to  our  earlier  attempts  this approach  al­

lowed  the graphic workers to articulate their demands 
and wishes in a concrete way by actually doing make-up 
work  on  the  simulated  equipment.  Even  the  first  ex­
tremely  simple  'paper  and  wood'  mock-up  allowed  the 

The UTOPIA  Project 

337 

graphic workers  to play a very active role in the design 
work. 

Organizational Simulation 
The design artifacts in our design workshop were not only 
used for simulation of how work could be conducted at the 
workstations. Another important aspect was to simulate 
relations between the designed  technology  and  work  or­
ganization. 

How we used an empty box with the sign laser printer' 

on it can illustrate this. In newspaper production the co­
operation between the layout person (journalist) and the 
make-up  person  (graphic  worker)  is  of  crucial  impor­
tance. In  the 'old' technology the journalist always got a 
hard  copy  of  the  page before it was delivered for  print. 
With computer-based text processing this had become a 
problem, and there were  repeated conflicts between gra­
phic  workers and  journalists concerning how  the  work 
should  be  organized. The  box simulating  a cheap laser 
printer envisioned  a new possibility where the make-up 
person can produce alternative solutions to the page, based 
on  the instructions from  the layout  person. The layout 
person would then get alternative hard-copy prints of the 
page as a basis for determining the final layout. 

The Work Organizational Tool  Kit 
As a supplement to the simulations, we needed design ar­
tifacts for analysis and design of current work organiza­
tion as well as of organizations supporting quality and de­
mocracy. 

Traditional methods for system description turned out 
to be too abstract for this design work to be carried out in 
cooperation with  the graphic  workers. Instead  we deve­
loped a work organizational tool kit to be used for analysis 
and design in group discussions. 

The basic ideas behind the organizational tool kit were 

that: 

338 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

•  it should be fast and easy for a group of people to work 

with, 

•  it should be cheap and flexible to use, allowing several 

alternatives to be tested during discussions, 

•  it should be based  on concepts relevant to newspaper 
production  and  support  involved  reflections  about 
existing and future work functions. 

To this end we started by analyzing the functions which 
have to be undertaken at a newspaper production plant to 
produce  a  ready-for-press  original.8  All  these functions 
were symbolized  with  icons  on  cardboard  bricks. Work 
material and work artifacts were symbolized in the same 
way.9  The  bricks were waxed  on the back, which  made 
them easy to place and move again. The idea behind the 
organizational tool kit resembles  what is known as wall 
graphs. However, the idea here was that each icon as such 
must reflect an insight into the specific labor process, e.g. 
newspaper production. 

A reminder of  the work organization at a  newspaper 
can quickly be made with the icons of the organizational 
tool kit. However, similar to other graphical descriptions, 
this  kind  of  descriptions  easily  becomes  very  compli­
cated,10  and  thus,  hard  to  change  and  inaccessible  to 
others than the creators. For this reason it is important to 
stress that  the creation  process is very important  as a 
process of  mutual learning. It was not our goal to make 
descriptions to be used for other people than those taking 
part in the design process. Our emphasis was on the use of 
the tool kit, not on correctness in the descriptions. 

The  organizational  tool  kit was  used  for  discussions 
about conflicts like 'demarcation disputes', that is, which 
functions should  be  carried  out  by  editorial staff, and 

8 These functions are described in Dilschmann and Ehn, op. cit. 
9 The organizational tool kit is described by Dan Sjögren in 
Dilschmann and Ehn, op. cit. 
10 B0dker, S. and Madsen, K.H:: 'More or Less Systems Descrip­
tions' in Lassen, M. and Mathiassen, L.: Report of  the Eight 
Scandinavian Conference on Systemeering, part I, Aarhus 1985. 

The UTOPIA Project 

339 

which should be carried out by make-up staff. It was also 
used to discuss, for example, conflicts concerning the right 
to operate graphic page make-up workstations and orga­
nizational solutions to this. Games with the organizational 
tool kit were not only played by  the graphic workers and 
the researchers participating in the UTOPIA project. Ses­
sions were also held together with journalists, and in ne­
gotiation sessions with management representatives. 

The Requirement Specification 
Based on the work in the design workshop the first  ver­
sion of UTOPIA'S requirement specifications for computer-
based page-make up and image processing was published 
in late 1983.11 They  were  made in constant discussions 
with  TIPS,  but  the  requirements  were  meant  to  be 
generally applicable  when introducing new systems for 
newspaper  production.  Thus,  they  were  meant  for  all 
suppliers and newspapers, not only for Liber/TlPS. 

In many respects the requirement specifications looked 
like traditional ones. It was a forty-eight  page technical 
document filled  with musts and ought-to's, and questions 
to be answered by the suppliers. There was a description of 
requirements  for  work  procedures,  display  screens, 
human-computer  interaction,  and  operations  for  page 
make-up and image processing equipment. 

What was new was that these technical requirements 
were  derived  from  the  principle  that  the  equipment 
should serve as tools  for skilled  work and for production of 
good  use quality products. The requirement specifications 
were also different in the sense that they also specified re­
quirements  for  work  organization,  work  environment 
and training. Technology bringing about poorer working 
conditions than those already existing was not accepted. A 
minimum  requirement  was that graphic workers  must 
be  able  to carry out the same  work  operations in page 

11  Ehn, P. and Sundblad, Y. (eds.): Kravspecifikation  för da­
torstödd  bildbehandling och ombrytning, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1983. 

340 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

make-up  and  image  processing  as  they  could  do  with 
traditional technology.  Product quality inferior to  what 
could be obtained with traditional technology was also re­
jected. 

Professional Training 
Our next step in the UTOPIA project was, while still wor­
king in the design workshop, to aim the resources of  the 
project  at  professional  training.  Many  of  the  reports 
produced in the project were written to be applied in pro­
fessional training of  graphic workers. The list includes 
textbooks  on  computer-based  page  make-up,12  on com­
puter-based  image  processing,13  on  work  organization 
when integrated  computer-based  technology is introdu­
ced,14  and  on  work  environment  in  this  new  environ­
ment.16 A large part of the educational material was tested 
in  training of  graphic  workers in 1984  in  the  Graphic 
Industries Department of the Royal Institute of Techno­
logy (Stockholm). Valuable experience was also gained by 
using the  design artifacts from  the design  workshop in 
teaching situations. 

Investigations of History and Future 
Parallel to these design and professional training activi­
ties, a historical study of the printing industry and a study 
of  democratic  technology  policy  were  conducted  within 
the UTOPIA project. 

The historical study compared the introduction of new 
technology in the printing industry around the beginning 
of this century with the situation in the 1980s. The report 
suggests, against the historical background, the need for 

12 Ehn, P. et al: Datorstödd Ombrytning, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 
13 Frenckner, K and Romberger, S.: Datorstödd  Bildbehandling, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 
14 Dilschmann and Ehn, op. cit. 
15 Gunnarson, E.: Arbetsmiljökrav, Swedish Center for Working 
Life, Stockholm 1985. 

The UTOPIA Project 

341 

broad cooperation between the different  unions involved 
in the technological changes in the graphic industry to­
day. The conclusion is that a counterpart to labor's united 
front at the turn of the century with its rather successful 
strategy concerning the introduction  of  new technology, 
today only can be established through closer cooperation, 
or even amalgamation of  the unions within the graphic 
industry.16 

The technology policy study discussed the UTOPIA pro­
ject in the light of a 'new Scandinavian model' for  tech­
nological research and development activities supporting 
more  democratic  solutions,  and  new,  more  democratic 
demand patterns based on voices from the workplaces.17 

Back to Reality 
The cooperation between the UTOPIA  project and Liber/ 
TIPS also included an evaluation phase. This evaluation 
was to include the TIPS system and active development of 
work  organization in connection  with  the first  pilot in­
stallation at the Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet. Based on 
these experiences  updated  requirement  specifications 
were to be written. Here the  original intentions proved 
difficult to realize. The management  at Aftonbladet  was 
not particularly interested in a  well-defined  experiment 
on work organization in connection with the pilot instal­
lation. The journalists' union was also opposed to an orga­
nized  experiment. All  this  meant  that  the ideas of  the 
UTOPIA  project for active  participation  in  an  organiza­
tional experiment where graphic workers and journalists 
together in practice seek new ways, had to be abandoned.18 

16 Ekdahl, L.: Att  bli  maskinens herrar, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1984. 
17  Sandberg, Å.: Mellan alternativ  produktion och industriell 
FOU, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1984. 
18 However, after the project ended an evaluation of the use of the 
equipment has been carried out. See Bartholdy, M et al.: Studie av 
datorstödd  bildbehandling på Aftonbladet, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1987. An updated version of the require­
ment specifications based on this evaluation and post-UTOPIÀ 

342 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Scandinavian Models? 
Before ending this chapter on UTOPIA with some general 
reflections on the impact of the project for a more demo­
cratic design and use of computer artifacts, I will illustrate 
our reflections on designing for democracy  at work  with 
two 'Scandinavian' paradigm cases  from the project - a 
work  organization  model for  'peaceful  coexistence'  of 
graphic workers and journalists in newspaper production, 
and a  model  for  participative and  democratic technolo­
gical research and design.19 

Example 1 : 
Work Organization in the Borderland 
Questions  concerning  work  organization  in  connection 
with integrated text and image processing in newspaper 
production  were  important study areas in  the  UTOPIA 
project, especially prerequisites for designing future ways 
of organizing work from manuscript to plate'. 

This is a question full of conflicts causing confrontations 
between professional groups and their trade unions. This 
is  not  only  true  where  newspaper  employees  are 
concerned;  metal  workers and  engineers confront  each 
other,  chemist's  assistants  and  chemists,  and  many 
others. Management introduces new technology to save 
manpower.  Journalists, graphic  workers, and  adminis­
trative staff confront each other in the struggle over a de­
creasing number of jobs. 

Is there a basis for solving these demarcation disputes 
across professional and union-based frontiers? Can a new 
way of organizing work create peaceful coexistence in the 
borderland? 

changed technological possibilities is now being produced.  This 
work is also being carried out by Merete Bartholdy in cooperation 
with the former members of the UTOPIA project. 
19 The skill aspects of the UTOPIA project will be further developed 
in the part on Designing for  Skill. 

The UTOPIA Project 

343 

I will  exemplify  this by  considering the "borderland' 
between  editing  and  making-up,  one  of  the  many  bor­
derlands in newspaper production.20 

Editing and  Making-Up 
Journalists are afraid of losing their control over the lay­
out if  the graphic workstations are placed in the compo­
sing room  and are operated  by the graphic workers. Al­
ternatively, they  naturally see a possibility for  creating 
new jobs for themselves if the sub-editors obtain the right 
to operate the workstations. The graphic workers not only 
risk losing jobs, but they also risk losing page make-up, a 
corner-stone in graphic work, if the journalists obtain the 
right to operate the graphic workstations. 

The connections between  editing/layout/make-up can 
be  seen  as follows:  The  result of  the sub-editor's work 
(planning content, planning pages, and text editing) may 
be called a journalistic model of the newspaper page. The 
journalistic  competence  involved  lies in  improving  the 
readability of  the product. The  make-up person  refines 
the product by giving the journalistic model a graphic de­
sign. The graphic competence involved lies in improving 
the legibility of the product. 

The Traditional Way' of  Organizing Work 
With  the  introduction  of  graphic  workstations  it  may 
seem apt to try to maintain the traditional way of orga­
nizing work. The make-up staff in the composing room 
gets powerful computer-based tools. The sub-editors may 
get expensive electronic sketch  pads. Both  professional 
groups and their respective competences are intact, and 
may even be developed. But the technical possibilities for a 
more flexible production with a later deadline for manu­
scripts, and  hence a higher product quality, are  not ex­
ploited. 

20 This example is further elaborated in Dilschmann and Ehn, op. 
cit. 

344 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

The strict  division  of  labor  between  journalists  and 
graphic workers is maintained. The instructions from the 
editorial staff to the composing room are written instruc­
tions, primarily rough layout sketches even in situations 
where oral instructions would have been sufficient. If the 
sub-editors have electronic sketch pads, the instructions 
are communicated electronically in the form of boxes on a 
display. Sub-editors and make-up staff do not cooperate 
closely, even though they work with the same pages. The 
division between the news-room and the composing room 
obstructs  the  necessary  dialogue  in  connection  with 
questions, suggestions, changes, follow-up, and exchange 
of ideas. 

An 'American Way' of  Organizing Work 
In  fact,  when  integrated  computer-based  systems  for 
make-up and image  processing first  were implemented, 
the  traditional  model  was  rejected  by  management, 
though the unions often wanted to stick to it. The news­
paper Star News, published in the Los Angeles suburb of 
Pasadena, was in the early 1980s  the technically  most 
advanced  newspaper in the world. The  management of 
this paper has consciously introduced  new technology in 
order to get  rid  of  graphic workers. The graphic work­
stations were placed in the news-room, where they  were 
operated by editorial staff as well as by new groups of em­
ployees.  The  organization  did  not  allow  any  room  for 
make-up staff, but the journalistic model was still trans­
formed into a graphically designed page. 

The problem is that the people who performed the work 
did  not  have  the  necessary graphic competence,  which 
results in a deteriorating product quality. Furthermore, 
the new staff was not organized in trade unions, received 
lower wages, and  usually had  not received a journalistic 
education. 

The 'Scandinavian Way' of Organizing Work? 
In the UTOPIA  project  we found neither the 'traditional' 
nor the 'American' model to be the work organization of 

The UTOPIA Project 

345 

the future. The 'traditional' model was rejected because it 
meant a misuse of  the technological potential for higher 
quality in  newspaper  production. The 'American' model 
was  rejected  on  ground  of  its  anti-democratic  and  de-
skilling approach. Instead, we found inspiration for an al­
ternative  work  organization  at the newspaper  0stlxn-
dingen, which is published in Elverum, Norway. It repre­
sented a  Norwegian answer to the American  challenge. 
The first steps on the path towards what hopefully may be 
called  the 'Scandinavian  way*  of  organizing integrated 
production had been taken. 

Below  I will expand  this example  to a  more general 
model for discussions of future work organization.21 This 
model grew out of a number of  discussions in many ses­
sions  where  the organizational tool  kit was  used, often 
starting with the work organization at 0stlaendingen. In 
the model we assumed that technology according to  the 
UTOPIA requirement specifications WEIS vised. 

In this model the reporters have access to display ter­

minals. Here they write and process their articles, if they 
wish to. The reporters do not do any actual typographical 
coding. Furthermore, the display terminals will give them 
access to text files, administrative databases with public 
information and maybe even foreign databases. When the 
reporters  choose  to  use  typewriters,  the  manuscript  is 
entered by the teletypist. 

A  central  journalist  and  technical  production  unit 
called the central production is established. This unit is the 
central part of  the production process. Here journalists 
and  graphic  workers  cooperate  closely  and  smoothly. 
However there is a clear division of responsibility between 
the professional groups. 

In the central production and in its immediate vicinity, 
a number of other work functions have been integrated. 
Besides  page  editing and  make-up  there are functions 

21  Here I shall restrict myself to summarizing aspects of the 
•borderland* between journalists and graphic workers. The mo­
del, however, covers the entire pre-press production process. 

346 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

such as typing of paper manuscripts, proof-reading, ma­
jor corrections, editing of strictly standardized  material 
such as lists of television programs, and coding and make­
up of individual articles. 

Sub-editors take  on  more responsibility in  relation to 

the editors. The latter still have both editorial and admi­
nistrative tasks, but delegate more responsibility for the 
final selection. The editorial tasks of the editors in relation 
to the sub-editors are first  of all to maintain a general view 
of things and to act as support and discussion partners for 
the sub-editors and the reporters. The sub-editors usually 
work on paper print-outs. The reason for this is partly the 
diminished  eye-strain  involved,  and  partly  to  keep  a 
general view of the texts, as they often read both long con­
tinuous texts, and several texts simultaneously. Some of 
the text is corrected directly on the display screen by the 
sub-editors, while other corrections are made by the tele­
typist. 

Sub-editors work  closely together with page make-up 
staff. Apart from the  rough  planning of  pages, and  the 
enhanced text editing and image thinking, the sub-editors, 
among other things, have access to display terminals to do 
administrative work  on the material. The ease of  trying 
out alternatives, and of  making late evaluations of  and 
changes on  the page is improved  through the electronic 
page  make-up  process,  and  good  and  easy  proof  print 
possibilities are available via small laser printers. 

For  the make-up staff  the  most important  change is 
that the work is performed at graphic workstations. It is 
no  longer  necessary  to  wait  for film  from  photosetters 
when changes are made in the typography. The possibili­
ties for enhancing the typography with graphics are con­
siderably increased. Images  can  be  changed  in size di­
rectly in the  make-up  process.  Quality is improved  be­
cause several alternatives can  be tried out. Cooperation 
with the sub-editors plays a very important part. 

Because  the  electronic  page  make-up  tools  make  it 
possible to do rapid changes on the page late in the process, 
the make-up person can start the make-up process before 

The UTOPIA  Project 

Ml 

all parts are ready. The journalistic planning is thus made 
easier. Feature articles, and entertainment pages, etc., can 
be produced and made up beforehand. 

The teletypists in the central production, or in its close 

vicinity, have enriched  their work  content. They coope­
rate with the sub-editors and the make-up staff. The tele­
typists type  the text from  paper manuscripts, code  and 
make-up articles and type the more extensive corrections. 
They may also  perform  certain administrative tasks in 
the central production. 

Image  processing staff  handles the editorial images. 

Work of high quality is made  with black and white rep­
roduction.  The  processed  images  are  transferred  elec­
tronically to page make-up, where the sub-editor can get 
a  copy  if  needed.  The  image  processing staff  also  has 
access  to  conventional  reproduction  equipment, for  ex­
ample, for color work. Photosetting is performed the same 
way as before. However, requirements for quality control 
are stricter now. Now it is not only a question of columns, 
but  of  whole  pages  with  images  which  are going to  be 
produced directly on plate. 

Possibilities in the Borderland 
It was our conviction in the UTOPIA project that this work 
organization  model  could  serve as a  paradigm case for 
discussions on technology and organization for quality and 
efficiency in production. These would be solutions where 
skills, professional identity, and the professional pride of 
graphic  workers  and  journalists  could  live  on.  We 
intended  to show  that they  provide  a  basis for graphic 
workers and journalists to  jointly influence and improve 
the product, working  practices, and  working conditions. 
By  now  the model  has also  inspired  many  negotiations 
and agreements on work organization at different news­
papers in Scandinavia. 

348 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Example 2: 
Research and Development for 
a More  Democratic Technology 
A  national  technology  policy  for  democratization  is 
another area where experiences from the UTOPIA  project 
can be utilized as an inspiring paradigm case. This applies 
to the process as well as to the results. 

So far it is just an idea or a perspective with only a few 

practical examples. This  aspect of  the project was high­
lighted in a study by Sandberg.22 He related the UTOPIA 
experiences  to  other similar  approaches,  both  interna­
tional examples like the LUCAS  workers' approach  and 
the strategy developed  by Greater London Council, and 
Swedish trade union approaches like the ones developed 
by the Metal  Workers' Union, the Food  Workers' union, 
and the State Employees' Union. The idea may be outlined 
as follows:23 

•  technology  which  supports  good  working  conditions 

and good use quality products should be designed; 

•  the trade unions should  play an  active role in formu­

lating requirements for this technology, since they are 
best fitted  to capture and  draw  upon  the employees' 
knowledge  and  experience  of  work  and  work  envi­
ronment; 

•  this helps to design technology which satisfies the de­

mands of  the employees, and that is useful, since it is 
based  on  their  practical  understanding of  the  labor 
process; 

•  this is a  unique opportunity and  resource  which  our 

Scandinavian high tech industry should utilize; 

22 Sandberg, op. cit. 
23 For more details see Sandberg, Å.: Technological  Change and 
Co-determination in Sweden - Background and analysis of  trade 
union and  managerial  strategies, Temple  Press (forthcoming). 

The UTOPIA Project 

349 

•  our governments should foster and support such acti­

vities  with  national and  Scandinavian  research  and 
development programs; 

•  furthermore,  its  traditionally  calm  labor  markets 
make many sectors of Scandinavian industry good 'test 
sites' for these technological and organizational alter­
natives; 

•  and give opportunities for domestic markets of realistic 

size for at least initial production of  this kind of tech­
nology, especially if the demands for it are supported by 
the trade unions and by government requirements; 

•  in the long run this kind of technology (which supports 
quality of work and products) could give Scandinavian 
industry opportunities in foreign markets. 

As pointed  out, there are only a few activities going on 
along these lines today, and it would not be correct to de­
scribe them as a  trend. Furthermore, other  future sce­
narios would probably be more realistic. However, there is 
a growing interest in this 'new Scandinavian model', not 
only  within trade unions, and  the experiences from the 
UTOPIA project suggests that it is a promising approach to 
support more democratic design and  use of  new techno­
logy. 

Needless to say, this approach must be accompanied by 
changes in the public educational system. One important 
aspect is to enhance the designers' interest in and qualifi­
cations for dealing with this kind of objectives for demo­
cratic  technological  and  organizational  development. 
Another (just as important) aspect is to provide good op­
portunities for qualification and requalification of workers 
in different branches of industry. This is not a question of 
short retraining courses, but of real professional education 
fostering  technological  skills  as  well  as  genuine 
understanding and  practical mastering of tools and  ma­
terials in specific labor processes. Again, this may turn out 
to be just pious hopes. But it is hard to see how any truly 
democratic  design  and  use  of  new  technology  can  be 
achieved without these prerequisites being fulfilled. 

350 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Dissemination of the Results 
As with the DEMOS project it was a deliberate aim of the 
UTOPIA  project to disseminate the results from  our  re­
search and design outside the  walls of  our design  work­
shop. 

Our  major concern  was  with  the graphic workers in 

Scandinavia. The many textbooks for professional train­
ing of graphic workers in computer-based technology and 
work organization  have already  been  mentioned, as has 
our  newsletter Graffiti.  Our summary  report, Graffiti 
no 7, addressed graphic workers at the workplaces. It was 
translated into the different Nordic languages, and 50,000 
copies were distributed by the graphic workers' unions. 
For  international  use  we  also  produced  an  English 
version, and  an Italian graphic workers' union made its 
own translation. 

Our dissemination of the results, however, did not only 
address graphic workers alone. At a three day conference 
and  workshop in  May 1984, we  presented the results of 
our efforts to graphic workers, journalists, and adminis­
trative staff and their unions jointly. 

The project was also presented at several technical and 
management conferences on  new technology in newspa­
per production. 

The  requirement  specifications  especially  received  a 
great deal of attention in graphic trade journals, at semi­
nars and at conferences  on  newspaper  production tech­
nology.  Many  representatives from  journalists'  unions 
reacted critically to the fact that the requirement specifi­
cations did  not include editorial  systems, and  that they 
(the journalists) only  played  a minor  role when the re­
quirement  specifications  were  worked  out.  Reactions 
from employers were mixed. 'Technically competent, but 
too political', was a common assessment. The Scandina­
vian journal on newspaper technology, Tidningsteknik, let 
various  opinions  be  heard  in  a  special  report.  The 
managing editor  of  the  Danish  newspaper  Berlingske 
Tidende wrote in his contribution that the UTOPIA report 

The UTOPIA  Project 

351 

concludes with a range of good questions meant as inspi­
ration for trade unionists, but these are just as thought-
provoking for  newspaper  management.'24  Graphic trade 
unions have made extensive use of the requirement spec­
ifications in connection with collective bargaining and lo­
cal  negotiations.  The  Greater  London  Council  (GLC) 
translated the requirement specifications and  meant to 
use it for a new graphic industry project  along the lines 
sketched by  UTOPIA.  (This project, like most of the other 
projects that GLC initiated, was later stopped by the con­
servative British government.) 

Public debate of technological alternatives for skill and 

democracy was another arena for dissemination of UTO­
PIA  as a  paradigm case. Participation in meetings and 
seminars, also far outside Scandinavia, writing of articles 
and discussions with different trade unions were aspects 
of this work. To the public debate the UTOPIA project also 
contributed to two films. One was an educational program 
on new technology for Danish television. The other was an 
American  view  of  'the  new  Scandinavian  model'  for 
design of computer artifacts. 

The Marxist approach for  understanding possibilities 
and limits for democratization at work from  the earlier 
collective resource projects (e.g. NJMF, DEMOS, and DUE) 
also  formed  part  of  the  basis for  the  UTOPIA  project. 
Hence, just as in the earlier projects, this project's contacts 
with  the  research  community  studying  labor  process 
theory and emancipatory practice were important. Again, 
we did not really develop theory, but at research seminars 
and  conferences  we  have  contributed  to  the  scholary 
dialogue by discussing the UTOPIA  project as a practical 
application of a Marxist approach.25 

However, the UTOPIA  project also meant a new theo­
retical orientation. Our  attempts to  really  design  com­
puter artifacts for skilled work also brought us in contact 

24 Tidningsteknik, no 2,1984, p. 18 (my translation). 
25 The relations to the theoretical Marxist qualification debate are 
discussed in chapter 18, Skills and  the Tool Perspective. 

352 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

with  research fields  like  human-computer  interaction, 
software engineering, and  philosophy of  design, as has 
been discussed in the first two parts of this book. An in­
citement for  this wider theoretical  orientation  was our 
practical  experience  with  the  rather  successful  use  of 
mock-ups,  our 'design-by-doing' approach, and  our 'tool 
perspective'. We lacked  a theoretical frame  of  reference 
for understanding why it worked so well, and for getting 
ideas on  how  to  further  develop  our  design  approach. 
Again we started  out as users of  theory, rather than as 
developers of new theory, but our combination of a a theo­
retical approach focusing on the social issue of designing 
for  democracy  at  work  and  at  the  same  time  on  the 
technical  issue  of  designing  skill-enhancing  computer 
artifacts has met with a great deal of appreciation in these 
more technical research fields.26  We are now contributing 
to this 'new dialogue' by developing our practical experi­
ence into a theoretical perspective. Besides papers at con­
ferences,  a  more  comprehensive  theoretical  account  of 
our UTOPIA  experiences has been  presented  in a Ph.D. 
thesis  on  human-computer  interaction.27  One  main 
purpose for writing this book on work-oriented design of 
computer artifacts is to contribute to this new dialogue in 
the  research community. 

The UTOPIA Project: Success or Failure? 
Looking at the UTOPIA project in retrospect: was it a suc­
cess or a failure? 

First some positive opinions. When the UTOPIA  project 
the  decision-makers  from  the  Nordic 
was finished 
Graphic  Workers' Union  and  the graphic  workers  that 

26 See e.g. the comments by one of the leading researchers in 
human-computer interaction and cognitive  science,  Don Norman 
in Norman, D. and Draper, S. (eds.): User Centered  System De­
sign - New  Perspectives  on  Human-Computer  Interaction, 
Lawrence Erlbaum,  London 1986. 
27  B0dker, S.: Through the  Interface -A Human Activity  Ap­
proach to User Interface Design, DAIMI PB-224, Department of 
Computer Science, University of Aarhus, 1987(dissertation). 

The UTOPIA  Project 

353 

had  participated in the  project  were interviewed  about 
their view on the results.28 

Gunnar Kokaas, chairman of the reference group from 

the Nordic Graphic Workers' Union, stated that: 

The UTOPIA  project has been a good  model for Scandi­
navian cooperation, a model which ought to be studied 
by  other  Scandinavian  trade  unions.  The  work  has 
shown that conditions in various countries are similar, 
and that it would be a waste of  resources to carry out 
parallel  work  in various countries. The  contact  with 
graphic  workers  from  other  countries  and  with  re­
searchers has been valuable for the participants from 
the  workplaces.  Finding the financial 
resources  has 
been a big problem. Before similar projects are initiated 
it is important to ensure financial  support from sources 
all over Scandinavia. The  Scandinavian trade unions 
and certain public authorities should  jointly demand 
government support for objective  research, i.e. inclu­
ding research on the premises of the workers. 

I see  two  important  results. First  the  reports them­
selves. For the first  time the trade  unions are a step 
ahead in the assessment of  the new technology, even 
before the technology actually exists. The workers can 
read about that in the reports. Then there is the content. 
Several reports state that there is no  incompatibility 
between  making  profits  and  demanding  quality  of 
training,  work,  and  product.  Skills  will  always -
independent of  technology - be very important  in the 
graphic process. Some new skills will be acquired, but 
knowing what a good product looks like will always be 
important.  Human  beings  determine  the  needs  of 
human beings. I would like to say the following to all 
Scandinavian  trade  unions:  Make  good  use  of  the 
experiences  generated  by  the  UTOPIA  project.  New 
projects must soon be initiated, as it is important to stay 

28 UTOPIA  project group, op. cit. 

354 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

up-to-date where technology, work  organization, and 
training are concerned. 

O 
Ake Rosenquist,  chairman of  the Nordic Graphic Work­
ers Union and of  the Swedish  Graphic Workers  Union, 
concluded that: 

We  will continue  to  disseminate our  findings in  the 
form of  material from  the UTOPIA  project  to our sec­
tions and local unions. (...) The material will also be used 
in courses and at conferences. (...) The UTOPIA project 
has given us several contacts concerning technological 
questions.  Active  discussions  of  new  ways  for 
Scandinavian trade unions to cooperate  have already 
started. (...) In this connection I might mention that the 
interaction  between  researchers and graphic workers 
has been problematic. The participating graphic work­
ers sometimes felt  that things 'took so long\  Also the 
researchers didn't always take up the questions which 
seemed  most important  to the graphic workers. The 
most important results are that the trade unions have 
started to cooperate with  researchers, and the reports 
themselves which can form  the basis for  the work  of 
the trade union. 

Kaj Pedersen, chairman of  the Danish Graphic Workers' 
Trade Union: 

The UTOPIA  project has first  and foremost  taught us 
some working practices which  make it easier to com­
municate with other  professional groups in  the busi­
ness,  and  with  employers.  Negotiations  concerning 
work organization in connection with computer-based 
page make-up had almost come to a stop in Denmark. 
We  have chosen  to  use  the  UTOPIA  reports and  the 
working  practices as a starting point  in  the current 
negotiations. (...) The working practices of the UTOPIA 
project are also important where training is concerned. 
Up to now we have  been forced to arrive at some kind 
of  agreement  with the employers  to get  resources for 
training.  The  simulation  methods  developed  by  the 

The UTOPIA  Project 

355 

UTOPIA project give us possibilities to start on our own, 
because they require far less resources. 

Kjell Christoffersen, chairman of the Norwegian Graphic 
Workers'  Union: 

The UTOPIA  project has brought us abreast of techno­
logical development. Now we can define the employees' 
requirements on  the new  technology.  The  Union  ad­
ministration has just allocated $4,000 for a number of 
UTOPIA reports which will be distributed to local unions 
and negotiators. We think it important to disseminate 
findings  such as the requirements on the design of the 
systems,  work  environment,  and  work  organization, 
and especially demarcation problems between different 
professional groups. I think that the results will benefit 
us generally at the local level, and especially in connec­
tion with training and negotiations. 

Gunnar Rasmussen, one  of  the Danish graphic  workers 
participating directly in  the  project  group, emphasized 
that: 

The  project  has succeeded  in  working out  a  compre­
hensive  report on  requirements concerning computer 
based page make-up and image processing. This report 
has been widely  praised. The project has succeeded in 
the same  way  with organization  of  work.  New  tech­
nology requires new ways of  thinking in the field  too: 
the project has worked out a very applicable and com­
prehensive  method  for describing work  organization. 
In addition a number of important suggestions for trai­
ning have been formulated. 

And Malte Eriksson, one of the Swedish graphic workers 
that directly  participated  in  the  project  work,  summa­
rized: 

For  the union the UTOPIA  project  may  mean  every­
thing or  nothing. Just a pile of  reports or  something 
which  they  can  turn  into  practice.  We  know  more 
about  new technology. And  we  know  more about the 

356 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

limitations, for instance in communication both inside 
the  computer  and  between  man  and  computer. The 
requirement  specification is easy to use, even on both 
sides of the negotiation table. The organizational model 
is already being applied in at least five newspapers. The 
most important result is the cooperation between trade 
unions and researchers based on the unions' objectives. 
The reports and cooperation with a supplier, TIPS, that 
was exceptional, and worked out quite well. I am quite 
optimistic where  the future is concerned. The organi­
zational model presented by the UTOPIA project allows 
room for qualified graphic workers of the future. 

Finally, an international research perspective. An appre­
ciative  article  in  MIT  Technology  Review  analyzing 
UTOPIA - where  workers  craft  new  technology  con­
cluded:29 

So the impact of UTOPIA is continuing to expand, and 
the idea  that workers and  their unions  have an im­
portant role in the design of new technology is reaching 
a  wider and  wider audience. Today  Scandinavia. To­
morrow, perhaps, the rest of the world. 

However, as in all 'success' stories, UTOPIA, too, has its 
dark sides on which the light more seldom is shed. Let me 
in conclusion drag some of them into the light. 

Clearly one dark side is what happened to the vendor 
Liber that the UTOPIA  project cooperated  with, and  the 
destiny of the TIPS system. The problems of  carrying out 
practical technical  and organizational experiments  with 
the TIPS  system  have  already  been  mentioned.  There 
were, however, many more problems. 

Liber  really did  implement  most  of  the  requirement 
specifications  for  image  processing,  and  the  system 
worked  well.  When it came  to page  make-up, Liber de­
cided (for  market considerations) to make two versions. 

29  Howard, R.: 'UTOPIA - Where Workers Craft New Technology' 
in Technological Review, vol 88 no 3, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 1985. 

The UTOPIA  Project 

357 

One  was  according  to  the  UTOPIA  specifications,  and 
intended for the Scandinavian market with strong trade 
unions. A completely different one was destined  for the 
U.S.A  market. This latter version  was a less skill-based 
one,  not  relying  on  a  democratic  work  organization. 
Neither of the versions were really well implemented, at 
first due to technical problems, then, as a consequence, due 
to financial  problems. 

The TEPS system was implemented at several 'test site' 
newspapers.  However,  before finalizing 
it as a  market 
product the vendor was short of capital and the rights to 
the system  were sold  to another company  primarily fo­
cusing on the image  processing part. This  illustrates a 
problem with 'the Scandinavian model' for technological 
development. The small Scandinavian countries may lack 
both  the  technological  competence  and  the financial 
resources for really successful participation in the inter­
national technological race. 

The  UTOPIA  project  clearly  showed  that  the  latest 
technology may be designed and put into use to improve, 
not decrease, the skills of  the graphic  workers. If not a 
dark side, it is perhaps a dark horse, as to whether this 
really  will  happen.  Will  the  Scandinavian  newspaper 
owners exploit the possibilities for a constructive discus­
sion on technology, organization, and training? This to a 
great extent depends upon  whether the graphic workers 
and journalists succeed in overcoming their professional 
clash of  interests, and  together develop  a common  stra­
tegy. The  historical study conducted  by the project pro­
vides some insight into this. The new technology creates 
'demarcation  disputes' between  professional  groups,  as 
well as between trade unions. This presents a large and 
very  real problem. This is true for  graphic workers and 
journalists, as well as for other professional groups. How­
ever, the UTOPIA project demonstrated that solutions can 
be found. For newspapers there are technical and organi­
zational alternatives where no professional group is uni­
laterally lost, and where product quality and reasonable 
efficiency can be ensured. Nevertheless, the lack of trade 

358 

Designing  for  Democracy at Work 

union cooperation, not the technology, not the newspaper 
owners,  nor  the suppliers,  may  ironically  become  the 
decisive factor frustrating the dream of Utopia. 

Given this background it seems reasonable to ask why 
only the graphic workers' unions directly participated in 
the UTOPIA project, and not also the journalists' and the 
administrative staffs unions. I find  this question very im­
portant. Such participation would, at least in theory, have 
contributed to a better design. It was a deliberate choice by 
the research group to cooperate with the graphic workers, 
since we  considered  them  as  the  weakest  party  in  the 
current  technological  change  in  graphic  industry. 
However,  we also consciously  were seeking close  coope­
ration with the other unions concerned. The fact that we 
first  had  contacts  with  the graphic  workers  made  the 
other  unions, on good  grounds  or  not,  critical  towards 
UTOPIA, and thus frustrated the dream of a joint design. 
Finally a note on the design process in the UTOPIA pro­
ject. It was really Utopian.  The  preconditions for such a 
design process are not present in corporate business as we 
know it today. Resources for skilled workers, trade union 
people,  computer and  social scientists to  work  together 
over a long period of time designing tools in the interest of 
the end users do not generally exist as yet, not even  in 
Scandinavia. UTOPIA was not only a challenge to design, 
but also to a more democratic working life. 

Chapter 14 
Reminders on Designing for 
Democracy at Work 

In  this  part  I  have  discussed  the  democracy  aspect  of 
work-oriented  design  of  computer  artifacts. I have out­
lined the  collective  resource  approach  developed  in  the 
Scandinavian setting, especially focusing on our practice 
research  experiences from  the DEMOS and UTOPIA  pro­
jects. 

Together with Morten Kyng a few years ago I made a 

summary of  'some theses on the collective  resource ap­
proach', based on our shared experiences.1 In the light of 
the philosophical discussion in the first part of this book I 
will below  restate the  results from DEMOS, UTOPIA  and 
other collective  resource projects as a number of  'remin­
ders', in the Wittgensteinian sense, on designing for de­
mocracy  at  work. These  reminders, argued  throughout 
the chapters of this part of the book, are not scientifically 
proved Gileses' in a strict sense. 

The practice  research approach applied  certainly can 

contribute  to  practical  change  and  theoretical  develop­
ment, and my claim is that in both respects it has done so, 
but this case  and  practical change  based  approach does 
not  really produce scientific  theses in the form  that e.g. 
controlled experiments do. (The  theoretical status of sci­
entific theses produced that way is another  matter that 

1  Ehn, P.  and Kyng K.: The Collective Resource Approach to Sys­
tems Design' in Bjerknes, G. et al (eds.) Computers and 
Democracy - A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

360 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

will not  be examined here. Every research approach has 
its own practical and methodological problems.2) 

The  methodological  problems  with  the  practice  re­
search approach we applied derive from  the close  inter­
action  between existing theory  used  for  understanding 
and intervening in practice, and this changing practice as 
the inspiration for further theoretical reflections - a hen-
and-egg problem.  Furthermore, results can  not  only  be 
measured in terms of 'new theory", but must also be seen 
in the light of practical change - a related action and re­
flection problem. Another problem, one specific to design 
research, is related to the aim of not only contributing to 
substantial theory concerning the research field,  but also 
of  creating  new  design  artifacts and  working  practices 
related to this theory - a design research problem. 

With this in  mind, the following reminders from  the 

chapters on  designing for  democracy  at work  are sum­
marized for further reflection and action: 

Reminders 
Reminders on the General  Theoretical Framework  for 
Understanding Design and Use of Computer Artifacts in 
the Context of  Democratization of Work 
•  The design  process is part of  a  larger organizational 

development process. Furthermore, this process of  or­
ganizational  development  and  change should  in  the 
context of democratization be  understood as including 
trade union activities as well as societal constraints and 
opportunities. 

•  A central concept for understanding design and use of 
computer artifacts is that of  labor processes. A labor 

2 The methodological  problems with our practice  research ap­
proach in cooperation with trade unions has, as mentioned be­
fore, been reflected in a separate research project. See Sandberg, 
Å. (ed.): Forskning fôr  förändring - Om metoder  och  ßrutsätt-
ningar  för  handlingsinriktad  forskning i  arbetslivet, Swedish 
Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1981. 

Reminders 

361 

process  is a  process  to  produce  use  values: specific 
products or services of some kind. These use values are 
produced  by people using artifacts (specific machines, 
tools, techniques etc.) to refine objects of work (specific 
'raw materials'; goods, services, ideas, etc.). Planning as 
well  as execution  are  fundamental  parts  of  human 
work in this process. The division of labor between dif­
ferent groups of people, their qualifications for accom­
plishing different tasks, and the quality of the use val­
ues being produced are key aspects of the labor process 
in the context of democratization of work. 

•  The design process reflects, at least conceptually and so 

far in most cases also practically, a fundamental divi­
sion of labor, the division between planning and execu­
tion. In the design process, computer artifacts and use 
values, as well as skill requirements and organizational 
options for another labor process, the use process, are 
anticipated  and  'frozen'.  In  the  use  process  work  is 
executed given the constraints and opportunities set by 
the  design  process.  Turning  matters  the  other  way 
around, the characteristics of a given use process also 
set constraints and opportunities for the design process. 
•  The design process as well as the use process are sepa­

rate labor processes, and  at the same time parts of  a 
total' labor process. In this perspective an understan­
ding of changes in labor processes must be related to the 
totality as well as to the separate parts, to the division of 
labor between  different groups of  participants within 
the labor  process  of  design,  to  the division  of  labor 
between the design and the use labor process, and to the 
division of labor within the use labor process. 

•  Capital accumulation or generation of profits is the ba­

sic driving force in changes of labor processes. 

•  Intensification of  work and use of new technology are 

two basic strategies for capital accumulation. 

•  The  relations between on the one hand  workers and 
their trade unions, and on the other hand management 
and capital owners has its origin in the labor contract. 

362 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

This  is  an  exchange  relation  between  two  kinds  of 
commodity  possessors - capital  (which  owns  the 
means  of  production  and  the  workplace)  and  labor 
(which  owns its labor  power).  To  produce  profit  the 
capital owner needs to buy labor power; to earn a living 
the worker  needs to sell his or  her labor  power  and 
work at the workplace. 

•  Class struggle at work is an important aspect of actual 
changes in labor processes, not only of the use process 
designed, but also of the design process and of possible 
integrations in the future. 

•  A participative approach  to the design  process is not 

sufficient in the context of democratization at work. 

•  In democratization  of design and  use of  computer ar­

tifacts in Scandinavia, trade unions - especially on a 
local level — must play an active role. 

Reminders on Democratization by  Local Trade Union 
Participation in the Design of Computer Artifacts 
•  A clear distinction based on negotiations between union 
and management roles in the design process is not in 
opposition to, but a prerequisite for the democratization 
of cooperation and  decision-making in the work  orga­
nization. 

•  Design  and  use  of  computer  artifacts  requires  new 

trade union activities. 

•  The most important  prerequisite for trade union  par­

ticipation in the traditional design process is a parallel 
and independent process of accumulation of knowledge 
on the part of the union. 

•  The union investigation and negotiation strategy, 'the 

negotiation model', is a democratic and workable com­
plement to traditional design strategies. But it is very 
resource  consuming  for  the  local  unions.  Hence,  in 
many situations less participative strategies like mobi­
lization  around  general  union  principles  for  use  of 

Reminders 

363 

computer  artifacts, and  negotiations  based  on  these 
principles, may be a more realistic alternative. 

•  Local  unions need  external  resources and support in 

their design activities. 

•  A local trade union strategy has to be based on solidarity 
between  the different  groups of  workers involved,  a 
solidarity which goes beyond the traditional division of 
labor in the labor process and the traditional jurisdic­
tions between the unions involved. 

Reminders on Central Trade Union Support for 
Democratization of Design and  Use of Computer Artifacts 
•  The existing computer-based technology in many cases 
restricts the possibilities to locally  reach trade union 
objectives, especially with respect to skill, but also with 
respect to work organization. 

•  However, it is possible to design computer-based  tech­

nology based on criteria such as skill and democracy at 
work. 

•  Central trade unions must influence the process of re­
search and development of  new technology to change 
the supply of technological and organizational solutions. 
•  Equally important is a trade union strategy to influence 
the demand for these technological and organizational 
alternatives. 

•  Central  trade  unions  must  provide  training  with  a 
trade union perspective on design and use of computer 
artifacts, and influence the supply of professional trai­
ning for skilled work. 

•  A strategy like the 'new Scandinavian  model' for  re­

search and  technological development - focusing on  a 
new form for coopération between governments, trade 
unions and  high  tech  industry in  production  of  new 
technology  which  supports  good  working  conditions 
and  good  use  quality  products  and  services - is  a 
promising approach to support more democratic design 
and use of computer artifacts. 

364 

Designing  for Democracy at Work 

Reminders on Design Artifacts for User Participation in 
Design in the Context of  Democratization of Work 
•  TDesign-by-Doing' design methods like the use of mock-
ups  and  other  prototyping  design  artifacts  make  it 
possible for ordinary  users to  use their  practical skill 
when participating in the design process. 

•  'Systems description'  design  artifacts should  not pri­

marily be seen as means for creating true 'pictures of 
reality\ but as means to help the users (and the design­
ers) discuss current situations and envision and discuss 
future ones. To this end, as the 'organizational tool kit', 
they  must  support  a  'family  resemblance'  with  the 
users' ordinary  work  practice, and  be easy  to  use  in 
group work. 

Beyond DEMOS and UTOPIA 
What are the relations between these 'reminders' and the 
reflections on Design Philosophy and The Art and Science 
of Designing Computer Artifacts discussed in the previous 
parts? 

A first comment must be that my reason for writing the 
previous  parts to a great extent is rooted  in a desire to 
further reflect upon our experiences from the DEMOS and 
the UTOPIA projects. These parts are post hoc theoretical 
reflections to illuminate our 'achievements' as well as our 
'shortcomings'. They relate our research to a more gene­
ral  philosophical  and  academic  research  context.  They 
constitute a  frame of  reference  which  permits others to 
understand and criticize the basis for our research, as well 
as  for  allowing  us  to  rethink  some  of  our  research 
'findings'. 

In relation to the part on Design Philosophy, the collec­
tive resource approach is best captured as a Marxist  ap­
proach. However, in the case of the DEMOS  project there 
were also elements of a rationalistic Cartesian approach, 
with regard to its emphasis on formal procedures for de­
mocratization. In  the UTOPIA  project elements of  a Hei-

Reminders 

365 

deggerian  approach and a Wittgensteinian approach en­
tered with the 'tool perspective' and the 'design-by-doingf 
methods, but by no  means as an a  priori  philosophically 
conscious choice. Rather, our practical experiences led us 
in these philosophical directions. 

In  relation to the part on an Art  and  Science  of  De­

signing Computer Artifacts and  the 'definition' of design 
of computer artifacts, the social, historical, and planning 
aspects of  design of  computer artifacts were, both in the 
DEMOS and the UTOPIA project, extensively treated in the 
context of democratization of work. 

However, the creative aspect was not really taken into 
account in the DEMOS project, whereas the UTOPIA project 
came to focus on skill both in design and use of computer 
artifacts. 

With respect to the contradiction between tradition and 
transcendence in design, both projects highlighted crucial 
aspects in  the context of democratization. To  mention a 
few examples: There was the contradiction  between ad­
herence to traditional local trade union working practices 
of negotiations on behalf of the members, and at the same 
time the development of  new ways of  preparing negotia­
tions on  new technology. There was adherence to tradi­
tional project participation, and at the same time the de­
velopment  of  new  complementary  participative  struc­
tures. 

In  retrospect, a  'family resemblance' between the ap­

proach taken in the DEMOS and the UTOPIA projects and 
the 'social systems design methods' (Churchman, Ackoff, 
and Checkland) discussed in the previous part is obvious, 
though it was far from clear as the projects were carried 
out. In the case of the UTOPIA project, the relations to new 
prototyping design approaches suggested by Floyd, and to 
the  new  theoretical foundation  of  design  suggested  by 
Winograd and  Dreyfus are rather obvious too. Compared 
to the above approaches I find  that the strength  of  the 
collective resource approach is our ability to integrate so­
cial  theory  on  democratization  with design, and  as the 
ability to practically  participate in the democratization 

366 

Designing  for Democracy at  Work 

process. Just as obvious is our methodological weakness as 
compared  to more 'mature' design  approaches. In  rela­
tion  to design approaches  in  other  fields  discussed,  a 
'family  resemblance'  between  the  Bauhaus  movement 
and the collective  resource approach can  be noticed con­
cerning the focus on democracy and skill. In relation to 
'postmodern' architectural design the collective  resource 
approach lacks the playfulness suggested. 

The list of  reminders on  designing for  democracy  at 
work  started  with  the  suggestion  that  socio-technical 
participation in design is far from sufficient. In the light of 
our own practical shortcomings (and some progress in the 
UTOPIA  project),  and  the  more  'creative'  approaches 
discussed in the previous part I will end the list by sug­
gesting that 
•  formal  democratic  and  participative  procedures  for 
designing computer  artifacts for  democracy  at  work 
are not sufficient. The design process must also be or­
ganized  in a  way  that  make  it  possible for  ordinary 
users to utilize their practical skill in the design work, 
and having fun doing this. 

In the next part of this book I will elaborate on  the skill 
aspect of  creativity in design and  use of  computer arti­
facts. 

Part IV 
Designing for Skill 

'If we could rid ourselves of all pride, 
if, to define our species, 
we kept strictly 
to what the historic and the prehistoric periods 
show us to be 
the constant characteristic of man and  of intelligence, 
we should say not Homo sapiens, but Homo Faber. 
In short, intelligence, 
considered in what seems to be its original  feature, 
is the faculty of manufacturing artificial objects, 
especially tools to make tools, 
and of  indefinitely varying the manufacture.' 

Henri Bergson in Creative Evolution 

Introduction 

Craft work  unions, like those of  typographers, have his­
torically played a major role in the struggle for democracy 
at work and in society in general. The skilled worker and 
his union have often  been in  the front line, fighting for 
democratic rights. As was discussed in the previous part 
on Designing  for  Democracy  at Work, democratic  rights 
at work to a great extent concern  the worker's ability to 
counteract  tendencies  towards  deskilling  of  the  work 
force. Not surprisingly, craft work has been an ideal for 
the trade union movement. There  are historical and po­
litical connections between the ideal of democracy at work 
and the ideal of skilled workers producing good use quality 
products - my  normative  point  of  departure  for  work-
oriented  design  of  computer  artifacts. Though  the con­
nection between democracy at work and craft work is ob­
vious, it is also a problematic one. Craft work may end up 
in  the  kind  of  undemocratic elitism  that  many  profes­
sional groups exercise. There is also a contradiction  be­
tween craft workers' interests, and  the interests of  un­
skilled or unemployed workers. Furthermore, the ideal of 
high quality products may lead to the production of luxury 
products for the happy few who can  afford them, rather 
than to good  use quality products for the many. Finally, 
there is more to life than work. There is a contradiction 
between acquisition of high skills at work and time for re­
alization of  perhaps more important aspects of our lives. 
These  kind  of  contradictions  between democracy  and  a 
craft  ideal  are  important  to  consider.  Nevertheless,  I 
maintain the position that designing for skill should be a 
fundamental aspect of  work-oriented design of computer 
artifacts. This position will be elaborated in this part. 

Designing  for Skill 

370 
Craftsmanship as Design Ideal 
It is easy to become romantic about craft work. It is eve­
rything industrial work is not. John Seymour is one of its 
bards. In the introduction of his guide to traditional skill 
The Forgotten Arts he writes:1 

Radically every artifact a person uses today can easily 
be made from oil-derived plastic, in a large factory, by 
machine-minders whose chief quality is their ability to 
survive lives of  intense boredom.  Even  the  machine-
minders are rapidly being replaced by robots who, we 
are told, don't get bored at all. Artifacts so produced of­
ten  do  their  jobs  perfectly  well.  They  are  ugly,  for 
beauty in an artifact depends on  the texture  of some 
natural  material  combined  with  the skill  and  loving 
care of an artisan; they are short-lived, so consequently 
our  world  is  becoming choked  with  partly degraded, 
broken-down  plastic  objects,  and  their  production  is 
causing the pollution of our planet on a scale never be­
fore experienced. But, by and large, they work. If  eve­
rything we use is to be ugly and boring to make, what is 
the  purpose  of  living  at  all?  Was  there  once  really 
something  people  called  quality  of  life?  A  good  and 
satisfying quality, that is. Could there be again? Or are 
we, as a species, doomed to live out the rest of our des­
tiny doing boring  jobs and surrounded  by  mediocrity 
and ugliness? 

No  matter how convincing the above argument may be, 
its critics could easily demonstrate that in many respects 
an assembly-line worker who in 1988 works in a Scandi­
navian workplace and is a member of  a union has more 
freedom and autonomy in general than his fellow worker 
who was a member of a guild several hundred years ago. 
In addition he earns more money. 

1  Seymour, J.: The Forgotten Arts -A practical guide  to tradi­
tional skills, Dorling Kindersley, London 1984, p. 6. 

Introduction to  part  IV 

371 

The social and  political conditions under which crafts­

manship was acquired in the guild  system are far from 
being worth romanticizing about. 

However, since early industrialism attempts have now 
and then been made to counteract the negative  sides of 
industrial work  as machine-minding, and to reintroduce 
craft work  traditions — focusing on skilled  work for  pro­
duction of good use quality products. 

William Morris was  one of  these great utopians from 
the nineteenth century. His interests in quality  ranged 
from good  typography to ideal factories.  His craft work 
visions are still worth reading.2 

Today craft ideals are mostly associated with the alter­
native  production  movement,  which  deals  with  funda­
mental issues of our environment. Typically there is a fo­
cus on low technology small scale crafts production. 

The  UTOPIA  project  was a  rare example of  trying to 
apply craftsmanship principles to the design  and  use of 
advanced computer artifacts, but not the only one.3 These 
examples suggest designs which on the one hand norma-
tively support the craft ideal of quality of work and prod­
uct, and  on the other try to utilize the flexibility of com­
puters as material to design really skill-enhancing tools. 
However, if  we want to design and use computer arti­

facts based on the practical skill of craftsmen, rather than 
just the calculus of engineers, then we need new means of 
designing. The design approach we applied in the UTOPIA 
project demonstrated some ways of moving in that direc­
tion. These ways are also theoretically supported by the 
role  given  to  practical  understanding in  the  Wittgen-

2 See e.g. Morton, A.L.: Political Writings  of William  Morris, 
Lawrence & Wishart, Berlin 1973, and Morton,  A.L.: Three Works 
by William  Morris, News  from Nowhere,  The  Pilgrims of  Hope,  A 
Dream of John Ball, Lawrence & Wishart, Berlin 1968. 
3 The design efforts by the workers at Lucas Aerospace, and the 
work by research teams around Mike Cooley and Harold Rosen-
brock in Britain, the work by IG  Metal and researchers around 
Peter Brödner in Germany, as mentioned in the Prologue, 
demonstrate  similar attempts. 

372 

Designing  for Skill 

steinian and Heideggerian approaches discussed in Part I 
on Design Philosophy. In addition, it will be argued in this 
part that modern workstation technology and user inter­
face design styles constitute new opportunities for practi­
cally designing computer artifacts eis tools - for and with 
skilled workers. 

Obviously,  the  design  approach  advocated  here  is 
heavily influenced by traditional craft work. This goes for 
the product  ideal — a tool  under complete  control of  the 
user, as well as for the design ideal - the role of tradition, 
and the master-apprentice relation. There are, however, 
several points where one may criticize these ideals. 

One concerns the possibility  of designing computer ar­
tifacts in  such a  way that  using them resembles crafts­
manship. This  is,  for  example,  questioned  by  many 
craftsmen as well as by researchers. 

Craftsmen fear that their kind of skill will have to van­
ish when computer artifacts replace traditional tools and 
materials.  Researchers  support  them  in  this  view  by 
stressing that  abstract  technical  qualifications  are  re­
placing craft skills. It is the engineer, not the craftsman, 
that will be the ideal future user. In this part I will try to 
argue that though both  may be right in  their critique of 
our UTOPIAn ideal, they do not have to be. 

Another  critique is of  the desirability of  the  ideal  of 
craftsmanship  in design  and  use  of  computer  artifacts. 
Why  craft  work  and  autonomy  as an ideal? What  is it 
more than a  historically specific  pre-industrial and  pre-
capitalistic form  of  work? Moreover  it is a form of  work 
that carries an inherent individualistic and male centered 
ideal. Yes, let us try to extend it to something that is coop­
erative and human centered. And let us at the same time 
reflect upon whether the ideal of craftsmanship is too high 
an ideal, as has also been argued: The point is that if craft 
skill and autonomy are set as the ideal then  we  will in 
working life only find deskilled workers. 

I am  not arguing that  this critique  is wrong.  On  the 
contrary it should be taken as a challenge to change and 
develop the craftsmanship ideal. But no matter how much 

Introduction to  part  IV 

373 

we change and develop it, there are two aspects of crafts­
manship that I think  should  remain as cornerstones in 
our design ideal. 

The first  one is the priority of  practical  understanding 
in design and use of computer artifacts, as opposed to just 
relying on theoretical detached reflection. No matter how 
technically complex a  computer artifact is, it is possible 
and  desirable  to  anchor  design  and  use  in  practical 
understanding. That is a  a  position  I theoretically and 
empirically try to demonstrate in this book. 

The second  cornerstone I  want to maintain is the de­

sign ideal of computer artifacts as tools augmenting skills 
rather than replacing them. Again the claim is that theo­
retically as well as empirically this can be shown to be a 
possible way of designing. 

Structure of Part IV 
In the UTOPIA project we developed some design princip­
les we have referred to as the tool perspective. Traditional 
craft work was used as an ideal both for the design process 
and for  the tools  and  materials to  be  designed.  Hence, 
there was a strong emphasis on practical understanding 
both in design and in use. The design ideal for computer 
artifacts was seen as a set of tools under the skilled wor­
ker's control. The ideal for the design process was as an 
activity of  'design-by-doing', as a practical learning pro­
cess. In chapter 13, Case II: The UTOPIA Project I gave a 
general  background.  In  chapter  15,  The  'Tool  Per­
spective' -An Example, I will in more detail describe the 
tool  kit for computer-based  page  make-up designed  ac­
cording to these principles. 

In the following three chapters of this part I will elabo­
rate on the ideal of computer-based tools for skilled work. 
An important aspect of  computer artifacts that I will in­
vestigate in these chapters concerns how tool-like we may 
design them to be. I will refer to this aspect as the toolness 
of computer artifacts. 

374 

Designing  for  Skill 

In chapter 16, Tools, the concept of a tool is investigated. 
The chapter has the form of an inventory of tool aspects of 
computer artifacts. Pros and cons of understanding com­
puter artifacts as tools, as well as alternative views, are 
discussed. The conclusions are far from  unambiguous. I 
find strong support for a tool perspective, as well as fun­
damental criticism. 

In chapter 17, The 'Toolness' of  Computer Artifacts is 

discussed in terms of 'state of the art' hardware and soft­
ware supporting this toolness.  As  paradigm examples  I 
refer  to a  number  of  'classical'  computer  artifacts  dis­
playing such features. I also discuss the tool perspective in 
the light of some general principles for user interface de­
sign.  The  chapter  is introductory,  intended  as a  back­
ground for  readers unfamiliar with the field  of  human-
computer interaction design,  rather than as a contribu­
tion to the field. 

Finally, in chapter 18, Skills and the Tool Perspective, 
skill aspects of design and  use of computer artifacts are 
further  elaborated.  The  problematic  concept  of  tacit 
knowledge is defended. At the same time the blindness a 
tool perspective may create towards social, collective and 
cooperative skills is acknowledged. The chapter ends with 
a section in which the tool perspective and the craft work 
ideal  are  confronted  with  a  number  of  empirical 
sociological studies of changes of qualifications in relation 
to use of computer artifacts in working life. 

Chapter 15 
The 'Tool  Perspective' — 
An Example 

In the UTOPIA  project  we developed  a  design  approach 
which we called the tool perspective.1 The tool perspective 
takes the labor process as its origin rather than data or 
information flow. This means: not  detailed analysis, de­
scription and formalization of qualifications, but develop­
ment of professional education based on the skills of pro­
fessionals; not information flow analysis and systems de­
scription, but specification of tools and materials. The ideal 
for designing a computer artifact is a tool kit containing 
craft tools which under complete and  continuous control 
of the user can be applied to fashion materials into more 
refined products or services. The user is seen as a person 
who  possesses skills  relevant for the task  to be accom­
plished. Computer-based tools are developed to be used by 
skilled users to create good use quality products and ser­
vices. 

In the tool perspective, essential parts of the user's skills 
relevant  when  using a  tool are tacit, and  as such  they 
neither can nor should be made explicit  and formalized. 
Hence, the intention is not to automate parts of the skills, 

1 The tool perspective was first  outlined in Ehn, P. and Kyng, M.: 
'A Tool Perspective on Design of Interactive Computer Support for 
Skilled Workers' in Proceedings of the  Seventh Scandinavian Re­
search Seminar on  Systemeering, Helsinki 1984. See also B0dker: 
Utopia and the Design of User Interfaces' and Kammersgaard, 
J.: 'On Models and their Bole in the use of Computers' in 
Preceedings of  the Aarhus Conference  on Development  and Use of 
Computer Based  Systems and Tools, Aarhus, 1985. 

376 

Designing  for Skill 

but to build computer-based tools by which craftsmen, can 
still apply and develop their original skills. 

In this chapter I will exemplify the tool perspective with 
our  efforts  to  design  computer  artifacts  for  full  page 
make-up  in  newspaper  production.  I  will  make  a  few 
comments  on  the  design  process,  but  my  primary 
emphasis will be on the product designed. 

The main purpose of  the chapter is to give a  concrete 

example of an application of the tool perspective. This ex­
ample will then be utilized in the coming chapters, where 
both the tool aspect and the skill aspect of a tool perspective 
are scrutinized. 

The Design Process - 'Design-by-Doing' 
The tool perspective was deeply influenced by the way the 
design of  tools takes place within traditional crafts. The 
idea is that new tools should be designed as an extension of 
the traditional practical understanding of tools and mate­
rials used  within a given craft or  profession. As  a conse­
quence of this, design must be carried out by common ef­
forts of skilled, experienced users and design professionals. 
Users possess  the practical understanding necessary  as 
the basis for  the design, but  to support  their technical 
imagination  they  must  gain insight into  new  technical 
possibilities as well. The designer has to spend a great deal 
of time trying to gain some insight into the specific labor 
process. The goal is not to become, for example, a make-up 
person, but to be able to contribute constructively in the 
design  process. But  the designer  must also be a design 
professional. Computer-based  tools which  for the skilled 
worker are simple, powerful and  accurate to use, are of­
ten technically highly complex. 

In the UTOPIA  project  we  tried  out such a  process  of 
mutual learning: here, graphic workers learned about the 
technical  possibilities and constraints of computer tech­
nology, and we as designers learned about the work of the 
craft or profession in question. Initially the group worked 
with building up a mutual understanding of the specific 

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

377 

labor processes of the profession, of the design situation, 
and  of  the technical possibilities and limitations. Apart 
from  discussions,  visits  to  workplaces  with  different 
'generations' of  technology as well as visits to  research 
laboratories and vendors proved to be important early ac­
tivities in the mutual learning process. 

However,  as  mentioned  in  chapter 13,  Case  II: The 
UTOPIA Project, we, as designers, ran into severe difficul­
ties-with  regard  to  communication  with  the  graphic 
workers and with regard to really designing artifacts for 
skilled  work —  when  at the  beginning of  the  project  we 
used traditional design artifacts like data or information 
flows in  designing computer artifacts for page make-up. 
It was also described  how  the situation drastically  im­
proved  when  we shifted  towards a design-by-doing  ap­
proach. With the vise of  mock-ups and  other prototyping 
design artifacts the skilled workers could actively partici­
pate in the design process, expressing their craft skills, in 
the design process, by actually doing page make-up. 

In a  philosophical frame one can say that we came to 

reject the rationalistic and dualistic Cartesian design ap­
proach of descriptions based on a picture theory of reality. 
The basic design strategy was no longer one of correct de­
scriptions of  the user's skill and  practice as a  basis for 
formal descriptions of the correct design by a rational ob­
serving designer, but one of shared doing both design and 
page make-up. The main emphasis was instead on a mu­
tual learning process resembling the traditional master-
apprentice relation in a double sense. As designers we had 
to learn  practically from the skilled graphic workers do­
ing page  make-up. As  users participating in  the design 
process, the graphic workers had to learn from us as more 
experienced in design of computer artifacts. The  funda­
mental problem was to establish a context in  which this 
shared practice could be cultivated. The use of  mock-ups 
and other prototyping design artifacts helped in shaping 
this context. 

The philosophical foundation for such a design strategy 

has been discussed at length, in Part I on Design Philoso­

378 

Designing  for Skill 

phy, both as a Heideggerian approach and as a Wittgen-
steinian approach.2 

In  summary,  the Heideggerian  approach  provided  a 
basis for understanding human use of  artifacts as a  pre-
reflective involved  everyday activity, and design-by-doing 
as a process of anticipation of future use situations based 
on the dialectics  between support  for the users' gaining 
ready-to-hand  practical experience of  using their 'future' 
artifacts, and support for creative breakdowns as a means 
for present-at-hand  reflections of the desirability of diffe­
rent alternatives. The Wittgensteinian approach provided 
a basis for understanding design-by-doing as a language-
game. The  users can  participate in  this language-game 
because it has  family  resemblance  with  the language-
games played in their ordinary use situations. And by ac­
tually doing, for example,  page make-up they can  make 
use of their practical understanding in the design process. 
Design-by-doing becomes a language-game  in which the 
users  learn  about  possibilities  and  constraints of  new 
computer artifacts that may become part of  their future 
ordinary  language-games.  Users  learn  from  designers 
how to  participate in the language-game of design. How­
ever, to create  a  language-game  of  design-by-doing de­
signers have to learn a great deal from the users. 

In design-by-doing the traditional division of the design 
process into an application-oriented phase (carried out by 
application-oriented  designers) followed  by a computer-
oriented phase (carried out by computer-oriented design­
ers) also becomes problematic. The designer must be able 
to organize the design process, to master design artifacts 
for dealing with work organization, to contribute to edu­
cation and training, etc. But this cannot be done in a first, 
isolated  phase. Hardware  considerations play an impor­
tant role even in  the initial stages  of  design. The com­
munication  with  the  graphic  workers  about  existing 

2 See chapter 2, Existential  Phenomenology -A Heideggerian 
Approach and chapter 3,  Language-Games - A Wittgensteinian 
Approach. 

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

379 

technology, for example display resolution, response times 
and interaction devices, in  the beginning of  the design 
process, was of major importance in our design of the tools 
for page  make-up. Hardware considerations have  to  be 
dealt  with in  parallel  with  the software  design  consid­
erations in all stages of a design project, thus supporting 
the generation of  new ideas. We found  the use of simple 
mock-ups highly  useful in  this process,  but obviously in 
terms of  performance such  mock-ups have many limita­
tions. By being non-computer-based, however, they can be 
very  useful  in  highlighting limitations of  current, and 
future, computer technology. 

A Tool Perspective Use Model 
for Page Make-Up 
As pointed out, the opportunity for the users to relate these 
computer-based tools to their experience and knowledge is 
an important prerequisite for making computer artifacts 
applicable as tools in a labor process. To facilitate this we 
did in the UTOPIA  project design what we (with a badly 
chosen label) called use models.3 We developed use models 
for tools for page make-up and image processing.4 The use 
models  relate the use of  the computer-based  tools to the 
use of the users' traditional tools. The use models were in­
tended to encourage the graphic  workers to  apply expe­

3 The concept use model was inspired by Newman, W. and 
Sproull,  R.:  Principles of  Interactive  Computer Graphics, Mc­
Graw-Hill, Tokyo 1979. For a detailed discussion about use mo­
dels, see  Kammersgaard, op. cit. For a  parallel discussion of user 
models, mental models, and design models in the context of 
cognitive science see Norman, D.: 'Cognitive  Engineering* in 
Norman, D.  and Draper, S.  (eds.): User Centered  System Design, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986. 
4 See Ehn, P. et al.: Datorstödd Ombrytning, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1985, Frenckner, K. and Romberger, S.: 
Datorstödd  Bildbehandling, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1985, and Ehn, P. and Sundblad, Y. (eds.): Kravspeci­
fikation  for datorstödd  bildbehandling och ombrytning, Swedish 
Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1983. 

380 

Designing  for Skill 

rience, knowledge and skills from working with the old 
technology  when  designing  and  using  computer-based 
tools for newspaper production. 

The  idea  can  be  interpreted  in  our  Wittgensteinian 
language  of  language-games  and  family  resemblance. 
The practices of  users and designers are different. A use 
model is a means to bridge this gap, in design, as well as in 
use, of the artifact being designed. The user is experienced 
in his or her work, and knows how to play the language-
games in the work or use situation. Similarly, professional 
designers are experienced in the language-games  of  de­
sign. Both aspects are important. The way we learn the 
practice  of  new  language-games  is  by  participating in 
them, and  by  their family  resemblance  with other lan-
guage-games we are familiar with. 

A use model may be seen as a 'dramatic context' based 
on the professional language related to the labor processes 
in question, enhanced with new concepts developed from 
possibilities and restrictions of the new technology being 
used and of  external metaphors. It is proposed  that this 
model be instrumental in supporting family resemblance 
between the language-games of design, education and use. 
In design a use model should support communication 
between users and designers, and the design of functio­
nality and user interface of the computer computer arti­
fact. In the UTOPIA project the use models for page make­
up and image processing evolved in our use of mock-ups. 

In education  a  use  model  should  support  activities 
aiming at enhanced competence as practical  understan­
ding.  The  textbooks  on  computer-based  page  make-up 
and image processing that we wrote in the UTOPIA project 
were, for example, based on our use models.6 

In use a use model should support the user's ready-to-
hand focus on the work, making the artifact 'transparent' 
(preventing breakdowns like technical distortions). 

A way of expressing the relations between the design of 

tools and a vise model is to say that the use model consti­

5  Ehn, et al., op. cit., and Frenckner and Romberger, op. cit. 

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

381 

tutes a useful context for understanding computer-based 
tools as reminders of  traditional ones. In design of  com-
puter-based tools we not only design the new tools, we also 
design the material  for the skilled  worker to work  with. 

Below I will give a summary of the tool perspective use 
model for page make-up that we designed in the UTOPIA 
project. However as a  necessary background  I will first 
make a few comments on traditional tools and computer-
based systems for this labor process.6 

Tools  for  Page  Make-Up 
Page  make-up  is  the  process  by  which  full  newspaper 
pages are made up of material such as articles, pictures, 
advertisements, frames, and lines. 

Seen in a historical  perspective three different  page 
make-up technologies can be distinguished according to 
the material with which the make-up person works. 

In the first generation technology the make-up person 
works with tangible material in the form of types, clichées, 
and  printing  blocks  originally  made  of  wood,  later  of 
metal. This technology has its roots in sixth century China 
and mid-fifteenth century Europe (Gutenberg). The ma­
terial is put together in a form which is later used in the 
printing process. The tools employed, such as the com­
posing stick and the bodkin, were, like the material itself, 
tangible. 

In the second generation  the material is paper-based, 
and  the form is replaced  by a  paper  page  ground  onto 
which the material is pasted. Text, headlines, and galleys 
are produced  on photographic paper by  means of  a pho­
tosetter. Images are half-tone paper photographs, and the 
graphic materials are  tape rules, dry  transfer symbols, 
half-tone boxes, etc. The  original  make-up is photogra­
phically transferred to printing plates. This technology, 
which became common in the 1960s, is based on the app­
lication  of  computer-based  text  processing  and  offset 

6 The presentation of our tool perspective use model for page 
make-up is based on Ehn, et al., op. cit. 

382 

Designing  for Skill 

printing technology.  The  most  important  tools  are  the 
knife and wax. 

In the early 1980s, a third generation technology was 
on its way. The material and form are no longer tangible, 
but are presented as reminders on the display of a com­
puter workstation. The  tools are  more  abstract: with  a 
pointing device the worker can move a cursor on the dis­
play, choose part of or the entire material, and by means of 
buttons indicate what is to be done with the chosen ma­
terial. 

Thus  the  production  process  for  page  make-up  has 
changed from working with concrete, tangible material to 
working with reminders on a display. The stability which 
characterized the first  generation technology in the form 
of a limited choice of type sizes and exactly horizontal and 
vertical texts, columns, and lines, has  not  always been 
considered in the more flexible second generation techno­
logy,  where it is far easier  to  make  errors in  matching 
type sizes and mounting horizontally and vertically. 

Our ideal in the UTOPIA project was a computer-based 
tool kit that combined the strengths of the earlier techno­
logies and avoided their weaknesses, and at the same time 
utilized new technological possibilities for improving pro­
duct quality. 

We envisioned  a design  which was based  on the follo­
wing: When  making up a page on a graphic display, the 
page displayed  on the screen should  remind the user as 
much as possible of the final  printed page, and  the work 
should consist of using tools for placing and adjusting the 
material until a satisfactory result is obtained. The make­
up person should, in principle, work in the same way as in 
paper paste-up. Another important  consideration was to 
exploit the possibilities for supporting the advantages of 
both lead  composing (firmness of  typography) and  paper 
paste-up (flexibility).  Designed for skilled  graphic work­
ers, these computer-based  tools should facilitate and en­
courage the graphic workers to fully  use their creative 
abilities. 

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

383 

However, even the best current technology had its lim­
itations where for example graphic  displays are concer­
ned: 
•  they  emitted  light  rather than  reflected  it as  paper 

•  they were too small to reproduce a whole page in natu­

pages do; 

ral size; 

•  their resolution was too poor to make the body text legi­

ble in its natural size. 

To take an example: Imagine the resolution necessary to 
show a full  page of a newspaper in A2-format (560x410 
mm)  in  photosetter  quality  (typically 1500  points  per 
inch) on  the display.  A  27" display with 34,000x25,000 
pixels would  be necessary. Imagine further that the dis­
play has a refresh  rate of 100 Hz to eliminate flicker. To 
control the display a memory of 1 Gbit would be needed 
and each pixel should  be processed in approximately 10 
picoseconds. Available processors were at least 100 times 
too slow, and  the best available 'high  resolution' raster 
displays  had  a  resolution  of  approximately 1400x2000 
pixels on a 19' display. As the comparison shows the use of 
modern computer-based technology could  mean a drastic 
reduction of quality as compared with the traditional pa­
per paste-up technology for page make-up. 

The question was whether these drawbacks  could  be 

counterbalanced by new possibilities, such as: 
•  changes in  typography  and  graphic material  may  be 
executed more easily later in the process, and carried 
out faster; 

•  the relative ease of changing the typography  and the 
graphic design makes it possible to try several alterna­
tives in a short time; 

•  the ease of  changing the material makes it feasible to 
start making up the  pages at a  much earlier stage in 
the production, before all material is available, and then 
to successively complete and correct them; 

384 

Designing  for Skill 

•  the  positioning  can  be  made  more  precise — all  text 
may be set exactly horizontally; it is possible to get ex­
actly the same leading between all sections in the arti­
cle; the  material in  the surrounding columns can  be 
exactly aligned, etc. 

The tool  perspective use  model should  not only  be a  re­
minder of the users' ordinary work practice, it should also 
be both a way to overcome technical constraints imposed 
by  the computer technology, and  a way to envision  how 
new technical possibilities could be used. The use model we 
envisioned  should  technically  be  realized  on  a  graphic 
workstation  where  the  material  is  displayed  and  pro­
cessed on a high-resolution bit-mapped  display, and  the 
work is carried out by the make-up person using tools de­
signed as a combination of graphic operations and physi­
cal interaction devices. 

The Use  Model 
In the use model we imagined that page ground, menus, 
list of  material, and status  information are placed  on a 
desk. The desk also contains a work area. On the desk the 
make-up person works  with materials like articles, pic­
tures, logotypes, advertisements, frames, lines, etc. 

As it was not possible to show the whole desk on the dis­
play  (unless  the  page  was  considerably  reduced),  the 
make-up person will have to look at selected parts, which 
are  appropriately  enlarged  (or  reduced).  We  therefore 
imagined  that a  number  of  lenses  are at the  make-up 
person's disposal and through which different parts of the 
desk  can  be  viewed.  The  make-up  person  can  choose 
which lenses to put on the display. 

Each lens enlarges or  reduces according to  the scale 
employed. A limited number of scales should be available. 
These scales should be chosen so that each of the following 
criteria is met by at least one scale: 
•  the body text is easy to read: for precise allocation and 

changes in the text; 

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

385 

•  the material is shown in natural size: for assessment of 

optical and aesthetical balance; 

•  the whole  page can  be seen on  the display screen: for 

rough allocation; 

•  a miniature picture of the page: for guidance. 

Using fixed scales instead of a more or less continuous de­
gree of  enlargement helps the make-up  person estimate 
what the real page will look like. 

The interaction is supported by the following two capa­
bilities: The lenses can be directed at different parts of the 
page ground, work area, and  material; and the material 
visible through the lens can be moved in all directions. 

The  make-up  person  may  wish  to  work  on  several 

pages at the same time, for example to get a comprehen­
sive view of a spread, or an advertisement which fills  se­
veral  pages. Hence, several  pages can be  placed on  the 
desk so that the pages can be seen together through one or 
more lenses on the display. 

Naturally the lenses and the desk are reminders based 
on  metaphors  which  we  used  to conceptually  overcome 
the technical constraints of today's computer and display 
technology  which  prevent  the  make-up  person  from 
working directly on the full page in natural size and in full 
resolution. These aspects of the use model were necessary 
in order to ensure that certain possibilities for qualitative 
assessment  are  not  lost  in  the  computer-based  page 
make-up process. 

However, the imaginary tools called lenses are not just 
an impediment in the page  make-up process. They  help 
the make-up person keep in mind that what is seen on the 
display is not the final  page, but only a  reminder. The 
make-up person looks at the page through a lens which 
carries with it intentional and unintentional distortions. 
The make-up person must always have the final  page in 
mind. This is one of the reasons why the use model also 
includes facilities for getting proof-prints of the page as a 
basis for complementary assessment (for  example via  a 
laser-printer). 

386 

Designing  for Skill 

So far the desk and the lenses have been outlined. What 
about the tools for refining the material, for moving it, for 
measuring it, etc.? In the use model we imagined that tools 
for computer-based  page make-up are realized through a 
combination of general interaction devices and graphical 
operations as reminders of traditional make-up tools. 

As an example imagine that the make-up person is to 
pick up some material from the work area and place it on 
the page ground. He or she will point at the material with 
the pointing device, or rather, with the cursor which he or 
she controls with the pointing device. The  make-up per­
son will also indicate that he or she wishes to use a move 
tool.  Using  the  move  tool,  by  moving  one's  hand,  the 
make-up person controls  the positioning of  the material 
with the pointing device. 

The move  tool is an example of a  tool for  positioning 
material. The  material can  be  placed  anywhere on  the 
page ground or in the work area. 

Imagine, however,  that the make-up person wants to 
position a piece of text so that it exactly aligns with a col­
umn rule. Then  he or  she would, for example, with  the 
other hand use the support tool  for gravity  pointing. App­
lying this tool the make-up person has only to move the 
material close to the column rule. It will be 'sucked' into 
the exact  position. This is one of  the advantages of lead 
composing (firmness of typography) as opposed to paper 
paste-up. 

Using the other way around, we can imagine that the 
make-up person wants to position a piece of text to slightly 
overlap a logotype. He or she would than use a magnifying 
glass tool. When using the move tool to position the text on 
the logotype he or she looks at the text and the logotype 
'through' the  magnifying glass to see exactly  where  to 
place  it (thus  having  the flexibility  available in  paper 
paste-up). 

The  examples  illustrate  how  both  lead' and  'paper 
paste-up' aspects of  page make-up are envisioned in the 
use  model.  Another  aspect  of  the  use  model  for  page 
make-up that the examples illustrate is the importance of 

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

387 

the capability that allows the make-up person to use sev­
eral tools from the tool kit at the same time. 

We  envisioned  and  tried  to  implement  the following 

types of computer-based tools for page make-up: 
•  tools for selecting and  positioning the material. For ex­
ample tools for selecting, moving, column setting, con­
tour setting, centering, indenting, and leading. 

•  tools for support  for  page make-up. For example  tools 
for gravity pointing, aligning, magnifying, and various 
construction lines and construction points. 

•  tools for text  operations. For example for changing co­
lumn width, font and size; for kerning and letter spac­
ing; and, of course, for adding and deleting text. 

•  tools for picture operations. For example for changes of 

size of pictures and for cropping them. 

•  tools for make-up of advertisements. In addition to the 

'normal' make-up tools, tools for more imaginative ty­
pography like curve setting. 

•  tools for administrative operations. For example for al­
locating material from one page to another, for status 
information about pages and articles, and for request­
ing different types of proof prints. 

•  tools for controlling  desk' and 'lenses'. For example for 

directing, and changing size, of the lenses. 

•  tools for general support. For example for getting lielp' 
information, for 'undoing" mistakes, and for saving and 
later  resuming a  job  as it  was left.  Furthermore for 
furnishing' the desk with regard to display layout, type 
faces, scales, units of measurement, amount of help and 
status information, etc. 

The computer-based make-up tools can be designed to be 
extremely powerful in  the hands of a skilled  user. Well-
designed, they are founded upon a more than 500 year old 
tradition. Nevertheless, they are  new and  untested and 
need further elaboration. In our use model for page make­
up we have assumed that a large part of this can be done 
by the make-up person directly on the shop floor. At the 
least it must be possible to combine existing graphic tools 

388 

Designing  for Skill 

with personalized  tools which can be added to the opera­
tion menus or implemented as function keys. In the long 
run the make-up person  must have more advanced  pro­
gramming tools at his or her disposal to be able to modify 
existing  graphic  tools,  or  create  completely  new  ones. 
These are necessary tools for  our use model of  the com-
puter-based  page  make-up  desk  to  be  fully  realized, 
though we ourselves in cooperation  with a vendor  were 
unable to implement all of them. 

Summary 
Today  the design  of  a  tool-kit for  computer-based  page 
make-up like the one outlined  seems far from  Utopian. 
Several  professional  page  make-up systems, as well  as 
desktop publishing systems for  relatively small  compu­
ters, have many of the tools described, and support a work 
practice like the one suggested. This positive development 
was far from obvious for us when at the beginning of the 
1980s we  did our design in cooperation  between graphic 
workers  and  professional  designers.  In  fact,  the  main 
trend in the newspaper industry at that time was to de­
sign  computer-based  systems  that  deprived  graphic 
workers of  their skills, which  meant an acceptance of  a 
impoverished product quality. 

I can see several reasons for this change. One obvious 
reason is economic. There have been drastic reductions in 
the cost for the computer  technology  required, and  with 
desktop  publishing reaching far  outside the newspaper 
industry  a  mass  market  for  standard  software  has 
emerged, thus reducing the programming costs. Sticking 
to the economic arguments, it also seems, as was discussed 
in Part III on Designing  for Democracy, that there for the 
time being is a changing managerial rationalization atti­
tude suggesting that the skilled worker might be the most 
profitable one. 

Other reasons have more to do with changes in design 
practice. Of  course, the UTOPIA project was far from the 
only design  group  that had  learned  from  paradigm ex-

The 'Tool  Perspective' 

389 

amples in the history of  designing computer artifacts as 
tools.7 Finally, the best systems for computer-based page 
make-up on the market today, have, as the case was with 
the UTOPIA  project, been designed in close  cooperation 
with skilled graphic workers. 

In summary  the observations  on design  of  computer-
based tools for page make-up in the UTOPIA  project may 
be formulated as the following reminders: 
•  Designing  advanced  computer  artifacts  for  skilled 

work based on skilled work is a possibility. 

•  Important aspects of labor processes, in relation to de­

sign of  computer artifact, neither can nor  have to be 
formally described. 

•  Design should be done with users, not just for them. 
•  Mutual learning should  be  an important  part  of  the 

work in a design group. 

•  Design-by-doing and the design of use models are ways 
of making it possible for visers to utilize their practical 
skills in design and use. 

•  Hardware should be considered early in the design, in 

parallel with software, not after. 

•  The tool perspective is not such a bad idea. 
In the three coming chapters of this part some light will be 
shed on several of these reminders. 

7  Such examples will be discussed in chapter 17, The 'Toolness' of 
Computer  Artifacts. 

Chapter 16 
Tools 

The craft ideal is often upheld as the antithesis of using 
computers. A  representative craftsman's view was given 
by  Tomas Temte at a  research symposium, some  years 
ago,  addressing the  question: Is  the  computer  a  tool?. 
Tempte stated:1 

I am a master cabinet-maker in Stockholm, and have 
worked in the trade for 19 years. (...) For a craftsman, a 
tool is an object which is used to fashion raw material 
into a more refined product. By its weight, its hardness 
or  its sharpness,  the  tool  creates a  more  refined  or 
practical product. The tool is a necessary condition for 
material  production. For thousands of  years, the tool 
has  been  wielded  by  the worker's hand, but often in 
combination  with a  machine. The lathe is  one of  the 
oldest machines in history. With it, the tool could both be 
incorporated  into  a  machine  and  be  guided  by  the 
worker's hand (...) Today, I believe that the lathe is un­
dergoing its ultimate development. Numerical control, 
which is programmed in the computer, is the most that 
can be done with this mechanical device. In practice, 
the craft of lathe work will disappear with this genera­
tion  of  craftsmen.  As  a  craftsman,  I cannot  see  the 
computer as a tool based on what I have demonstrated 
and presented  with my assistants. Not in any sense at 
all. 

1  Tempte, T.: 'Is the Computer a Tool? — A  Craftsman's View' in 
Sundin, B. (ed.) Is the Computer a Tool?, Almqvist & Wiksell, 
Stockholm 1980, pp. 64,69. 

Tools 

391 

Let me state our position, in the UTOPIA project, regarding 
a tool  perspective clearly. We did  not, without qualifying 
the statement,  claim  that a  computer artifact is a tool. 
What we considered was whether the craft design process 
and  craft  use  of  tools  could  be  used  as  prototypical 
examples  for good  design. In the UTOPIA project we found 
strong support for such an ideal in practice. Below I will 
elaborate this position  as a 'conversation' with  different 
views I have found in the literature. 

First I will 'define' computer artifacts as tools proper, 

distinguishable from our other  privileged human instru­
ments. Then  I will  discuss some  criteria for good  tools. 
Next, relations between computer artifacts, machines and 
traditional tools are considered. This includes a discussion 
of 'autonomous machines' from the clock to the computer, 
and some  reflections on  'intelligent tools'. An ideological 
and technical critique of computer artifacts understood as 
tools is then considered. Finally, I also discuss alternatives 
to a tool perspective, like the design ideal of computer ar­
tifacts as playful 'postmodern' media. 

The Computer is a Tool 
Body, Language, Institutions, and Tools Proper 
To 'define' tools I will start at a most general level, distin­
guishing tools  proper from other human  instruments. In 
Teknokosmos  philosopher Ole Thyssen suggests such  a 
distinction, which is well in line  with the philosophical 
foundation of this book. He distinguishes four interrelated 
privileged  human  instruments — our  bodies,  our  lan­
guage, our social institutions, and our tools proper.2  We 
use them all in the social construction of reality. 

The first  privileged instrument is our body. It is not an 

artifact in the sense that it is man made, nor is it a physi­
cal  machine.  But  we  change  through  practice,  and  we 

2 Thyssen, O.: Teknokosmos - om  teknik  og  menneskerettig-
heder, Gyldendal, Viborg 1985, pp. 17-29. 

392 

Designing  for Skill 

certainly  use  our  cultivated  bodies.  Merely  think  of 
everything we do with our hands. 

Our second privileged instrument is our language. It is 
used  to  recreate  the  world,  for  communication  and  to 
carry our  consciousness. But  like our  bodies it did  not 
emerge as an artifact. We dwell in our language just as 
we are in our bodies. Our use of language is only possible 
within a certain form of life that sets conditions for our 
actions. But we certainly use language as an instrument. 
Our third privileged instrument is our social institu­

tions.  As with language we are born into them. But we can 
also recreate them and use them to achieve certain ends. 

The forth privileged instrument is the tool proper. It is 
physically objectified  work and  knowledge, dead labor in 
Marxist terminology. In contrast to the other three privi­
leged  instruments  all  tools  are  designed,  constructed, 
maintained, and redesigned. Obviously computer artifacts 
are tools in this fourth sense. The question is: What kind of 
tools can they be designed to be? 

When asking that question it should  be kept in mind 
that design and use of tools in this sense is interrelated to 
the other instruments: our bodies, our languages, and the 
social institutions that we live in. In the context of Part I 
on Design  Philosophy, the Heideggerian  approach con­
cerns use of tools as our existential condition, and how we 
practically understand the world.  In design  we are con­
cerned with intentional and unintentional breakdowns of 
understanding and use of these tools. In the Marxist ap­
proach we are concerned with design and use of tools in 
labor processes, as purposeful work activity transforming 
objects of work by the use of tools. We are interested in the 
design labor process and how it is related to the use labor 
process. Finally, in the Wittgensteinian approach we are 
interested in the same relation. Here we are interested in 
the language-games  of design and  use, not of  the labor 
processes. But practical understanding of the use of tools is 
just as fundamental. I think it can be justified to suggest 
that all three approaches are concerned  with the use  of 
tools as fundamental to human  practice, but with diffe­

Tools 

393 

rent weight and  emphasis on  the tools, our  bodies, our 
language and our social institutions. 

However, in asking the question of what kind  of tools 
computer artifacts can and should be designed to be, the 
tool  perspective focuses on  a specific kind  of  tools - the 
tools of craftsmen. To investigate this ideal I will look into 
the relation  between tradition based  technically simple 
hand tools, and complex natural science and engineering-
based machines. However, first  I will make a comment on 
what a good tool might be. 

Transparent Tools 

When we use a hammer to drive a nail, we attend to 
both nail and hammer, but in a different way. (...) The 
difference may be stated by saying that the latter [i.e. 
hammers] are not, like the nail, objects of our attention, 
but instruments of  it. They are not  watched in them­
selves; we  watch something else while keeping inten­
sely aware of them. I have a subsidiary  awareness of 
the feeling in the  palm of  my  hand  which is merged 
into my focal awareness of my driving the nail.3 

This comment by Michael Polanyi, the philosopher of tacit 
knowledge, is fundamental to my understanding of what 
is characteristic of a good tool. It is something that, when 
we have the skill to handle it, is transparent to us; some­
thing that lets us have  focal awareness on the task  or on 
the material we are working with. A good tool becomes an 
extension of our bodies. Or even, as Polanyi puts it, 'we 
pour ourselves out into them and assimilate them as parts 
of  our  own  existence.  We  accept  them  existentially by 
dwelling in them.'4 

3 Polanyi, M.: Personal  Knowledge, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
London 1973, p. 55. 
4 Ibid., p. 59. According to Polanyi this is also the case with 
'intellectual tools', and an argument is that 'when we accept a 
certain set of pre-suppositions and use them as our interpretative 
framework, we may be said to dwell in them as we do in our own 
body. Their uncritical acceptance for the time being consists in a 

394 

Designing  for  Skill 

But there is also a fundamental risk inherent in good 
tools and skillful use of them. They  not only strengthen 
our instrumental abilities, they  also make  us extremely 
dependent  on them, and  weakened  without  them. What 
can a blind man do without his stick, or a carpenter with­
out his hammer? This risk of being weakened is more se­
vere using computer artifacts instead of  traditional ma­
chine-tools,  no  matter how  tool-like  the  computer  arti­
facts may be designed to be. 

Tools for graphic work is a good illustration. The tradi­
tional typographical tools were not changed for long peri­
ods. The  tools you  learned to use as an apprentice were 
something you  could  be quite certain of  using also  as a 
journeyman or  master for  the rest of  your working life, 
and  you knew how  to make, repair and  maintain them. 
Even with the best tool-like designed  computer artifacts 
for graphic work  you  can  have  no such expectations. A 
computer-based  system  remaining  without  changes  for 
ten years, is more  than you  can expect. To  survive as a 
skillful tool-user of  computer artifacts  you have to adapt 
to changes, not  just get  more  experienced  with the  tools 
you already know. 

Tools for Conviviality 
Ivan  Illich, the  well  known  critic  of  our  contemporary 
technological society, argues that most industrial tools to­
day  deny the users the opportunity to invest the world 
with  his or  her  own  meaning,  allowing designers - not 
users - to  determine  the  meaning  and  expectations  of 
others. He argues that we need tools for conviviality.5 

Tools foster conviviality to the extent to which they can 
be easily used, by anybody, as often or as seldom as de­
sired, for the accomplishment  of a  purpose chosen  by 
the user. The use of such tools by one  person does not 
restrain another from using them equally. They do not 

process of assimilation by  which we identify ourselves with them.' 
(Ibid., p. 60.) 
5 Illich, I.: Tools  for Conviviality, Calder & Boyars, London 1973. 

Tools 

395 

require previous certification  of  the user. Their  exis­
tence does not impose any obligation to use them. They 
allow the user to express his meaning in action. 

According to Illich most hand tools, like primitive ham 
mers, good  modern pocket knives or pedal-driven sewing 
machines, lend themselves to convivial use. However, it is 
not in principle a question of level of technology. The tele­
phone is an example from the other end of the scale. 

Tool for conviviality could be a strong candidate as an 
ideal  for  work-oriented  design  of  computer  artifacts. 
Hence, it is important to notice the difference between this 
ideal, and  the ideal of  powerful skill-enhancing tools for 
skilled workers advocated by a tool perspective. The latter 
tools are not convivial in the sense that they are designed 
to be easily used by anybody as often or seldom as desired. 
They are not 'user-friendly' in general, but requires spe­
cific skills to be used, like extensive typographic skill to op­
erate a computer artifact for page make-up. In this sense 
they lack in conviviality by becoming the monopoly of one 
profession, no matter how well designed they are to let the 
user have focal awareness on making up the page. 

However, what Illich seeks is not total abandonment of 
these kind of  tools, 'but the balance between those tools 
which create the specific demands they are specialized to 
satisfy and  those complementary, enabling tools  which 
foster self-realization.'6 

I find,  taking design of  computer artifacts for graphic 
production as  my example, that there is a  need for  tools 
both for typographically highly skilled workers to produce 
high quality products, and for more casual use that does 
not  require previous certification of  the user, like some 
tools for  elementary desktop publishing. In both cases I 
find the ideal of self-realization just as important. 

386 

Designing  for Skill 

Tools, Machines and Computer Artifacts 
Let  me  recapitulate  the  characteristics  of  design  and 
computer artifacts discussed in an earlier chapter. I out­
lined design as a concerned social and historical activity in 
which artifacts and their use are anticipated, an activity 
and form of knowledge that is both planned and creative, 
and that deals  with the contradiction  between tradition 
and transcendence. It was also suggested that in designing 
artifacts we should  consider  them as mediating instru­
mental  and/or  communicative  activities;  as supporting 
individual and/or  cooperative  activities; as  augmenting 
and/or replacing human activities; as function and form 
that are irrevocably interconnected. Furthermore, com­
puter  artifacts  are  based  on  a  material  or  medium -
computers having a specific  capacity for symbol manip­
ulation - that can be shaped quite flexibly with regard to 
the different  activities and  aspects summarized  above. 
Thus, a special characteristic of computer artifacts seems 
to  be the kind of  reminders they  can be designed  to be. 
These reminders may be in the tradition of the use of ar­
tifacts in a specific use activity, or they may transcend it. 

In short: computer artifacts are what they are used for, 
but they can also be designed  as the reminders we want 
them to be. Below  I will  argue that no matter how com­
plex computers are, these characteristics make it possible 
for us to design computer artifacts as reminders of  craft 
tools, and  I will  try to show  which implicit and explicit 
values, both  intended and  unintended, such a tool ideal 
carries. 

From Craft Tools to Computer Artifacts 
The craftsman and his tools are to a great extent the epi­
tome of the traditional pre-industrial society. These tools 
like hammers, planes, wrenches, saws and  braces were 
designed based on traditional knowledge, and on practical 
understanding.  They  were  often  specialized,  like  the 
blacksmith's sledge  hammer, shoeing hammer, and  ball 
peen  hammer, or  the cooper's  heading knife,  hollowing 

Tools 

397 

knife and jigger, but they kept basically the same shape, 
form and  function for centuries. From the Middle Ages 
until the era of industrialization the tools of a carpenter or 
a smith  did  not undergo any  radical changes.  New tools 
were basically designed because of the appearance of bet­
ter materials or the development of  new crafts for which 
tools different from the ones already existing were needed. 
Practical experience and socialization into traditional 
values are how use of craft tools is learned. The craftsman 
controlled his individual labor process. His skill in using 
the tools  and in understanding the material he shaped 
was  of  ultimate  importance.  The  skill  of  the user  was 
what made the tool, both in use and in design. 

This skill and the quality  of  the products were guar­

anteed by the function of the craft guild. It controlled, if, 
and when, a man could become an apprentice. It used ex­
aminations to ensure that the apprentice by education and 
training had acquired journeyman skills. Then the jour­
neyman had to travel far and wide for perhaps five years 
to work with masters of  the trade in different places and 
even foreign countries, before he could produce a master­
piece to get his mastership diploma and be his own master. 
This work was carefully examined by the guild-master. 

Via the travels of  the  journeymen new tools and the 
practical understanding of  how to work  with them were 
learned and spread far around, and  there was an accu­
mulation of new knowledge about tools and their use. 

But the guild had on the other hand a very conservative 
influence on changes in tools, in  ways of  designing and 
using them. When a journeyman in  his work to achieve 
his mastership diploma designed his tools, they had to be 
just as the guild-master prescribed.7 With craftsmanship 
followed  high skill in design and  use of  tools, and  high 
standards for quality of products, but there was from the 
guilds a strong resistance to changes,  that only to some 

7 A description of the development from hand tools to industrial 
robots can be found in Strandh, S.: Maskinen genom, tiderna, 
Nordbok, Gothenburg 1979, especially chapter 3. 

398 

Designing  for Skill 

extent was balanced by the diffusion of new tools and their 
use caused by the travels of the journeymen. 

When I argue for a tool perspective for design and use 
of computer artifacts I do that with an emphasis on the 
role of skill, practical understanding, and quality of prod­
ucts, the mastery of  the tools,  the transparency of these 
tools, and the sensitiveness for tradition in design and use 
of these tools, not the conservative resistance to change. It 
is the contradiction between tradition and transcendence 
which I find fundamental to design. 

With the industrial revolution of  the nineteenth cen­
tury traditional craft tools started to be  replaced by ma­
chines, though machines like the lathe or the drill had ex­
isted long before. Machines as opposed to traditional tools 
were to a greater and greater extent based on detached 
theoretical  understanding,  and  were  much  more  com­
plex. 

A craft tool is 'transparent' to a user that knows what it 
is intended for. This is far from obvious in the case with a 
complex  machine.  However,  as  Lewis  Mumford  has 
pointed out in his classical study of Technics and Civiliza­
tion:8 

the essential distinction between a machine and a tool 
lies in the degree of independence in the operation from 
the skill and motive power of the operator: the tool lends 
itself to manipulation, the machine to automatic action. 
Given these 'definitions' of tools and machines, computer 
artifacts take a peculiar position. On the one hand they 
are obviously  machines: once started  they can  perform 
automatic actions. They are the automatic machine  par 
excellence. On  the other hand, we can design computer 
artifacts for the most skillful tool use. Or at least as re­
minders of such. 

The prototypical example for such an understanding of 
computer artifacts as tools is in a way neither the hand 

8  Mumford, L.: Technics and  Civilization, Harcourt Brace  Jo-
vanovich, New York 1934, p. 10. 

Tools 

399 

tool  nor the automatic machine. It is the machine-tool, 
like the lathe or the drill. 

We  can  design  computer artifacts that  remind  us of 
traditional machine-tools. The question is whether it is a 
good design ideal, and how far we can develop this famil­
iarity in specific  language-games of  use. To shed some 
light on  these questions  I will further investigate a few 
more aspects of tools, and what it means to use them. 

Prosthetic Tools and Autonomous Machines 
In 1976 Joseph Weizenbaum published Computer  Power 
and  Human Reason,9  a milestone in the humanistic cri­
tique of  contemporary  use of  computer artifacts. Accor­
ding to Weizenbaum there are two basic kinds of tools or 
machines. He calls them prosthetic tools and autonomous 
machines.10 This is a most important distinction for design 
of computer artifacts. 

Prosthetic tools add functional capacity to the human 
body. Some  of them are virtually  prostheses of  physical 
power, like a lever or a steam shovel. Others extend our 
physical  reach, like a spear or a radio. Still others are ex­
tensions of our sensory apparatus, like a microscope, a te­
lescope and various measuring instruments. 

Autonomous  machines  are  intellectual  tools.  Once 

started they  run by themselves on  the basis of an inter­
nalized model of some phenomena in the world. They are 
reminders and  paradigm  cases  in  the  Wittgensteinian 
sense: they  make us think  of something we already are 
familiar with. 

The Clock  and  the Computer 
To date, the most important autonomous machine in our 
culture is the clock. It neither extends our physical power 
or reach, nor our senses. It is a reminder or a 'use model' 

9 Weizenbaum, J.: Computer  Power and  Human Reason - from 
judgment  to calculation, W.H. Freeman and Company, San 
Fransisco 1976. 
1° Ibid., pp. 20-25. 

400 

Designing  for Skill 

of the planetary system. Its products are hours, minutes, 
seconds, or even pico-seconds, as a basis for predictions. 
Lewis Mumford calls the clock, not the steam engine 'the 
key  machine of  modern  industrial age.'11  The first 'mo­
dern' clocks  were designed and  used in monasteries. In 
the fourteenth century the clock spread out of the monas­
tery, and in the words of Mumford,12 

the regular striking of the bells brought a new regula­
rity into the life of the workman and the merchant. The 
bells of the clock tower almost defined urban existence. 
Time-keeping  passed  into  time-serving  and  time-ac-
counting and time-rationing. 

In the same way the rationalization of the labor process in 
early industrial capitalism was characterized by 'scienti­
fic  management', the Taylor  system. It combined  accu­
rate  time  measurement  of  detailed  operations  of  the 
worker,  with deskilling division  of  labor, concentrating 
control in the hands of management.13 

But there is another aspect of the clock that is just as 

important. This autonomous  machine changed  our  rea­
lity from  reasoning based on practical and direct experi­
ence to reasoning from  an abstract  model. Weizenbaum 
writes:14 

It is important to realize that this newly created reality 
was and remains an impoverished version of  the older 
one, for it rests on a rejection of those direct experiences 
that formed the basis for, and indeed constituted, the old 
reality. The feeling of hunger was rejected as a stimu­
lus for eating; instead, one ate when an abstract model 
had achieved a certain state, i.e., when the hands of a 
clock pointed to certain marks on the clock's face (the 
anthropomorphism here is highly significant too), and 
similarly for signals for sleep and rising, and so on. This 

11  Mumford, L., op. cit p. 14. 
12 Ibid., p. 14. 
13 See the previous part on Designing  for Democracy at Work. 
14 Weizenbaum, op. cit., p. 25. 

Tools 

m 

rejection of direct experience was to become one of the 
principal characteristics of modern science. 

Computer  artifacts,  like  clocks,  are  autonomous  ma­
chines, only  much  more  general.  Not  only  can  they be 
used  to change our understanding of  the planetary sys­
tem, they can literally be designed to simulate and remind 
us  of  any  situation,  existing  or fictitious.  As  general 
autonomous machines they can be designed as reminders 
of craft tools, or any kind of prosthetic tool, just as well as 
artificial intelligence. The question is to what extent prac­
tical understanding of this new reality can substitute the 
former experience. That is a  context in which design of 
computer artifacts as tools for skilled work must be put. If 
we take the example with the computer-based tool kit for 
page make-up of  newspaper pages, it is obvious that the 
direct  experience  of  using  these  tools  is different  from 
working with  hot  metal or in paper paste-up. However, 
we cannot be sure that practical experience from this new 
situation is less useful for development of  typographical 
skills and  products of  good  quality. It may be true that 
signs on the display are all there is to work on, but these 
signs do not have to be numbers and formulas. They can 
be most various and interesting pictures or graphics that 
we  manipulate  with  most  of  our senses via  interaction 
devices. Certainly computer artifacts can be designed to be 
used as reminders of traditional tools. But there are also 
reasons to be skeptical to this 'toolness'. However, before 
exploring this skepticism, let me first consider the vision of 
computer artifacts as 'intelligent tools'. 

'Intelligent Tools'? 
I have earlier argued that good tools let the user retain fo­
cal  awareness  on  the  task  he  or  she  is  working  with, 
leaving only a subsidiary awareness of the tools. This re­
quires control over the tools. But what about 'intelligence' 
in the tools? 

Neither the problem of 'tool intelligence' nor the use of 
'intelligent tools' are  new phenomena, slavery being the 

402 

Designing  for Skill 

most inhuman  historic example  of  human  use of  other 
humans as 'intelligent  tools'.  Slaves seen  and  used  as 
'intelligent tools' by their oppressors could to some extent 
be  controlled  by  violence  and  ideology.  However,  this 
widely practiced  non-human use of  human beings as 'in­
telligent tools' later continued in the emerging capitalistic 
society. Here it took the (by then socially accepted) form of 
divided wage labor. However,  this human  use of  human 
beings represents a fundamental control problem for the 
oppressing 'owner' of the 'intelligent tools': He might get 
the commanded job done, better than he ever could have 
done  himself, but  he  lacks control  or  understanding of 
how  it is  done. The  human 'intelligent tools' are by  no 
means  transparent.  Taylorism  and  'scientific  manage­
ment' were  an attempt to regain this control and trans­
parency - on behalf of management. 

The history of  human use of animals as tools further 

demonstrates the conflict between control and 'intelligen­
ce'. Horses, camels and llamas were for  example prefer­
red to gorillas as means of transportation, despite the fact 
that gorillas are both stronger and more 'intelligent'. The 
obvious advantage of the horse over the gorilla is its 'tool-
ness' - the locomotive power of a horse can be pretty well 
controlled by human beings manually and continuously. 
But  certainly horses are more  'intelligent' than arti­

facts like cars. Still cars are preferred over horses. This is 
not only because of more horse-power, but also because of 
their superior 'toolness'. They are designed  to allow the 
driver full control. But could  not some  artificial intelli­
gence, compensating for driver inadequacies, be desirable 
for make driving a bit safer?16 

This is not the place to discuss the high hopes of artifi­

cial intelligence, but to address a practical question of the 

15 These examples of historical 'intelligent tools' are inspired by 
Ghandchi, H.  and  Ghandchi. J.: 'Intelligent Tools — The  Corner­
stone of a New Civilization' in The AI  Magazine, fall 1985. How­
ever, the authors' future prospects of artificial intelligence as a 
cornerstone of a new civilization is as far away as one can get 
from my basic ideas of work-oriented design of computer artifacts. 

Tools 

403 

toolness of computer artifacts: to what degree are we in­
terested in tools that do more than 'what they are told' to 
follow our intentions, or as it often is expressed as an in­
terface design ideal: tools that do what we mean, not what 
we say.16 

An illustration from  the UTOPIA  project's tool kit for 
page make-up is the use of gravity pointing when, for ex­
ample an article is placed on the page ground.17 The user 
just has  to place the article near the column line. Auto­
matically it aligns  with the column  line when the lead 
make-up' effect of gravity pointing is chosen. This is not 
magic to the user, because he or she can understand this 
feature from  the use model, and  can control whether to 
use this effect or not. 

A fancier example is an office information systems use 
model that Dionysious Tschritzis has called Objectworld,.1* 
Users  are seen  as controlling  independent  'knowledge 
bases'. In this world of knowledge bases there live animal­
like  knowledge  objects  known  as  Knos.  They  travel 
around  in  Objectworld  collecting and  disseminating in­
formation. Some of  them are specialized as carriers that 
move information around while leaving it intact, others as 
parasites  that follow  other  knos  to  collect  information 
from them, still others as hunters that move around and 
assemble  other  knos  that  have  gone  astray.  Knos  are 
understandable  for  the  user  from  the  use  model, 
Objectworld, but most of  them are not  under the user's 
control. 

There is a conflict between 'toolness' and 'intelligence', 
between control and automation. However, since the tool­
ness of computer artifacts is a designed reminder, there is 

16  Classical examples are  such as having the computer executing 
the right command, though it may be wrongly spelled. See e.g. 
Teitelman, W  and Masinter, L.: The  Interlisp Programming 
Environment' in Computer, April 1981. 
17 See the chapter on The Tool  Perspective'. 
18 Tsichritzis, D.: 'Objectworld' in Tsichritzis, D. (ed.): Office  Au­
tomation, Springer, Berlin 1985. 

404 

Designing  for Skill 

the opportunity  to design  more or less 'intelligent tools', 
trying to meet both the tool requirement for control and 
the 'intelligence' requirement for getting done what actu­
ally was intended. In this sense 'intelligent tools' may be 
designed  to  strengthen  rather  than  weaken  the  user's 
control.19 

In summary: the usefulness of  'intelligence' designed 
into a tool is a question of how well this 'illusion' supports 
the user's ultimate control, which in turn depends on how 
the 'intelligent tool' can be understood from the use model 
shaping the metaphorical understanding. 

The Computer is not a Tool 
Critique of Tool Ideology 
Now to the criticism of the toolness of computer artifacts. 
There is a point in Weizenbaum's earlier discussed argu­
mentation on tools that I have not mentioned so far. 

Once man could  kill another animal only  by crushing 
or tearing it with his hands; then he acquired the axe, 
the spear, the arrow, the ball fired from a gun, the ex­
plosive shell. Now charges mounted on missiles can de­
stroy mankind itself. That is one  measure of how far 
man has extended and remade himself since he began 
to make tools.20 

This illustrates an  obvious  risk  of  understanding com­
puter artifacts as tools. The computer as a tool metaphor 
may suggest that we are in control, whereas in reality we 

19  For similar views on tools and intelligence see Norman, D.: 
'Cognitive Engineering* in Norman,  D. and Draper, S. (eds.): 
User Centered  System Design, Lawrence  Erlbaum, London 1986, 
and Kay,  A.: 'Computer Software' in Scientific American, vol 251, 
no 3, September 1984. 
20 Weizenbaum, op. cit., p. 20.1 can only add that since direct ex­
perience is rejected, we can skillfully fire these deadly weapons, 
imagining that we are only fighting horrible creatures from outer 
space in a computer game. 

Tools 

405 

may be completely alienated and out of control. This illu­
sion of control has ideological significance. 

Art Historian Linda Gardiner Janik participated in the 

abovementioned  conference  which  addressed  the ques­
tion: Is the computer a tool?. In reflections over the contri­
butions she especially was struck by this ideological use of 
the tool metaphor. If the computer is not just a machine, 
but also a tool, then an emotive tone is added:21 

the concept of a 'tool' implies what I might call mere-
ness, a sense of the subordinate, the manipulable, the 
non-threatening or non-determining part of our world 
which  we  have made for our  ends and  can  therefore 
control. (...) What this usage suggests to me is that in 
asking whether computers are tools we are not talking 
specifically about computers at all, but more generally 
about all our  machines, especially  the  more  'autono­
mous' ones in Weizenbaum's sense; the oddness, in an 
everyday  context,  of  calling  an  oil-tanker,  a  guided 
missile or a computer a tool, derives not from the par­
ticular  characteristics  of  those  artifacts  but  simply 
from  the  tension  between  their extreme  mechanical 
complexity  and  the  contrasting  notions  of  technical 
simplicity  and  availability attaching to the ordinary 
concept of a tool. By calling such machines 'tools', we 
are in effect assuring each other that in spite of their 
complexity,  autonomy, and  unforeseeable social  con­
sequences, they are after all nothing but fancier kinds 
of canoe, spear or abacus. And this metaphorical exten­
sion of the concept of a tool is perhaps most attractive 
when in reality the machines in question are slipping 
out of our control to an ever greater extent. 

I find  Janik's critique striking, indeed, and  I  basically 
agree with it. The 'computer is only a tool' metaphor has 
the ideological function of reassuring us that our fears of 

21  Janik, L. G.: 'Some Reflections on the Topic of the Sigtuna 
Symposium' in Sundin, B. (ed.):  Is the Computer a Tool?, Alm-
quist & Wiksell, Stockholm 1980. 

406 

Designing  for Skill 

being controlled and  replaced by computers are  without 
grounds. This is one of the ways in which the 'computer is 
only a  tool'  metaphor  has become  an ideological  tool  of 
modern  capitalism  (for  example  turning our  attention 
away from  alienated  assembly-line  work  controlled  via 
computer-based  planning  systems,  or  unemployment 
tragedies caused by the introduction of labor saving com­
puter artifacts.) Another obvious use is as a sales argu­
ment  for  vendors  of  computer  artifacts  (regardless  of 
whether they in practice are tool-like or not). 

More generally  Weizenbaum has argued the ideologi­

cal aspect of tools, that we not only use them to transform 
our environment, but that they  also strongly  determine 
our understanding of the world and ourselves. In the era 
of  the computer,  cognitive  psychology  has transformed 
our brains into computers, and  our minds into informa­
tion  processing systems. This is a  later  version  of  the 
original Cartesian mind-body dualism, in which the mind 
became a ghost in  the machine. Before that God  was a 
craftsman. 

On what happens when we lose our tools Weizenbaum 

writes:22 

The  six-shooter  of  the  nineteenth-century  American 
West was known as the 'great equalizer*, a name that 
eloquently testifies to what that piece of hardware did to 
the  self-image  of  gun-toters  who,  when  denuded  of 
their weapons, felt themselves disadvantaged with re­
spect to their fellow citizens. 

This  example  could  easily  be  extrapolated  to  modern 
hardware such  as the desktop computer  of  middle  ma­
nagers today. And certainly, if we go back in time, depri­
ved of his tools, a craftsman was no one. 

Critique of Tool Rationality 
A  critique  similar  to Janik's  of  metaphorically  under­
standing computer artifacts as tools has been presented by 

22  Weizenbaum, op. cit., p. 19. 

Tools 

407 

the philosopher of science, Bo Dahlbom. However, he also 
argues that the tool metaphor is the fundamental meta­
phor of  the modern purposive rational society (a term he 
uses in Max Weber's sense of  'Zweckrationalität'). When 
computer artifacts are seen as tools, questions of  values 
and norms are reduced to second order. First value  neu­
tral tools are designed. Then it is instrumentally decided 
which values they should be used to control.23 

The understanding of  computers as tools that I have 
argued for is the opposite. The tool perspective as a design 
ideal emphasizes designing computer artifacts to support 
the  user's development  of skills and  the quality of  the 
product. If anything, the design ideal of a tool perspective 
is that of the traditional craft skills. More generally I ar­
gue that the role skill has in a tool perspective, and skill 
and democracy in work-oriented design design, is as con­
sciously  articulated  values  on  which  design  should  be 
based. This is what Dahlbom,  with  reference to Weber, 
calls  value  rational  action  ('Wertrationalitet').  I  agree 
with Dahlbom that a simple return to traditional values is 
no solution to the problems of the modern purposive ratio­
nal society, and that only approaches that explicitly deal 
with their own values, and use them as a basis for change 
of technology and organizations, can be a challenge to the 
modern society.  My  point is that the  tool perspective is 
such a humanistic value rational design principle. 

When, despite different kinds of  valid ideological cri­
tiques of understanding computers as tools, I keep insist­
ing  on  the  usefulness  of  a  tool  metaphor  as a  design 
perspective the argument  is not  that computer artifacts 
are craft tools proper. The argument is that we should be 
challenged to try to design computer artifacts as skill-en-
hancing tools for production of good use quality products 
and services, and to the extent that we find this impossible 
we should reflect over the obstacles and try to make them 

23 Dahlbom, B.: Humanisterna och Framtiden - fyra varianter 
över ett tema av  Max Weber, Department of Science, University of 
Umeå, Draft 1986, p. 56. 

408 

Designing  for Skill 

clear. At the same time, as part of a strategy for work-ori-
ented design we should fight  back against any ideological 
or commercial attempt to label computers as tools, where 
they in practice alienate our lives. 

Critique of Technical Lack  of Toolness' 
I now turn to a  more technical critique in arguing why 
computer artifacts not are tools. Such a critique has been 
articulated by Bernd Wingert and Ulrich Riehm.24 In ad­
dition to the kind of general use of the tool metaphor criti­
cized above, they find  a weak and a strong thesis propo­
sing that computer artifacts are tools. 

The strong thesis, which  argues  that computer  arti­

facts are the new tools, they  reject with reference to the 
sensuous control of the object being refined which is lost 
when a tool is replaced by a computer artifact. What you 
work  with is a  software  program  which  has a  complex 
structure that is strictly different from  physical objects. 
This difference is evident. 

The weaker thesis, which argues that computer  arti­

facts can be metaphorically designed so that working with 
them resembles work with tools, is of special interest here, 
since it is fundamental to the tool perspective. Wingert 
and  Riehm  reject  this  thesis  on  the  following  three 
grounds. 

Firstly, when  using computer  artifacts the user to  a 
great extent gives values to global parameters rather than 
performing the detailed operations - the operational  ac­
tivity is replaced by the computer artifact. My comment: 
This is  not that different from  preparing  materials, in 
work with traditional  tools. Furthermore, 'direct manip­
ulation' user interfaces provide a means to overcome this 
obstacle.25 

24  Wingert, B. and Riehm, U.: 'Computer als Werkzeug -
Anmerkungen  zu einem verbreiteten Missverständnis', in Ram-
mert, W.  et al. (eds): Technik  und  Gesellschaft, Jahrbuch 3, 
Campus Verlag, Frankfurt 1985. 
25 See the next chapter on The 'Toolness' of Computer  Artifacts. 

Tools 

409 

Secondly, what the user acts on is a piece of software, 
not  the 'real' object,  which instead is controlled  by  the 
software  and  produced  via  some  peripherals.  It is  the 
computer artifact, not the user, that  refines the object. 
This means that you to a large extent have to rely on trial 
and error procedures, hoping that the result will be good. 
My  comment: Trial  and  error  is also  common  in  work 
with traditional tools. It takes a long time before the user 
can see the result of many operations he or she performs 
with traditional tools on physical materials. But the more 
experienced the user becomes in vising specific tools and 
materials the  better he or she becomes in  knowing how 
the result will be. Just as when using computer artifacts, 
including their peripherals. 

Thirdly, no matter how well designed a computer arti­

fact is, what  the user interacts with and  gets feed-back 
from is a simulation, not the real object. Hence, the user 
can never be sure that the 'representation' on the display 
really has taken place. My comment: This is doubtless a 
fundamental difference for the user as compared to actu­
ally performing work on the ultimate object. However, in 
practice this situation may not be  too different from the 
one above. It is important to get feed-back not only of what 
happens on the display but also continuously from the ul­
timate results of the interaction. As the users get experi­
enced they will be quite good at predicting the results, even 
when the simulation suggests something slightly differ­
ent. Of course, there can be  major technical breakdowns 
where  the  user  keeps on  working in  good  faith,  while 
nothing happens but as reminding signs on  the display. 
This is a difference from traditional tools. 

The differences between traditional tools and even the 
most tool-like designed computer artifacts that Wingert 
and  Riehm  highlight  are fundamental  differences. The 
computer is not a tool in the same sense as a craft tool, and 
I agree that it is important to be aware of what is specific 
to computer artifacts. However, I see no fundamental ar­
gument why it should not be a good and in principle rea­
lizable  design  ideal to  metaphorically  design  computer 

410 

Designing  for Skill 

artifacts as tools for skilled work. These new 'tools' will be 
different from the traditional ones, and it will be different 
to work  with them. This difference may be in two direc­
tions, as with the tool  kit for  page make up that we de­
signed in the UTOPIA  project: not  only were the simula­
tions of some traditional tools pale copies, there were also 
some totally new, extremely useful and previously incon­
ceivable tools. 

Computers and Computer Artifacts as Media 
Finally, I will comment upon the view that computer ar­
tifacts not are tools, but media. I will suggest that rather 
than arguing the one view over the other we should con­
centrate on the productive relation between the two. 

Firstly, on  the most general tool level, where I have 
called the computer the material out of which we  design 
specific computer  artifacts, the computer is a  medium.26 
Computers are vehicles for signs just like books, gramo­
phone records, and other media are. But they are a differ­
ent kind of medium or material, that, due to the capacity 
for signal manipulation, can be designed to change opera­
tions according to our  interaction with them. Alan Kay 
has put it this way:27 

The protean nature of the computer is such that it can 
act like a machine or like a language to be shaped and 
exploited. It is a medium that can dynamically simulate 
the details of any other medium, including media that 
cannot exist physically. It is not a tool, although it can 
act like many tools. It is the first  metamedium, and as 

26 Peter B0gh Andersen has made interesting attempts on this 
level to replace the dominant information processing view with 
theory from traditional linguistics and semiotics focusing on both 
form and content of messages, and on the implied communica­
tion not only between users, but also between users and designers 
and programmers. See e.g.  Andersen, P.B.: Edb-teknologi  set  i 
medieperspektiv, University of Aarhus 1984. 
27 Kay, op. cit., p. 47. 

Tools 

411 

such it has degrees of freedom for representation never 
before encountered and as yet barely investigated. 

Secondly, since computers are media or materials we can 
deliberately design computer  artifacts as media (just as 
we can design them as craft tools). They can be designed 
as  media,  like  advanced  books,  as hypertexts,  as  mail 
handlers, as shared  materials for  planning, control  and 
coordination of activities, etc. 

The problem  with  the tool  perspective is that it may 
create a blindness towards the media  aspects of  use of 
computer artifacts. But I see no real contradiction. How­
ever, as an ideal for work-oriented design we then have to 
consider a media design ideal. Whereas the tool perspec­
tive has the skill of the user, the control of the tools, and the 
quality of the product as its design ideal, it seems with my 
frame of  reference reasonable to suggest  that the corre­
sponding media design ideal should be emancipatory dia­
logues free from coercion. Research on computer support 
for cooperation in small groups along such an ideal  has 
recently been emphasized. For example in our own efforts 
in Århus in a  recently established  research program for 
computer support for  cooperative design and communi­
cation we try to unite the skill ideal and the free dialogue 
ideal, seeing computer artifacts both as tools and as me­
dia.28 A reason for this is that even when we focus on de­
sign of  computer artifacts  as media,  these media  might 
best be operated with tools designed according to a craft 
tool ideal. 

However, computer artifacts are not only  designed as 
tools and media. The computer as a medium can also, for 
example, be designed into computer artifacts that appear 
as 'intelligent dialogue partners' using natural-like lan­
guage. Clearly we can design many aspects of this popular 
'illusion', but what can it accomplish but disillusion, if, or 

28 Andersen, P.B. et al.: Research  Programme  on Computer 
Support  for Cooperative  Design and  Communication, Department 
of Information Science and Department of Computer Science, 
University of Aarhus 1987. 

412 

Designing  for Skill 

when, the user finds out that the partner is a puppet on a 
string, and that someone unknown and invisible holds and 
control the string? Is this not in a way the ultimate alien­
ation of human beings, and a serious distortion of human 
communication?29 

There is, however, another  approach  to the design  of 
computer  artifacts  that  utilizes  the  computer  as  a 
medium to design computer artifacts as completely  new 
media, an approach  that  I find  most  interesting.  I  am 
thinking of  the design of computer artifacts as games or 
plays  where  the  user  is  the  main  actor  in  a fictitious 
'world' or context. As the dialogue partner design ideal it 
supports the idea of fictitious  characters. The big differ­
ence is that here the user knows that he or she is playing a 
game. This 'postmodern' media design approach supports 
an ideal of  fantasy, playfulness and sheer  fun, rather than 
emphasizing skill and free communication. Below I will 
exemplify this playful challenge to the more  serious de­
sign of  computer artifacts as traditional tools and  media 
for hard work. 

Computer Artifacts as Interactive Plays 
In Interfaces as Mimesis 30  Brenda Laurel, who has been 
involved  with  companies  developing  computer  games, 
gives an introduction to this 'postmodern'  media design 
ideal. 

Since  all  we  can  experience from  interaction  with  a 
computer artifact is simulations, why then not make the 
most out of the special characteristics of the computer as a 
medium? Why not try to design fictions that we really can 
experience? That is the question this design ideal focuses 
on. 

29 For a detailed critique of the dialogue partner model see B0dker, 
S.: Through the  Interface, Department of Computer Science, 
University of Aarhus, 1987, chapter 4. 
30  Laurel, B.K.: 'Interfaces as Mimesis' in Norman,  D.  and 
Draper, S. (eds.): User Centered  System Design, Lawrence Erl-
baum, London 1986. 

Tools 

413 

Laurel describe  her own  motives for such a  design as 
springing out  of  her  'impatience  with 'dumb' computer 
games, a fascination with the idea of 'interactive movies', 
and a perverse desire to become Captain James T. Kirk.'31 
If we see computer artifacts as plays then we focus on 
designing a 'world' that the user can virtually live in and 
commit him/herself to. As a user I know that when I enter 
this dramatic context or 'world' it is fictitious,  just as when 
I watch a play. As Laurel stresses:32 

I know that the people on the stage are actors and that 
the castle parapets are cardboard, but I choose, in order 
to have the pleasure of unencumbering emotional and 
rational participation, to suspend  that knowledge for 
the duration of the play. 

Computer artifacts as media can as an ideal be designed 
for such  pleasurable engagement, by  giving them a dra­
matic form like plays, with the intention to be acted out, 
rather than read as descriptions. Designing computer ar­
tifacts this way  becomes  a form  of  artistic imitation,  a 
mimesis, an art that has been studied and practiced from 
Aristotele's Poetics and onwards. 

But there are differences  between a play and a com­

puter artifact if  we compare a user with a member of  an 
audience. The latter can only marginally interact in the 
play (except in some avant garde plays), whereas compu­
ters as media lend themselves very well to design of such 
interaction. Computer artifacts can be designed as inter­
active  mimesis.  This  makes  possible  a  user-artifact/ 
'world' relation that Laurel calls first-personness. 

First-personness is a grammatical metaphor. It is the 

designed simulation of thrown activity of, for example at­
tending a meeting, wielding a hammer, or eating a meal. 
This is different from say how most  movies or novels are 
told. The viewer or  reader is often a  third-person entity 
outside the action. It is also different from say computer 

» Ibid., p. 85. 
32 Ibid., p. 76. 

414 

Designing  for Skill 

artifacts to which the user makes imperative statements 
and asks questions, and where the computer artifact as 
feed-back 'tells' the user what to do, and what it has done. 
This  is  second-personness.  First-personness  supports 
'direct awareness' of being in the fictitious 'world'.33 

This first-person  direct awareness not only requires a 
good plot, it also has to be supported by interaction devices 
that allow interaction in all relevant sensory modalities, 
for example physically pointing or speaking as opposed to 
typing, spatial and graphic reminders as opposed to tex­
tual ones. 

Laurel's suggestion is that in design of computer arti­

facts  we  use  the  principles  of  mimesis  and first-per­
sonness to 'indicate how the material and structure of a 
mimetic world  can be orchestrated to create  the experi­
ence we desire.'34 

Say we want to design a computer artifact to be an en­

cyclopedia, and use the principles of interactive mimesis. 
When looking  up the  word Hamlet, the  user would not 
read  about a prince of Denmark, but  experience a drama 
in Kronborg Castle. In the entry on ancient Egypt he or 
she would not look for information about pyramids, but "be 
climbing  them,  looking  around  their  musty  innards, 
reading hieroglyphs, or reincarnating pharaohs.'35 

What if the user looks up the word for a tool, for exam­

ple a hammer? Will he or she be able to use it? I think that 
it depends not only on if there is a dramatic context to use 
it in, but also on the user's skill. Laurel is very critical to 
the computer  as a  tool  metaphor, arguing that the tool 
comes in  between  the  user  and  the 'world',  preventing 
him or her from acting in it. I find  computer artifacts as 
interactive  plays supporting direct  awareness for  plea­
surable  engagement  a  most  challenging  design  ideal. 
However, with Polanyi's tool concept in mind, it becomes 

33 Principles for design of 'direct awareness' will be discussed in 
the next chapter on The 'Toolness' of  Computer Artifacts. 
34 Laurel, op. cit., p. 77. 
36  Ibid., p. 85. 

Tools 

415 

clear that there always is a price for direct awareness: we 
must by practical experience acquire the skills necessary 
to  have focal  awareness on  what  we  are doing, leaving 
only subsidiary awareness for the tool. This is the case 
when we use a hammer as well as when we use computer 
artifacts designed  as interactive  mimesis.  On the other 
hand, in design of computer artifacts as tools for skilled 
work we may benefit a great deal from design principles 
of computer artifacts as interactive plays. In a way a tool 
perspective is  just a special case of  designing computer 
artifacts as interactive plays - a case where the first-per-
sonness is carried out by a skilled tool user acting in a con­
text of  useful materials from which he or she can create 
good  use quality products. It is a challenge to design, to 
create such tools for  pleasurable engagement, tools that 
when used help the  user transcend the boredom  of  ma­
chine work. 

Summary 
In  this  chapter  I  have  discussed  the  consequences  of 
understanding computer  artifacts as  tools. I started  by 
distinguishing  tools  proper  from  other  human  instru­
ments - our body, our language, and  our social institu­
tions.  'Transparency'  and  'conviviality*  were  then  dis­
cussed as ideals for the design of tools. Differences between 
tools,  machines and  computer  artifacts  were  then out­
lined. The critique of  the ideology suggesting that 'the 
computer is only a tool', and the more technical  critique 
denying the 'toolness' of computer artifacts, were also dis­
cussed.  Finally,  the  complementary  understanding  of 
computer artifacts as media, especially in a 'postmodern' 
version, was highlighted. 

To sum up: I have tried to show how computer artifacts 
•  are tools proper in the general sense of being designed 

as means to an end, 

•  tools  proper  that  on  a  more  concrete  level  are  ma­
chines, in the sense that once started they perform au-

416 

Designing  for Skill 

tomatic action, and hence differ from simple hand tools, 
but that 

•  these machines metaphorically can be  designed  as re­

minders of traditional craft  tools for a specific craft or 
profession, just as well as they metaphorically can  be 
designed  as new  media, utilizing interactive hardware 
devices and the capacity of signal manipulation to cre­
ate these reminders, but that 

•  there also exists an ideological  use of  a tool  metaphor 
suggesting that we are in control of the development of 
the social, political and technical use of this technology, 
when in practice we may be more alienated than ever, 
and that this ideological use of the 'the computer is only 
a tool'  metaphor may, as discussed in  Part III on De­
signing  for Democracy, have to do with the fact 

•  that in industry today computer artifacts are more of­
ten designed  as machines, in  the  sense that they take 
control away  from the user and automate skill. 

In this chapter I have pointed at many problems with a 
tool perspective. A tool perspective for design of skill-en­
hancing computer-based tools may unintentionally create 
a blindness, both for other design ideals such as interactive 
media, and for the ideological use of a tool metaphor as a 
smoke  screen  for  what  really  goes  on,  not  only  in our 
working lives. However, when this is said, I still find  the 
craft tool ideal of the tool perspective a most useful para­
digm case for design of computer artifacts. 

In the next chapter I will refer to developments in user 
interface hardware and software design that support the 
'toolness' of computer artifacts. 

Chapter 17 
The  Toolness' 
of Computer Artifacts 

The Apple Corporation set  the standard  for small com­
puter workstations in the marketplace  when they intro­
duced  the Macintosh  in 1984.  Tool-like  software/hard­
ware, based on the 'mouse', the 'desktop metaphor', icons 
and 'windows' on a graphic display, suddenly spread from 
universities and research laboratories to literally millions 
of users. 

This machine was by no means the first tool-like com­

puter artifact, nor was it the most powerful one. But it was 
unique in that it created a commercial breakthrough af­
ter more than twenty years of ideas and efforts by vision­
ary designers. 

Apple  recognized  the importance of  developments in 
hardware and software concerning the 'user interface' of 
computer artifacts in creating the 'toolness' of  the Mac­
intosh. This represented a shift in design. As Alan Kay, one 
of  the visionary designers of  computer artifacts as tools 
has put it:1 

The user interface was once the last part of the system 
to be designed. Now it is the first. It is recognized as be­
ing primary because, to novices and professionals alike, 
what is presented to one's senses is one's computer. 

To design tool-like user interfaces we have to understand 
both software and hardware. The user interface is a com­

1  Kay, A.: 'Computer Software' in Scientific American, vol. 251, 
no. 3, September 1984, p. 42. 

418 

Designing  for Skill 

bination of  hardware and software that the user experi­
ences in use. In an earlier chapter it was suggested that in 
designing  user  interfaces  we  should  be  aware  of  the 
physical aspects that set conditions for the physical hand­
ling of the artifact, the handling aspects that involve con­
ditions for operating and controlling the artifact, and the 
subject I object  directed  aspects that constitute the condi­
tions for activities on 'objects' or with 'others' via the arti­
fact. The subject/object directed aspects relate to both the 
physical and the handling aspects, as well as to the desired 
functionality.2 The basic interest in user interface design is 
in which way  the artifact augments, and is transparent, 
in human activities directed  towards the subject/object. 
Additionally we  are also interested  in the aesthetic  and 
ergonomie aspects of the user interface. 

All  these aspects are relevant  to the toolness of  com­

puter artifacts. Does the artifact really allow the user to be 
fully engaged in the task he or she is performing, requir­
ing only  subsidiary awareness of  the artifact? Does the 
handling or control of the artifact break down this invol­
vement - this thrownness? Does the physical design of the 
input/output devices  support functionality, ergonomics, 
and aesthetics in a way that prevents a shift in awareness 
from involvement in the task towards the artifact itself? 

The main hardware and software developments that in 

these respects have changed the toolness of computer ar­
tifacts are related  to the technology  of graphic  worksta­
tions, including new interaction devices. 

In this chapter I will take a brief look at the main fea­
tures of concepts and styles for designing the user inter­
face of computer artifacts as tools, or at least as reminders 
or simulations of tools. 

The first main section is an overview of the 'state of the 
art' of computer-based tools. First the workstation concept 
is introduced and briefly discussed. Then I turn to the his-

2  See B0dker, S.: Through the  Interface -A Human Activity  Ap­
proach to User Interface Design, DÀIMI  PB-224, Department of 
Computer Science, University of Aarhus, 1987 (dissertation). 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

419 

tory of design visions that have contributed to the toolness 
of computer artifacts. The section ends with a list of state 
of the art prototypical examples. 

In  the  second  main  section,  drawing  on  the field  of 
human-computer interaction  state of  the art  principles 
for  designing toolness of  computer artifacts, are introdu­
ced and discussed. Based on the workstation technology, 
software for directness and the use of metaphors, use mo­
dels, and systematic  domains are discussed as ideals for 
designing computer artifacts as tools. 

The chapter is  of  a background  character, where  my 
claims of a tool perspective as a design ideal are seen in the 
light of  current technical  developments, and  research in 
the field  of human-computer interaction. 

Computer-Based Tools - State of the Art 
The Workstation 
From a  user point of  view the main  hardware characte­
ristics of the contemporary computer workstation are the 
visual display unit and the input devices. The traditional 
computer  terminal has been  given  a  considerable face­
lifting.3 

3 Concerning displays there has been a shift from traditional al­
phanumeric screens with typically 24 lines of 80 fixed font cha­
racters, to graphic displays with up to 20 inch bit-mapped displays 
and a typical resolution of 1000x1000 pixels. Simple alpha-nume-
ric text as output and feedback has largely been replaced by gra­
phics, pictures, icons,  etc. As main input device  the traditional 
QWERTY  keyboard has been complemented  and sometimes almost 
replaced by combined pointing and selecting devices related to the 
graphic display. The pointing and selection devices typically con­
trol a cursor on the graphic display. They are not only used for 
making graphics on the display, but perhaps more typically for a 
variety of tasks like selecting or positioning an object on the gra­
phic display for further operations on it. Input from the pointing 
devices is closely related to changes of output on the graphic dis­
play. Typical  examples are the mouse  (control of a cursor by hand 
movements of the mouse on the table, and buttons for 'clicking'/ 
selecting objects on the display), joystick  (a handle e.g. to indicate 
cursor movements like direction (by pushing it in the correspon-

420 

Designing  for  Skill 

Interaction with a  computer  workstation is no longer 
constrained to reading fixed characters on the display and 
writing text via a keyboard.  Bit-mapped  displays  with 
high-resolution graphics in combination  with new inter­
action devices, like the mouse, have opened up the oppor­
tunities for completely new design styles, often referred to 
as direct manipulation. The means used  to support this 
are windows  (frames  that the  user  can  size  and  move 
around on the display, and in which, or  'through' which, 
the user can  manipulate or 'view'  objects  and  actions), 
menus (to select objects and actions from), and icons (that 
'picture' the object or action they are intended to remind 
one of). 

ding direction) and speed (by the power or magnitude of the push), 
trackball (that moves the cursor through rotating movements of 
the ball in a box), graphic tablet (a touch-sensitive surface 
separate from the screen that 'maps' the display, and where the 
cursor is moved by corresponding movements of a pointing device 
on the tablet), light  pen (direct pointing with the pen at spots on 
the display),  touchscreen (pointing with fingers on a pressure 
sensitive membrane  covering the  display), etc. Scanners and 
laser printers are also important computer  workstation devices to 
input and output text and graphics that more or less directly 
correspond to what is displayed on the screen. Developments of 
workstation technology include refinements of the pointing 
devices and a better understanding of how they can be combined 
and specially designed for specific applications. Also the displays 
will be improved. Not only can they be made larger, have better 
resolution,  color,  and increased facilities for manipulating 
images, but they may also be flat,  lightweight and non-light 
emitting as opposed to today's CRT-displays. Other examples are 
built-in modems and network capabilities that drastically in­
crease the data available  for manipulation with computer work­
station based tools, and new technologies for speech input and 
output that widen the interaction possibilities. For an introduction 
to workstation interaction devices see e.g Schneiderman, B.: De­
signing the  User Interface, Addison-Wesley, USA 1987, chapter 6, 
and for a critical view of how little has been done in the area, 
Buxton, W.: There's More to Interaction Than Meets the Eye: 
Some Issues in Manual Input', in Norman,  D.  & Draper, S. 
(eds.): User  Centered  System Design, Lawrence  Erlbaum, London 
1986. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

421 

These  technical achievements  may  contribute  to  the 
toolness of  computer artifacts, making the artifact more 
transparent and letting the user focus his/her awareness 
on the task, to the aesthetics of using computer artifacts, 
and also to the ergonomics of use. But there are also con­
tradictions, such as between increased functionality with 
a larger display versus less eye-strain and perhaps lower 
radiation with a smaller one. And  there is  of  course no 
guarantee that a  nice user interface  corresponds to  aes­
thetically better designed products. The many disgraceful 
graphic products resulting from  desktop  publishing are 
evidence enough of that. Discussions of these kinds of pros 
and cons of workstation technology were important in our 
design  of  computer-based  tools  for  page  make-up  and 
image processing in the UTOPIA project.4 

However, even though there lately has been a dramatic 

development of  the interaction devices of  computer arti­
facts,  many  possibilities still seem  untried.  In There's 
More to Interaction Than Meets the Eye, William Buxton 
lets us imagine a time far into the future where  an an­
thropologist dig into a fully stocked computer store from 
our days with all of  the hardware and software in  wor­
king  order.  Buxton  guesses  that  the  anthropologist's 
conclusions would be that we had:5 

a well-developed eye, a long right arm, a small left arm, 
uniform-length fingers  and  a  iow-fi' ear. But the do­
minating characteristics  would  be  the  prevalence  of 
our visual system  over  our  poorly  developed  manual 
dexterity. 

What Buxton draws our attention to is, except for seeing 
how little use is made of our senses in design of user in­
terfaces of computer artifacts. In sewing, driving a car or 
playing the organ we find  it natural to use our feet. Why 

4 See chapter 15, The 'Tool  Perspective'-An Example,  and 
Gunnarson, E.: Arbetsmiljökrav, Swedish Center for Working 
Life, Stockholm 1985. 
5 Buxton, op. cit., p. 319. 

422 

Designing  for Skill 

not so in the design of computer-based tools? And why not 
interaction  devices for  both  hands? Imagine  having  to 
turn off your shower in order to adjust the water tempe­
rature! That is the one-handedness most computer  arti­
facts are designed for. 

Buxton gives examples of improvements using already 

existing interaction devices, but his main point is that:6 

managing input is so complex that it is unlikely that we 
will ever totally understand it. No matter how good our 
theories are, we  will probably always have to  test de­
signs through actual implementation and prototyping. 
The consequence of this for the designer is that proto­
typing tools (software  and  hardware) must  be  deve­
loped and considered as part of the basic environment. 

This recommendation is well in line with our  UTOPIAn 
experiences of  designing computer-based tools, and with 
the skill-based design strategy being argued in this book. 

From Design Visions to Technical Reality 
Now to some design visions which have contributed to the 
toolness of computer artifacts. Examples from this history 
are worth mentioning for several reasons. One is the time 
it may take to technically realize good  design ideas. An­
other is the creative way of thinking that guided some of 
these 'prophetic' designs. 

The  perhaps oldest  reference is to Vannevar  Bush's 
'memex'  from  1945.7  His  imagined  'memex'  device 
transformed one's desktop into tools for easy access, an­
notation, and elaboration of  all recorded  information in 
the world. The concept included ideas of  personal work­
stations, associative indexing, windows,  database trails, 
etc. Not only were ideas concerning personal tools envi­
sioned, but also cooperation using hypertexts, for example 

6 Ibid., p. 321. 
7 Bush, V.: 'As We May Think' in Atlantic Monthly, July 1945, pp. 
101-108. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

423 

sharing recorded  paths through  textual  and  image ar­
chives. 

In the early 1960s Douglas Engelbart developed such 
ideas in a  detailed scenario on  how  computer  artifacts 
could be designed  for augmenting  human  intellect* His 
augmentation tools  basically concerned  the organization 
of ideas and the production of text (including the hyper­
text notion). Engelbart got support for  trying to  realize 
these ideas,  and  the Augmentation  Research Center at 
Stanford Research Institute was established. New inter­
action devices like the joystick and lightpen were tested in 
practice, and the first  'mouse' was born. The experimental 
oN-Line System (NLS) was designed to provide a complete 
Knowledge workshop' for a user  writing and editing do­
cuments, running programs, etc. The user was equipped 
with tools for  navigating in an 'information space', and 
there were tools for  personal as well as for  cooperative 
work. At the Fall Joint Computer Conference in 1968 the 
system and the basic concepts were presented.9 Still more 
impressively, Engelbart demonstrated the system at the 
conference using a computer workstation and utilizing a 
three-button mouse, and a five-piece  key set as comple­
ment to the traditional keyboard, all with remote connec­
tions to  the Augmentation  Research Center at Stanford 
Research Center. A point of special interest in our context 
of  tools  is Engelbart's  commitment  to  tools  for  skilled 
work, i.e. that augmentation is what is fundamental, not 
the easy-to-use criterion.10 

8  Engelbart, D. C.: Augmenting  Human  Intellect: A Conceptual 
Framework, AFOSR-3223, Stanford Research Institute, Menlo 
Park 1962. 
9 Engelbart, D.  C. and English, W. K.: 'A Research Center for 
Augmenting Human  Intellect' in AFIPS  Proceedings - Fall  Joint 
Computer Conference, 1968. 
10 For more details on the work of Douglas Engelbart see the 
appendix in Bannon, L. J.: Extending the  Design Boundaries of 
Human-Computer  Interaction, Institute for Cognitive Science, 
University of California, San Diego, May 1985. 

424 

Designing  for Skill 

Another early and influential contribution to the tool-
ness of computer artifacts is Ivan Sutherland's Sketchpad, 
ideas for a graphic design program from 1962.11 The user 
should interact by using a light pen for  adding, moving, 
and deleting parts of drawings directly on the display. The 
display was metaphorically seen as 'sheets of paper'. Pic­
tures were  composed  from  primitive  picture  types like 
points, line segments, and circle arcs, as well as from user 
defined pictures. The user could copy these picture defini­
tions, and modify the copy to create a new picture. A pic­
ture definition could also be used as a master for arbitrar­
ily  many instances. If  the master  was edited, each  in­
stance would change correspondingly. Sutherland's work 
has  helped  create  many  graphic  interface  ideas  sup­
porting the toolness of computer artifacts, ideas that only 
now are being fully explored. 

A list of historical contributions to the toolness of the in­

terface of  computer artifacts would  be most incomplete 
without  reference  to the  researchers  and  designers  at 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. At the beginning of the 
1970s Alan Kay initiated the Learning Research Group to 
realize design  ideas from his Ph.D. dissertation on The 
Reactive Engine.12 The design ideal for the Learning Re­
search  Group  was the Dynabook - a  personal  medium 
the size of a notebook by which  everyone could  have the 
power to handle virtually all of his or her information-re­
lated needs. This is how the vision was described:13 

Imagine  having your  own  self-contained  knowledge 
manipulator in a portable package the shape of an or­
dinary notebook. Suppose it had enough power  to out­
range your senses of sight and hearing, enough capac­

11  Sutherland, I.E.: Sketchpad-A Man-Machine  Graphical 
Communication  System, MIT, Cambridge 1963 (dissertation). 
12 Kay, A.: The Reactive Engine, University of Utah, 1969 (disser­
tation). 
13 Kay, A. and Learning Research Group: Personal  Dynamic  Me­
dia, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, Technical Report no SSL 
76-1, March 1976. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

425 

ity to store for later retrieval thousands of page-equi­
valents of  reference materials, poems, letters, recipes, 
records, drawings, animations,  musical scores, wave­
forms,  dynamic  simulations,  and  anything  else  you 
would like to remember and change. We envision a de­
vice as small and portable as possible which could both 
take  in  and  give  out  information  in  quantities  ap­
proaching that of human sensory systems. Visual out­
put should be, at least, of higher quality than what can 
be obtained  from  newsprint. Audio output  should ad­
here to similar high-fidelity standards. There should be 
no discernible pause between cause and effect. One of 
the metaphors we used when designing such a system 
was that of a musical instrument, such as a flute,  which 
is owned by its user and responds instantly and consis­
tently to its owner's wishes. Imagine the absurdity of a 
one-second delay between  blowing a note and  hearing 
it 

The influence from these ideas on the research and design 
at  Xerox  PARC  as  well  as  on  the  development  of  the 
workstation concept and actual design in general has been 
immense. 

The  user  interface  of  the  'interim  Dynabooks'  the 
Learning Research  Group designed  was from  the user's 
point of view very similar to today's workstations - a high 
resolution  bit-map  display,  mouse,  windows,  pop-up 
menus, local  disk  memory etc. It had  programming and 
problem  solving  tools,  a  text  editor,  tools  for  drawing, 
painting and  animating pictures, for generating music, 
etc. 

The first prototype of  this 'interim Dynabook' was the 
programing environment Smalltalk. The user interface of 
this object-oriented programming language was later de­
veloped at Xerox PARC into one of the most powerful set of 
tools for programmers developed to date.14 

14 See e.g. Goldberg, A.: Smalltalk-80: The  Interactive Program­
ming  Environment, Addison-Wesley,  Reading 1984. 

426 

Designing  for Skill 

Other important design efforts at Xerox PARC were the 
development  of  the experimental Alto  workstation  and 
(based on  these prototyping experiences) the implemen­
tation of the Star office system - a system of workstations 
and  peripherals like  laser  printers connected  in a  local 
area network. The use of icons, windows, and the desktop 
metaphor in a consistent use model, as well as of the 'what 
you see is what you get' principle in the user interface de­
sign makes it one of the most tool-like office systems so far. 
And the design principles behind the system are far from 
outdated.15 

The ideas of  toolness of  computer artifacts have  been 
around for quite some time, but their implementation and 
further exploration  have  just  began. This is especially 
true, when it comes to the visions of tools for cooperative 
work.  However,  the  technical  opportunities  should  be 
great, not least since the capacity of the multi-million dol­
lar  machines  required  in  the  late 1960s  now  can  be 
achieved for a few thousand dollars. 

Prototypical Examples 
of Computer-Based Tools 
Now  to some  prototypical  examples  of  computer-based 
tools, a 'snapshot' of some of  the 'state of  the art' com-
puter-based tools around today. I have a double reason for 
mentioning them. Firstly, they illustrate what I mean by 
computer-based tools. Secondly, investigations of practical 
designs are, in our field  just as in other design fields,  an 
important source for further theoretical development. 

Tools for Typography and Graphic Design 
Given  my  background in graphic industry technology in 
the DEMOS and UTOPIA projects, tools for typography and 
graphic design come first  to mind. 

15 See e.g. Smith, D.  C. et. al.: 'Designing the Star User Interface' 
in Byte Magazine, vol 7, no 4, April 1982. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

AZI 

Word  processors are fundamental tools in this catego­
ry. Word  processors let the user constantly view the do­
cument he or she is working on. The user has first of all 
tools for manipulating the text in the writing process. In 
addition several  word  processors (like Word  3.01 from 
Microsoft)  have  integrated  other  tools.  Hence,  when 
working on a document with the tools the user can view 
the document from different perspectives. There are tools 
for typography, layout and graphics, as well as for struc­
turing the ideas in the document. Furthermore, there are 
tools for checking spelling and for hyphenation.16 

Other  programs for  graphic  design  support the user 

with a set of  tools for  drawing and  painting (like Mac­
Paint from Apple and later Fullpaint). These  programs 
give the user a feeling of full control over pencils, brushes, 
paint etc.  Whereas these  programs  remind  the user  of 
traditional painting (what the user manipulate is the bit­
map of  the display), other programs let the user in addi­
tion move, combine  and in  other ways manipulates gra­
phical  'objects'  like  circles  and  free  form  shapes  (like 
MacDraw from Apple, and Illustrator from Adobe). 

A third type of computer-based graphic design tools are 
those for page make-up. (The first really  powerful set of 
make-up  tools  for  small  computer  workstations  was 
Pagemaker  from Aldus.) These  tools remind the user of 
traditional make-up tools. The  user interactively  places 
text and pictures, changes fonts, edits text, crops pictures, 
etc. The  operations the  user  performs on  the page are 
those he or she could do in hot metal and in paste-up tech­
nology. In addition there are new operations like 'pouring' 
text into the galleys. (In fact the best of the desktop pub­
lishing page  make-up systems  today fulfill  most  of  the 

16 Word processors may rather be tools for creative writing than 
for graphic design. However, in producing this desktop published 
book I have experienced word processing tools in all the above 
mentioned respects. 

428 

Designing  for Skill 

requirements we in the UTOPIA project specified for pro­
fessional newspaper systems in 1983.)17 

The toolness in  all these graphic  design  programs is 
based on the metaphor that what the user sees on the dis­
play is the 'paper' he or she is working on. The tools and 
materials used are typically picked from menus and then 
handled  with a  mouse (and in addition a  keyboard). In 
addition, via windows the user can (again metaphorically) 
see the material from different perspectives and in differ­
ent  magnifications.  Clearly,  the  toolness  of  the  page 
make-up  'use  model'  and  of  the  image  processing 'use 
model' in the UTOPIA project were designed with similar 
ideas. 

'Desktop' Tools 
Another popular set of computer-based tools are those as­
sociated with the desktop  metaphor. The display is gra­
phically designed as a 'desktop' with icons for a mailbox, 
documents, a filing  cabinet, a wastepaper basket, different 
tools  the  user  needs  for specific  tasks like  writing do­
cuments, sending mail, searching for  data in files  and 
documents, writing programs, etc. The user has a mouse 
to handle the tools and documents he or she works on (e.g. 
by double-clicking on them). Objects  on the desktop are 
moved  around  by  'dragging* them  with  the  mouse. For 
example, the user drags a document to the wastepaper 
basket if he or she want to throw it away (delete). 

The first  well known example of the desktop metaphor 
was the previously mentioned  Xerox  Star office system, 
where toolness was created this way. Finder, the opera­
ting system for the Apple  Macintosh, utilizes a similar 
metaphor in the view the user is given. Another example 
worth mentioning is the Switcher by Andy Hertfield, one 
of the most creative Macintosh programmers. It goes be­

17 See chapter 15, The 'Tool  Perspective'- An Example, and Ehn, 
P. and Sundblad, Y. (eds.): Kravspecifikation  ßr datorstödd 
bildbehandling och ombrytning, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1983. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

429 

yond the desktop metaphor, by  also supporting the user 
with a metaphor of  tools, not for  manipulating the pro­
grams on the desktop, but for looking into the memory of 
the  machine  and  then  moving  around  between  and 
within programs. 

Explorative  Programming  Environments 
Explorative  programming environments like  Smalltalk 
and Interlisp from Xerox, and the operating system Unix, 
may also be seen as examples of sets of tools (though the 
concept here is used in a more abstract sense) for acting 
in,  and  manipulating,  a  'world'  of  programs  and  data. 
Windows and menus on the display are related to pointing 
devices, and function in a similar way as in the examples 
above to create the toolness. 

HyperCard  by Bill  Atkinson represents a new dimen­

sion of  programming environments. Admittedly, it lacks 
much of  the power of the above mentioned programming 
environments, but  the toolness  has been given new fea­
tures. All programing objects have a visual graphic shape 
that is displayed on the screen. Furthermore, depending 
on the user's experience, he or she can manipulate the ob­
jects with tools on different levels, at first simply with tools 
for copying and modifying existing prototypical examples, 
later by really programming new  objects. In contrast  to 
traditional  'off-the-shelf  programs HyperCard  applica­
tions are 'open' - as in  programming environments,  the 
user can at any time modify the application and build new 
tools. 

Dynamic Spreadsheets 
Dynamic  spreadsheets are  computer-based  tools  for  a 
wide range of applications. (The best know examples are 
VisiCalc, the  first  dynamic  spreadsheet,  designed  by 
Daniel Bricklin and Robert Frankston and the contempo­
rary Excel  from Microsoft.) The visual metaphor is here 
that of  the old  ruled-paper spreadsheet. But in addition 
each cell is given a value rule specifying how its value is to 
be determined. These rules can easily be copied and modi­

430 

Designing  for Skill 

fied  to other  cells.  When  the  user  enters or  changes  a 
value anywhere in the spreadsheet, all values that are de­
pendent on it change too. Interaction takes place as in the 
earlier examples, and the user literally sees how the whole 
spreadsheet changes as he  or she manipulates a-single 
cell. The spreadsheet metaphor is most helpful for simu­
lating different strategies: 'What happens to the spread­
sheet if  I change  the value  or the rule of  this cell?'  'In­
stantly'  the  user sees  the changes  on  the spreadsheet. 
Other tools in the tool kit let the user design and edit busi­
ness graphics like pie charts, by just selecting a set of cells 
from the spreadsheet, and then applying a graphic tool. A 
spreadsheet application is an example of a computer-ba-
sed tool that transcends properties of traditional tools and 
materials. (The tools for  'pouring' text into  galleys that 
some  page  make-up  programs  have  display  the  same 
'magic'.) 

Computer  Games 
I will end  this list of examples of  computer-based  tools, 
which certainly could have been made much longer, with 
the toolness that some computer games represent. These 
games resemble programming environments. The player 
operates in a dramatic context, which he or she has tools 
to operate in and on. Lode  Runner from Bröderbund is a 
good  example.  It  is  a  game  where  the  player  moves 
around  in  labyrinths  of  bricks  and  ladders,  collecting 
treasures while  being chased  by evil men. The  action is 
continuously  displayed  on  the  graphic display  and  the 
player controls his or her 'man' with the  mouse - all the 
time the player sees and hears what he or she does. (As in 
most computer games the narrative lacks literary quality, 
but has a most dramatic theatrical context.) 

However, the interesting toolness is that the player has 
an editor for 'building' new, and changing old labyrinths 
and games - tools to  make tools. Much  as in the graphic 
design programs discussed  above the player picks a  tool 
for placing objects like bricks, ladders, treasures etc. By 
exiting the editor the player moves into the just recreated 

The 'Toolmss'  of  Computer Artifacts 

431 

brave new world to find  out if it works as intended (and to 
have some fun). 

I am  not suggesting that  all the examples above de­
monstrate tools in  the sense of traditional tools.  In par­
ticular, the  role of  professional skill and  aspects of  the 
quality of  the product have to some extent been left out. 
Nevertheless, to me the examples demonstrate important 
features and  inspiring ideas for design of 'transparent', 
and 'convivial', computer-based tools. In the next sections 
principles for designing this toolness of computer artifacts 
will be discussed. 

'Directness' 
'Direct  manipulation' is a  basic  principle for  designing 
toolness of computer artifacts. The principle was coined by 
Ben Schneiderman in 1974, and he and others have later 
developed it into one of the main principles for user inter­
face design.18 He has described driving a car as his favorite 
example of direct manipulation.19 

The scene is directly visible through the front window, 
and actions such as braking or steering have become 
common  knowledge  in  our  culture. To  turn left,  the 
driver simply rotates the steering wheel to the left. The 
response is immediate  and  the scene  changes, provi­
ding feedback to refine the turn. Imagine trying to turn 
by issuing a command  LEFT 30  DEGREES and  then 
having to issue another command to see the new scene. 
In  user  interface  design  this is  typically  simulated  by 
pointing at visual reminders of  objects and  actions on a 
display. Tasks can rapidly be carried out, and the results 
are  immediately  observable.  Keyboard  entry  of  com­
mands is replaced by pointing devices for selecting objects 
and actions. 

18 Schneiderman, op. cit. 
19 Ibid., p. 180. 

432 

Designing  for Skill 

In a recent article Edwin Hutchins et al. have further 
developed the principles for directness. They suggest that 
this directness is achieved  by a  change of  central meta­
phor for  the user interface.20  Traditionally a  conversa­
tional metaphor has been used. The user is in contact with 
linguistic structures, structures that can be interpreted as 
referring to the objects of interest. The interface becomes 
an intermediary to a  hidden 'world'. Focal awareness is 
on 'conversations' with the intermediary about the task, 
not on  performing it. The interface stays in the way for 
the user, as a badly designed tool. 

Alan Kay has argued that:21 
a person exerts the greatest leverage when his illusion 
can be  manipulated  without appeal  to abstract  inter­
mediaries such as the hidden programs needed  to put 
into action even a simple word  processor. What I call 
direct leverage is provided  when the illusion acts as a 
Tcit" or tool, with which to solve a problem. 

This can  be accomplished  by  the design  of  a dramatic 
context for the user to act in. This dramatic context is of­
ten referred to a model world metaphor. The user does not 
describe actions, but  rather performs  them in the dra­
matic context. This world of action, rather than language 
of description, is typical of the examples above, not only of 
the computer games, but also of all the others, like graphic 
design environments, spreadsheets, and exploratory pro­
gramming environments. 

The tool  perspective from  the UTOPIA  project can be 
seen as a special case of creating a dramatic context by the 
use of a model world metaphor. The user is the skilled ac­
tor, and the 'world' is designed by 'tools' that the actor can 

20  Hutchins, E.L. et al. 'Direct Manipulation Interfaces' in Nor­
man, D. and  Draper, S. (eds.) User Centered  System Design, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986.1 have chosen to use this article 
as my main point of reference to the field  of human-computer in­
teraction since, in my view, it is one of the best accounts of state of 
the art design principles in the field. 
21  Kay, 1984, op. cit., p. 42. 

The 'Toolness' of  Computer Artifacts 

433 

use to refine 'materials'. This is a 'meta'-metaphor  that 
can be applied to many practical situations, but of course 
completely  different  meta-metaphors  can  be  created  as 
well.  Such  an  alternative  meta-metaphor  of  viewing 
computer artifacts as interactive plays was discussed in 
the previous chapter. 

However to establish directness in use of tools in these 

dramatic contexts, certain  requirements of  the user in­
terface have to be  fulfilled. Hutchins et al. suggest that 
(translated to the language used in this book): 

•  It must be possible for the user to practically treat re­

minders of  objects or  actions as the  objects or  actions 
themselves. This is not equivalent  to saying that the 
reminders cannot be verbal, and have to be graphical, 
using  pictures  and  icons.  The  point  is  rather  that 
menus, icons and pictures on a display have proved to 
function much as onomatopoetic words do. 

•  There  must  be an  inter-referential  relation  between 
input and output 'language'. Input expressions must be 
allowed  to incorporate or make  use of  previous output 
expressions. Directness is typically designed  by use of 
the same  'object' as both input and  output. With  in­
teraction devices the user 'controls' the changes of the 
display. 

•  There must not be delays between a user input issued to 
change an object  and the corresponding change  of  the 
output (unless such delays are 'natural' in the dramatic 
context). 

•  It must be possible for the user to 'view' the objects from 
different perspectives, and in this sense obtain different 
reminders of the same object. 

In the examples of tool-like computer artifacts given ear­
lier, as well as in the design of tools for page make-up and 
image processing in  the UTOPIA  project, these  means to 
achieve toolness have typically been utilized. 

More analytically, Hutchins et. al. suggest that seman­
tic directness, articulatory  directness, and direct engage-

434 

Designing  for Skill 

ment are central concepts for designing the directness of 
computer artifacts. 

Semantic Directness 
In  a  language  more  in  line  with  this  book  semantic 
directness involves how  close the dramatic context is to 
the user's conceptual competence, i.e. how  well the user 
interface relates to the practice and language the user is 
familiar with. Frequent  users can in  this respect break 
through  most  poorly  designed  interfaces and  overcome 
semantic breakdowns, but that is no excuse for not trying 
to design consistent dramatic contexts in the language of 
the  users. However,  a  user interface  that supports se­
mantic directness for a skilled user does not necessarily do 
it for a novice, and vice versa, which is a well known de­
sign dilemma. 

Another dilemma of semantic directness is the level of 
tools in the user interface. The primitive command  of a 
Turing machine gives the  user the tools to  perform any 
task that can be done with a computer artifact, but there 
are not many users that would be helped by this in their 
ordinary work practice. Hutchins et. al. refer to this as the 
Turing tar-pit in which everything is possible but nothing 
of interest is easy.22 But they also warn for the converse, 
where  over-specialized  tools  make operations easy, but 
little of interest is possible. 

However, as Don Norman argues in another article in 

the same book:28 

We want higher-level tools that are crafted to the task. 
We need low-level  tools in order to create and modify 
higher-level ones. The level  of  tool  has to  match  the 
level of intention. Again, easier to say than to do. 

22 Hutchins, et al., op. cit., p. 101. 
23  Norman, D.: 'Cognitive Engineering" in Norman, D. and 
Draper, S. (eds.) User Centered  System Design, Lawrence Erl-
baum, London 1986, p.54. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

435 

Fundamentally  there  seem  to  be  two  ways  out  of  this 
dilemma of semantic directness. The first  is to design the 
tools in close cooperation  with the future users, close  to 
their practical experience and professional language. This 
is how the tool metaphor was used in the UTOPIA project 
and  in  the  graphic  design  examples  given  above.  The 
complementary way is to give the user access to tools on 
different levels for  manipulating and  incrementally  ex­
panding a whole and consistent dramatic context, reach­
ing from basic programming tools to the most aggregated 
application tools. This is, for example, how a user interacts 
with a Smalltalk machine as opposed to traditional envi­
ronments of  separated operating systems, programming 
languages  and  application  programs.  HyperCard  de­
monstrates the same principle. 

Articulatory Directness 
Articulatory directness has to do with the relation between 
concepts used in the interface and their physical form. As 
mentioned  earlier onomatopoeia  is a  technique  used  in 
spoken language. Hutchins et al. argue that:24 

in many ways, the interface languages should have an 
easier time of exploiting articulatory similarity than do 
natural  languages  because  of  the  rich  technological 
base available to them. Thus, if the intent is to draw a 
diagram,  the  interface  might  accept  as  input  the 
drawing motions. In turn, it could  present as output 
diagrams, graphs, and images. If  one is talking about 
sound  patterns to  the interface  language, the  output 
could be the sounds themselves. The computer has the 
potential  to exploit  articulatory similarities through 
technological innovation in the varieties of dimensions 
upon which we can operate. 

Most  significantly  high  resolution  bit-mapped  displays 
facilitate the creation of  direct articulation. Expressions 
like pictures and icons on a display and their immediate 

24 Hutchins, et al., op.cit., p. 110. 

436 

Designing  for Skill 

changes according to input issued by the user, or sounds 
from a tone generator, are means that extend the articu-
latory directness of verbal language. On the input side we 
can achieve articulatory directness by mimicking actions 
like cursor movements by moving a mouse, a trackball, a 
lightpen, etc. Certainly it is the articulatory directness, not 
the semantic one, that has made computer games so at­
tractive to many people. 

Output devices like bit-mapped displays and input de­

vices like the mouse are in these games, and in several of 
the examples above, used to support a spatial  metaphor. 
The spatial metaphor can  be  used  to create completely 
new concrete tools for tasks that earlier have been purely 
formal or abstract. Furthermore, even in computer-based 
systems with  poor support for  a spatial metaphor users 
tend  to  use it for  'moving around  in the system' or  for 
'going from  one  place  to another'.25  It has also been ob­
served how young  people in our contemporary  media so­
cieties develop unique competence in dealing with spatial 
and graphical  representations. It started  with film  and 
television, but computer games  and  personal computers 
have accelerated this tendency.26 

'Direct  Engagement' 
Finally, direct engagement is, according to Hutchins et al., 
a feeling of involvement directly with a world of objects. 
These objects must be of interest to the user, and it must be 
possible to perform actions on them and watch how they 
react. To provide the user with the opportunity of this en­
gagement, designers  have to  utilize  means for creating 
semantic  and  articulatory  directness  of  computer  arti­
facts. However, in addition the use of these artifacts has to 

25  Andersen, P.B. and Madsen K.H.: 'Design and Professional 
Languages' in Larsen, S.F. and Plunkett,  K. (eds.) Computers, 
Mind  and  Metaphors  (forthcoming). 
26  Greenfield, P.: "Video Games as Tools of Cognitive Socializa­
tion' in Larsen, S.F. and Plunkett, K.  (eds.) Computers, Mind  and 
Metaphors  (forthcoming). 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer  Artifacts 

437 

be interesting enough for the user to engage in. After all, 
the user interface is, as Kay has put it, 'essentially a thea­
trical context'.27 It is the design of an engaging dramatic 
context  in  which the  user  can  have  focal  awareness on 
action in this 'world', leaving only subsidiary awareness of 
the tools used, which is the hardest challenge to designers 
of user interfaces. This is a challenge for design of  tools 
and contexts for professional  use just as much as for de­
sign of computer games. This narrative aspect, especially 
the creation of first-personness 
interaction with computer 
artifacts as interactive mimesis, was exemplified in the 
previous  chapter.  Here  I  will  elaborate  on  the  use  of 
'metaphors',  'use  models'  and  'systematic  domains'  in 
creating toolness or directness of computer artifacts. 

Metaphors, Use Models, 
and Systematic Domains 

Metaphors 
The use of metaphors in design of computer artifacts has 
frequently been mentioned in this chapter: a  tool meta­
phor, a  desktop metaphor, a spatial metaphor, a  model 
world  metaphor, a  page  make-up  metaphor, etc. Meta­
phors  typically  mean  understanding  one  situation  in 
terms of another.28 

When  using  computer  artifacts,  metaphors  may 
remind the user of  a set of  useful tools, for  example for 
page make-up or for organizing documents on a desktop, 
rather than  using a  computer. The  metaphors are sug-

27  Kay, A., op. cit., p. 42. 
28 For a detailed discussion of computers and metaphors see e.g. 
Andersen, P.B.: 'Semiotics and  Informatics - Computer as a  Me­
dia' in Ingwersen et. al.: Information  Technology  and  Informa­
tion Use, Taylor Graham, London 1986, see also Madsen, K.H. 
'Breakthrough by Breakdown — Metaphors and Structured Do­
mains' in Klein, H.  and Kumar, K.  (eds.) Information  Systems 
Development  for  Human  Progress in Organizations, North-Hol­
land  (forthcoming). 

438 

Designing  for Skill 

gestions to the user that working with the computer arti­
fact is similar to the work the user is familiar with in or­
dinary work situations. Other metaphors relate more to 
the user's general experiences than specifically  to their 
professional practice. Thus, the suggestion is made that 
the computer artifact is an almost  physical 'information 
space' which  the user can  move  around  in, or  a  model 
world that the user can play in, like the office information 
system Objectworld mentioned in the previous chapter. 

Furthermore the reminders are typically created with 
layers of metaphors. For example the metaphor of a tool 
kit for  page make-up is based on  the more general tool 
metaphor, which in turn utilizes both  the spatial  meta­
phor and the model world metaphor. 

However, if the user interface of a computer artifact is 
understood as essentially a dramatic context, it is not just 
metaphors proper, but any  narrative means that can be 
used to create useful reminders in the dramatic context of 
a user interface that we should be concerned  with in de­
sign. What  is important is what  the  user  interface  re­
minds the user  of.  This  may  be in the  tradition  of  the 
user's familiar tools and professional language, or it may 
transcend them reminding the user of other experiences, 
providing the user  with  opportunities to see and  do fa­
miliar things in new ways. 

In our Wittgensteinian language we could say that the 
user interface is a sign that plays the role of reminding the 
user about what he or she can do with a specific computer 
artifact in specific situations in specific language-games. 
All the metaphors listed above are intended for design of 
such signs, as such useful reminders. These signs are just 
as important in design for professional  work as for more 
amusing games. 

Use Models 
In designing for skill there is a clear relation between the 
user interface of  a computer artifact, the user's profes­
sional language and competence, and the design situation. 
To facilitate this, in the UTOPIA project we designed what 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

439 

we called use models (outlined in an earlier chapter). Use 
models for  tools for  page make-up and image processing 
were developed.29 

Here I shall return to the role of  use  models in use. 
Fundamental aspects of the use models created were (on a 
meta-level) a  tool metaphor, a physical space metaphor, 
and a model world metaphor. 

These  meta-metaphors in  the  use  models supported 
family resemblance with the users' ordinary professional 
language and  practice of  page make-up and picture pro­
cessing  work.  In  these language-games  work  was  per­
formed with tools like a knife, in a physical space like the 
page ground, in a given world  of typographical tools and 
materials. 

The choice of these or other metaphors in a use model is 
by no means 'natural'. They are hopefully creative design 
choices that fit  well with the ordinary language-games in 
the users' normal practice. They are developed in inter­
action between designers and the prospective  users. The 
same applies to the reminders created of the specific tools 
and materials. 

However, the use models did not merely have a family 
resemblance with the users' traditional  tools. They  also 
included  new  tools  that  were  introduced  because  of 
limitations in use of computers; and new tools with which 
the  users  could  do  things  that  were  not  possible  with 
traditional tools. An example of the first  is cropping a pic­
ture, an example of  the second  is the 'magnifying glass' 
needed because of too low display resolution and limited 
display size and resolution, while an example of the third 
is a tool for 'pouring' articles into a given column space on 
a page ground. 

In the use model for page make-up, the resemblance of 

the properties of  the working material was straightfor­
ward. As in the user's practice with traditional materials 
articles could be composed of text, pictures, and graphics. 
Texts could be ingress, headline, subtitle, picture text, etc. 

29 See chapter 15 on The Tool  Perspective' - An Example. 

440 

Designing  for Skill 

These materials could  be composed of  paragraphs, sen­
tences, words, word spaces, characters, character spaces, 
lines, leadings, columns, groups, etc. 

However, in the vise model we designed for picture pro­
cessing we in contrast decided to give the material some 
fundamentally new properties as compared to traditional 
graphic material. 

Traditional graphical  material for  picture  processing 

are  either  opaque  (reflecting  light)  like  paper  photo­
graphs, or transparent like dia frames (letting some light 
from behind pass through the picture). However, on  the 
display we can simulate both these properties in the same 
picture material, which gives some new opportunities for 
image manipulations (imagine a partly transparent and 
partly reflecting picture). Hence, graphic materials were 
seen as having both a transparent layer and an intensity 
(or light reflecting) layer that the user has tools to control 
independently. 

As designers we were quite pleased with this extension 
of the properties of graphic material and the new graphic 
operations it made possible, and so were the participating 
graphic workers, but it should also be admitted that this 
aspect of  the use  model for  picture processing was  the 
hardest one for new users to get used to. The 'innovation' 
in picture processing that the use model suggested had no 
obvious  immediate  family  resemblance  with  graphic 
worker's ordinary use language  and  practice. It did  not 
support new ways of doing picture processing for all gra­
phic workers. To what extent this aspect of the use model 
should be  redesigned, and  to  what extent  the learning 
process based on the use model could be developed is a de­
sign challenge - the fundamental dialectics of  tradition 
and transcendence in design. We tried both ways. 

The above outlined use models were designed in close 
cooperation  between  professional  graphic  workers  and 
designers. They were developed based on the use of simple 
mock-ups and  prototyping tools on  which different ver­
sions of the use models were 'implemented'. Changes and 
new design ideas were based on the typographers' experi-

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

441 

enee from  actually doing (simulated) graphic work  with 
the mock-ups and  prototypes, and  designers' and  users' 
joint reflections on the usefulness of the simulated tools for 
graphic work. 

When the users were satisfied with their simulated use 
of the use models 'implemented' on the mock-ups, we as 
designers  used  these  models (understood  as reminders 
and  paradigm  cases)  to  make  traditional  requirement 
specifications for construction.30 

Systematic Domains 
What about formalization of  skills when  designing use 
models?  In  the  terminology  of  Winograd  and  Flores  a 
systematic domain must be generated.31 This systematic 
domain must then be formally represented in a way that 
can be put into a computer. The objects in this systematic 
domain possess no other properties  than those we have 
designed them to and have been able to formalize. 

Thus far  there is no  difference,  as compared  to  the 

problem of  'knowledge engineering' in the design of arti­
ficial intelligence expert systems. 

However, the difference  becomes  clear when  we  ask 

what is represented as the systematic domain. In an ex­
pert system the knowledge of an expert is what one tries to 
capture in the  model. Hence, the expert's knowledge  is 
reduced to what can be stated explicitly as facts or rules. 
The  model is an  attempt to include  the expert's know­
ledge. As has been  discussed  earlier there seems to be 
much more to professional competence than what can be 
formally described.32 

3° See chapters 15 on The 'Tool  Perspective' -An Example, and 
13, Case II: The  UTOPIA Projects. 
31 The concept of systematic domains, and the problem of formal 
representations in e.g. expert systems are discussed at length by 
Winograd, T. and Flores,  P.: Understanding Computers  and 
Cognition - a new  foundation  for design, Ablex, Norwood 1986. 
32 In the next chapter I will return to the role of 'tacit knowledge'. 

442 

Designing  for Skill 

If we take a tool perspective as our design approach, the 
systematic domain  created  is designed  to be  under  the 
user's skillful  control.  His or  her  understanding is  not 
modelled. What are modelled  are the tools and  materials 
the skilled  user works with. 

To take the graphic example, what are modelled  are 

typographical materials and tools, not the far more com­
plex  knowledge  about typographical  design  that expert 
system "knowledge engineers' try to capture. 

However, a fundamental problem is what we can know 

about existing or desirable properties of tools and  mate­
rials in a given craft or profession. In some cases these ob­
jects and their properties already exist present-at-hand, to 
use our  Heideggerian  language - as already objectified 
designed tools and  materials within the professional  do­
main. Typographic material became a systematic domain 
a long time ago. Mathematics and bookkeeping are other 
examples. This has paved  the way  towards success  for 
computer-based tools in these professions. 

The design of new systematic domains requires that a 
world that is ready-to-hand for the user breaks down, that 
it partly becomes  present-at-hand, objectified as for ex­
ample new tools or materials to work with and on. How­
ever, if these tools are good, they will, as all good tools, be­
come ready-to-hand  in the hands of an experienced  user, 
extending his or her control of the task to perform. Hence, 
in this sense formalization may help develop rather than 
decrease competence in a domain, may create glasses for 
new views rather than just a new blindness. 

In which existing professions and crafts can we design 
such  new systematic domains?  If  so,  how  do  we  do  it? 
What may be achieved? And what blindness do these new 
systematic domains  create, which is the  knowledge and 
competence that might get lost in this process? These are 
fundamental  questions  to  which  the  answers  may  be 
given  in  actual  design  based  on  a  creative  dialogue 
between professional  users and  designers, rather than in 
theoretical reflection. 

The 'Toolness'  of  Computer Artifacts 

443 

I find  design of  computer artifacts as tools for skilled 
workers  to  be  a  challenging,  highly  exciting,  and 
technically quite possible direction for our design efforts. 
In  design  of  computer-based  tools  the  limits  set  by 
formalization  are  wider  than for expert systems, since 
there is no  attempt  to  replace  human  competence  by 
formalization, but instead to augment human competence 
by skill-enhancing artifacts. The  creation of  metaphors, 
use models, and  new systematic  domains provides chal­
lenging  aspects  of  designing  the  toolness  of  computer 
artifacts. But we should not be so blinded by this fact (i.e. 
that we can design systematic domains with tools for skil­
led work) as to believe that all professions and crafts lend 
themselves to such tool manipulation. 

From Concrete Experience to 
Abstract Formalisms to Concrete 
Experience? 
To sum up on the toolness of computer artifacts, I will re­
turn to some concluding remarks (by Hutchins et al.) on 
the new opportunities for practical understanding:33 

On the surface, the fundamental idea  of  Direct Mani­
pulation interface to a task flies in the face of two thou­
sand  years of  development of  abstract formalisms  as 
means  of  understanding  and  controlling  the  world. 
Until very recently, the use of computers has been an 
activity squarely in that tradition. So the exterior of Di­
rect Manipulation,  providing as it does for the direct 
control of  a specific task world, seems somewhat  ata­
vistic, a return to concrete thinking.  On the inside, of 
course,  the  implementation  of  direct  manipulation 
systems is yet another step in a long formal tradition. 
The illusion  of  the  absolutely  manipulable  concrete 
world is made possible by the technology of abstraction. 

33 Hutchins et al., op. cit., pp. 119-120. 

444 

Designing  for Skill 

There is no ultimate farewell to abstract formalisms in the 
design of  computer artifacts, but there are promises of a 
revival for practical skills in design and use. 

In another context Bo Göranzon has made the follow­

ing reflection  on the consequence  of  Cartesian  abstract 
algebraic formulation of concrete geometric points, lines, 
surfaces and  volumes.  The  new  mathematic-algebraic 
language made concrete geometric  thinking  redundant. 
Göranzon gives the example of the equation x2 + y2  = 25 -
a representation of a circle's properties. The properties of 
the  circle  are  all  there  in  the  formula.  Has  algebra 
replaced  geometry,  and  the  brain  the 'eye', he asks?34 
However, it is somewhat a  paradox  that the Cartesian 
mathematical-logical  replacement  of, for  example,  con­
crete geometric  thinking,  now  can  be  used  to  recreate 
conditions for concrete thinking. The circle is there on the 
display, round as ever, ready for the user to manipulate it 
in a spatial, geometric and concrete  way. In fact we  are 
only in the beginning of exploring user interfaces as tools 
supporting such concrete actions. Computer workstation 
technology, design principles of directness, and the use of 
metaphors and  use models are steps in  the direction  of 
designing computer artifacts as highly useful tools to  be 
practically manipulated  and concretely experienced. The 
possibilities are there. As  was discussed  in the part on 
Designing  for Democracy at Work, however, the question 
of who will benefit from them is a  rather different one, 
indeed. 

34 Göranzon, B.: *Vad  är en dator?' in Göranzon, B. (ed.): 
Datautvecklingens Filosofi - tyst  kunskap och  ny  teknik, Carlsson 
& Jönsson, Malmö 1984, pp. 41-42. 

Chapter  18 
Skills and the Tool Perspective 

In this chapter skill aspects of the tool perspective will be 
discussed. The  basis for  the discussion was already for­
mulated in Part I on Design Philosophy. 

With  the Heideggerian  and  Wittgensteinian approa­

ches the importance of practical understanding in design 
and  use of  computer artifacts was stressed.  Here I will 
further  elaborate  on  the  highly  controversial  concept 
commonly referred to as tacit knowledge. I will also make 
some reflections on the blindness that the tool perspective 
may  create with regard  to skill as social competence in 
intersubjective communication. 

With the Marxist approach (first generally discussed in 
Part I on Design Philosophy, and then further elaborated 
in Part III on  Designing  for  Democracy  at  Work  with 
reference to the practice research carried out in the DE­
MOS  and UTOPIA  projects) a  frame of  reference for  un­
derstanding societal aspects of design and use of computer 
artifacts was outlined. In this chapter I will go one step 
further by  explicitly relating the skill aspect  of  the tool 
perspective to the ongoing 'Marxist debate' on qualifica­
tions and new technology. 

Tacit Knowledge 
An  essential aspect of  the  tool  perspective  was  the as­
sumption that tacit knowledge neither can nor should be 
formalized into algorithmic procedures. 

446 

Designing  for Skill 

Tacit knowledge exists, and it is by no means mysteri­
ous - this is what  we  can  learn  both  from  a  Wittgen-
steinian and a Heideggerian approach. 

In a  Wittgensteinian approach tacit knowledge  is re­

ferred to as the kind of knowledge that involves practical 
understanding  by  familiarity  and  by  'rule  following 
behavior'  in  practice.  We  acquire  tacit  knowledge  by 
practical sensuous experience from  earlier cases and  by 
learning to follow rules in practice, rules that are neither 
explicit nor distinguishable from the actual perfomance of 
them.  Understanding practice  as participation in inter­
twined language-games is fundamental to the Wittgen­
steinian notion of tacit knowledge. 

In a Heideggerian approach tacit knowledge is related 
to  the involved,  rapid, fluid  and  intuitive  performance 
typical of  proficient and expert behavior. This proficient 
and expert behavior we all acquire in some situations in 
our lives. It is performance in a world  that has become 
ready-to-hand  and where detached reflections are secon­
dary to our performance. 

However, in a discussion of the tacitness' of  practical 
understanding I find  it reasonable to start with explicit 
reference to Michael Polanyi,  who coined  the term tacit 
knowledge,x  He  uses  well-known  human activities like 
swimming or riding a bicycle to establish2 

the well known fact  that the aim of a skillful  perfor­
mance is achieved by the observance of a set of  rules 
which are not known as such to the person performing 
them. 

And he argues that:3 

1 Tacit knowledge is discussed in Polanyi, M.: The Tacit Dimen­
sion, Anchor Books, Doubleday & Company, New York 1967, and 
Polanyi, M.: Personal  Knowledge, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
London 1973. 
2 Polanyi, 1973, op. cit., p. 49. 
3 Ibid., p. 53. 

Skills and the  Tool Perspective 

447 

an art which cannot  be specified  in detail cannot be 
transmitted by prescription, since no prescription exists. 
It can be passed on only by example from master to ap­
prentice. 

The role of  tradition is, according to Polanyi, crucial to 
learning tacit knowledge:4 

To learn by example is to submit to authority. You fol­
low your master because you trust his manner of doing 
things even if you cannot analyze and account in detail 
for its effectiveness. By watching the master and emu­
lating his efforts in the presence of his example, the ap­
prentice unconsciously picks up the rules of the art, in­
cluding those  which  are  not explicitly  known  by  the 
master himself. 

These are basic assumptions of  the tool perspective, and 
the design  principles and  recommendations based  on it. 
However,  as  we  participate  in  many  language-games, 
and are skillful in different situations in our lives, there is 
also a possibility of transcendence from traditions in the 
meeting between different groups, with different practices 
and knowledge. And as will be discussed, transcendence is 
in fact also the hallmark of skillful and creative rule fol­
lowing behavior. 

Tacit Knowledge and  Non-Explicit Knowledge 
However, not all non-explicit knowledge is genuinely tacit 
knowledge.  According  to  the  philosopher  and  Wittgen­
stein expert Allan Janik there are at least three different 
kinds of tacit knowledge that in principle can be made ex­
plicit and formally described.5 

His first example is knowledge that is kept tacit for po­

litical  or  economic  reasons. Trade  secrets of  craftsmen 
and  their guilds provide a historical example  which  at 

4 Ibid., p. 53. 
6 Janik, A.: Tacit Knowledge, Working Life  and  Scientific Method, 
Brenner Archive,  Innsbruck University, 1986. 

448 

Designing  for Skill 

least had  this as an ingredient.  The craftsmen's status, 
power and standard of  living often depended  on keeping 
others away from their knowledge. This was also part of 
the tacit knowledge that typographers had in the era of 
lead composing. The same  could  probably be said about 
many  professioneils  today,  including  designers  of 
computer  artifacts.  When  we,  with  a  tool  perspective, 
argue  that  tacit  knowledge  neither  can  nor  should  be 
made  explicit,  tacit  knowledge  based  on  this  kind  of 
professional trade secrets is not what we have in mind. 

The second  example concerns the kind  of  knowledge 
that in  principle  could  have  been  articulated  but  that 
never  was, because no one had an interest in doing it. As 
Janik put it : 'nobody pays much attention to the practice 
of blacksmiths until those practices are in danger of going 
out of existence.'6 However, it is not until we try to make 
explicit the tacit skill of a craft that we find  out to  what 
extent it also was tacit in a more fundamental way.7 The 
history of  Taylorism  from  the beginning of our century 
demonstrates  that  tacit  knowledge  does  get  lost  if  we 
assume that all skilled work can be reduced to algorithmic 
procedures. The use of computers in  working life in the 
1960s and 1970s was perhaps the peak of  this mistake, 
that is unless artificial intelligence and expert systems in 
the 1980s take us yet another step down the deskilling 
ladder. 

The third example of tacit knowledge that in principle 
can  be explicitly articulated is, according  to Janik, the 
absolute  presuppositions  of  everyday  practice. A  trivial 
example may be that when I write a text with my word 
processor and  move the mouse I assume without reflec-

6  Ibid., p. 4. 
7  In Göranzon, B. (ed.): Datautvecklingens Filosofi - tyst  kunskap 
och ny teknik, Carlsson & Jönsson, Malmö 1984, pp. 12-13, 
Göranzon calls the kind of consequences that we do not observe 
until after perhaps 4—5  years, 'third order consequences', as dis­
tinguished from immediately observable consequences, and con­
sequences like eye strain that we can observe within a year or so. 

Skills and the Tool  Perspective 

449 

tion that the cursor will move accordingly. Only in break­
down situations, to use our Heideggerian language, does 
this presupposition appear to me, for example if there is a 
technical  problem  with the mouse. A more general and 
serious example may be the presuppositions that the work 
mates I  have today  also will be around tomorrow. Cer­
tainly we can also purposely bring these assumptions to 
our attention, and in that sense make the tacit knowledge 
explicit - make  the-ready-to-hand, present-at-hand. But 
we live  our everyday life embedded  in a background  of 
such assumptions. To make them  explicit is at times an 
important endeavor, in social science typically performed 
as critique of ideology, and in professional activities, like 
design,  as  reflection-in-action.8  However,  to  make 
absolute presuppositions explicit again only partly makes 
tacit knowledge explicit. We could not perform skillfully if 
we  had  to  be  aware  of  them  all  the  time - that  would 
literally mean a breakdown of  professional competence, 
regardless of whether we talk about riding a bike, using a 
computer  artifact  or  attending  a  meeting  in  a  design 
team. 

The examples above demonstrate tacit knowledge that 
can  be  made  explicit  and  to  some  degree  formalized. 
Hence  when  we  talk  about  tacit  knowledge  it is  often 
something else we  have in mind. We think of knowledge 
that defies precise description by its very nature. 

Tacit Knowledge as Sensuous Experience 
Following Wittgenstein, Janik suggests that knowledge by 
familiarity is a kind of  tacit knowledge that results from 
sensuous experience. This is sensuous experiences that 
are  not  limited  to seeing.  Most  of  us  know  how  coffee 
smells and a clarinet sounds. But how do we describe it to 
someone  that does  not?  Once  you  know  by experience, 

8 This was, with reference to Schön D. A: The  Reflective Practi­
tioner - How Professionals Think  in Action, Basic Books, New 
York 1983, discussed in chapter 9, Other Ways of Seeing and 
Doing - External  Alternatives. 

450 

Designing  for Skill 

then you know, and there is no mystery about it. You will 
perfectly well understand when someone else talks about 
the sound  of  a  clarinet. But  to 'describe'  this sound  to 
someone that does not know it, the best thing you can do is 
to use paradigm cases, for example metaphors, analogies, 
and hints that remind him or her of something familiar. 
The  skill  involved  in  this  kind  of  tacit  knowledge  is 
associated  with  the ability  to  make subtle  discrimina­
tions - like between the sound of a clarinet and an oboe. 
We  are all  capable  of  such  judgments,  but  we  are  not 
equally good at it. 

However, in some  respects  these  kinds  of  sensuous 
knowledge also can be formalized and automated. It is an 
easily accomplished task to design a computer artifact to 
distinguish  between  a clarinet and  an  oboe.  It is quite 
different with the social competence of making judgments 
such as whether a  clarinet sounds nice, a cup  of  coffee 
smells awful, or a page layout has a nice balance. The skill 
to  make  sensuous,  typically  aesthetic  and  moral 
judgments is communicated  by examples under the gui­
dance of  someone  more skillful, and  learned  by experi­
ence. This kind of knowledge for making judgments based 
on sensuous experience  defies rational formalization  in 
the sense discussed in the tool perspective. 

Tacit  knowledge  based  on  sensuous  experience  also 
concerns another aspect of the tool perspective. How does 
a computer artifact differ from traditional tools  with re­
spect  to sensuous experience, especially  when  there  is 
more  to it  than meets the eye?  Not  many  years ago, it 
would have been  perfectly correct  to say that all we can 
sense using a computer artifact is the text from  the dis­
play that meets the eye, and the feeling of the keys when 
touching the keyboard. Hence, traditional knowledge by 
familiarity was by necessity constrained when computer 
artifacts replaced traditional tools. Current developments 
of computer workstation technology and in user interface 
design  are  widening  the  scope  considerably.  The  tool 
perspective suggests that we think of traditional tools as a 
design  ideal  in  the  following  respects:  What  kind  of 

Skills and the Tool  Perspective 

4SI 

sensuous experiences are possible with them? How can we 
design computer artifacts in these respects? But certainly 
there are not only limitations: computer artifacts based on 
modern workstation technology also open up possibilities 
for  new  sensuous experiences.  We  may  not  be  used  to 
thinking of  the knowledge  of  a  young expert  computer 
game  player as tacit  knowledge. But is this not exactly 
what it is?  Hence, it seems  that in  designing computer 
artifacts as tools we must investigate both constraints and 
new possibilities for acquisition of tacit knowledge based on 
sensuous  experience.  Maybe  we  will find 
that  the 
possibilities are  only  pale copies of  the originals, like  a 
simple computer-based tone generator is of a clarinet. But 
we will also find  new challenging tools for composing and 
playing electronic music that defies some of the limits of 
traditional instruments. 

Tacit Knowledge - Tradition and  Transcendence 
Now  to the paradox of  rule following behavior. As men­
tioned, many rules that we follow in practice are scarcely 
to be distinguished from the behavior in which  we  per­
form  them.  Tacit  knowledge  that  involves  following 
specific rules in  practice is the  practical understanding 
that Wittgenstein as well as Polanyi emphasize. It is the 
kind of knowledge, as a rule following activity, that only 
can be acquired as practical experience. This is typically 
how  craftsmanship is acquired. The  tacit  knowledge  is 
passed  on  by  example from  master  to  apprentice. The 
rules are only  rarely made explicit as prescriptions. In 
most cases we simply do not know  how to do  that. They 
are  tacit  knowledge.  We  do  not  know  that  we  have 
followed a rule until we have done it. The most important 
rules  we  follow  in  skillful  performance  defy  explicit 
formalization, but  we  still  understand  them. As Polanyi 
put it:9 

It is  pathetic to  watch the endless efforts - equipped 
with microscopy and chemistry, with mathematics and 

9 Polanyi, op. cit., p. 53. 

452 

Designing  for Skill 

electronics - to reproduce a single violin of the kind the 
half-literate Stradevarius  turned  out  as a  matter of 
routine more than 200 years ago. 

This is the traditional aspect of human rule  following be­
havior. Polanyi points out that our perhaps most explicit 
rule based  system - the practice of  Common Law — also 
uses earlier examples as paradigm cases:10 

This procedure recognizes the principle of all traditio­
nalism that practical wisdom is more truly embodied in 
action than expressed in the rules of action. 

According to Polanyi this is also true for science, no matter 
how rationalistic and explicit it claims to be, the point be­
ing that:11 

while the articulate contents of science are successfully 
taught all over the world in hundreds of new universi­
ties, the unspecifiable art of  scientific research has not 
yet penetrated to many of these. 

The  art  of  scientific  research  defies  complete  formali­
zation; it must partly be learned by examples from a mas­
ter whose behavior one trusts. The suggestion in the tool 
perspective to actively include skilled users in the design of 
new computer artifacts, when their old tools and working 
practices  are  redesigned,  can  hardly  be  given  better 
illustrations.  After  all, few  social  activities  have  been 
under such pressure of rational formalization as Law and 
Science, and still they are heavily dependent on practical 
experience and  paradigm cases. Why should  we  expect 
other work practices that have been under less pressure of 
formalization  to  be  less  based  on  practical  experience, 
paradigm cases and tacit knowledge? To take the extreme 
example,  Tayloristic  reduction  of  work  to  algorithmic 
procedures is not only a democratic failure, but has also 

10 Ibid., p. 54. 
11 Ibid., p. 53. 

Skills and the Tool  Perspective 

453 

failed in terms of utilizing the workers' tacit knowledge as 
practical understanding of the labor process. 

In  rule following  behavior there is  also the aspect of 
creative transcendence of traditional behavior. Again, this 
is what is typical of skillful human behavior, and exactly 
what defies precise formalization. By mastery of the rules 
comes  the freedom  to extend  them. This creativity  de­
pends on what Janik calls 'the open-textured character of 
rule-following behavior.'12 To begin with, we learn to fol­
low a rule as a kind of dressage, but in the end we do it as 
creative activity. To  be  able to follow a  rule is to have 
learned how to in practice continue an example we have 
been given. Mastery of the rules puts us in a position to in­
vent new  ways of  carrying on.  This skill is tacit  know­
ledge. In Janik's words:13 

Another way of putting the matter would be to say that 
there is always and ineliminably the possibility that we 
can follow the rule in  a wholly unforeseen way. This 
could not happen if we had to have an explicit rule to go 
on from the start. (...) The possibility of radical innova­
tion is, however, the logical limit of description. This is 
what tacit knowledge is all about. 

This is why rule based expert systems cannot completely 
replace the creativity of a human competence, and why in 
the tool  perspective there is such strong epistemological 
focus  on  skill  both  in  design  and  in  use  of  computer 
artifacts. The tool perspective  focuses on traditional skill, 
not at the cost  of  creative transcendence, but  as a  neces­
sary condition for it. 

Not Just Instrumental Skill 
Now  to some critical points concerning skill  and  a tool 
perspective. 

12 Janik, op. cit., p. 8. 
13 Ibid., pp. 11-12. 

454 

Designing  for Skill 

The competence involved in using tools in a labor pro­
cess can, with reference to Jürgen Habermas, be  under­
stood according the kind of interest that is supported.14 

An important aspect in use of tools is instrumental ac­

tion, as when a carpenter uses a hammer to drive a nail. 
He realizes more or less defined goals under given condi­
tions. The  purpose is effective technical control and cor­
rect evaluation of  the environment.  By learning rules of 
instrumental action  we acquire  skills. They put us in a 
position to solve  problems. Incompetent  behavior reveals 
itself in instrumental failure. 

However,  there  is  more  to  competence  than  instru­

mental skills, as there is more to labor than instrumental 
work. In use of tools in a labor process we do not only per­
form  instrumental  actions,  we  also  participate  in  lan­
guage-games,  or  in  Habermas'  words,  an  institutional  1 
framework  of  symbolic interaction. We  perform  ordina­
ry-language  intersubjective  communication  actions.  As 
internalization of the social conventions of the labor pro­
cess the carpenter  learns 'correct'  behavior,  the compe­
tence  to  follow  (and  sometimes  skillfully  break)  con­
sensual norms or rules. Deviant behavior reveals itself as 
violation of social conventions, and provokes social sanc­
tions. 

To use computer artifacts in a specific labor process is 
both  instrumental  action  and  communicative  action; it 
requires both  instrumental work skills and social inter­
action competence.  We  can distinguish between what it 
means to follow a  rule to perform instrumental actions 
like operating a computer artifact, and what it means to 
follow a rule in the sense of knowing how to act according 
to  the norms for  social interaction in  which  the instru­
mental use of the artifact is embedded. It is in practice by 
repetition and experience that we learn both kind of rules. 

14 These knowledge  interests were  referred to in the introduction 
to both Part I on Design Philosophy and Part II on The Art and 
Science  of  Designing Computer Artifacts. See e.g. Habermas, J.: 
Toward a Rational  Society, Heinemann, London 1971. 

Skills and the  Tool Perspective 

455 

Professional skill as expertness or proficiency is to know 
the rules so well that you know when  to creatively tran­
scend  them  and  eventually  create  new  rules.  Both  in­
strumental  and  communicative  aspects  of  the  tacit 
knowledge of skillful following of rules in practice are im­
portant to understand in design of computer artifacts. 

However, no matter how much we, given the tool per­

spective, acknowledge the tacit professional competence of 
the users there is inherently an unfortunate bias towards 
the instrumental use of computer artifacts. The tool per­
spective may create a  blindness  for tacit  knowledge that 
stems  from  the  maintenance  of  the  institutional  frame­
work in which computer artifacts are embedded.16 

This critique could also be extended to a gender critique 
of the tool perspective, since women traditionally are more 
socialized to perform actions to follow and maintain social 
norms  of  institutional frameworks  than  to  perform  in­
strumental  actions.  The  traditional  tacit  knowledge  of 
women remains invisible in the background.16 

Another similar critique of the tool perspective involves 
the focus on individual skill, whereas less attention is paid 
to collective  competence of a group  of workers. Typically 
work and interaction in labor processes are performed as 
cooperation. The individual's work is dependent on that of 
others. Communicative actions are important aspects of 
this cooperation,  but  there are also cooperative instru­
mental actions, mediated via the artifacts and the mate­
rials being used. The  labor process is highly integrated, 

16 In the UTOPIA project we tried to focus on such aspects, but 
more as a complement to the tool perspective than as rethinking 
of it. 
16 The importance of the social competence of office workers has 
using a theoretical approach close to the one outlined in this book 
been analyzed by Wynn, E.: Office Conversation as an Informa­
tion Medium, University of California, Berkeley 1979 
(dissertation). With special reference to the work of women see 
e.g. Lie,  M. and  Rasmussen, B.:  Kan 'kontordamene' 
automatiseres?, IFIM, Trondheim 1984, or Ressner,  U.: Den 
dolda hierarkin, Tema Nova, Stockholm 1985. 

456 

Designing  for Skill 

requiring both coordination and planning of the individual 
activities, and of joint activities. There is no  reason why 
cooperation  and  collective  control  as  design  ideals  in 
work-oriented design should be subordinated to the ideal 
of individual skill. 

Hence, the tool perspective as design ideal needs to be 
supplemented with ideals that help focus on cooperative 
aspects in general and especially on  the tacit knowledge 
performed  as social  interaction  competence  in  a  labor 
process. 

Qualifications and New Technology 
In this last section I will return to the Marxist approach 
focusing on  changes in skill when  new technology is in­
troduced.17 I will relate the tool perspective to influential 
'Marxist' empirical  studies  of  qualifications in  working 
life. What do these studies conclude about constraints and 
possibilities for skilled work when computer artifacts are 
being used in working life? Which are the constraints on a 
craft design ideal? 

Is Craft Work Just of  Historical Interest? 
The  craftsman  worked  with  hand  tools  and  machine-
tools,  and  had  a  great  autonomy  in  using  these  tools. 
Planning of the job was integrated with the manual exe­
cution of craft work. He was a highly skilled worker. 

Mechanization came with the use of  machinery. Ma­
chines  replaced  hand  tools.  The  craftsman  was  trans­
formed into an operator of these machines. At  the same 
time  planning of  the  work  was  done  by  engineers and 
administrators as 'intellectual' planning and design work 
distinguishable from  the 'manual' work  of operating the 

17 Hence, the theoretical context is the same as in the discussions 
of the democracy aspect of the DEMOS and UTOPIA  projects in Part 
III on Designing  for  Democracy at Work, although the  emphasis 
is a different one. 

Skills and the Tool Perspective 

457 

machines. There  was a  division  between  practical and 
theoretical work. 

Automatization comes into its own especially with the 

use of  computers. It changes the work of not only opera­
tors, but also engineers and administrators. A new relation 
between  'manual'  and  'intellectual',  or  practical  and 
theoretical work is taking form. Is it more like craft work 
than  mechanized  industrial  work?  Is  it  neither,  but 
something completely new? 

Craft work is the point of reference in many studies of 
qualifications and automation. In  Labor  and  Monopoly 
Capital,the influential work by Harry Braverman from 
1974, it is both point of reference and ideal. This is also true 
of Robert Blauner's classical study from 1964, Alienation 
and  Freedom.19 However, as will be discussed below, this 
point of reference is questioned  by several later studies, 
especially German ones. Moreover the results of the vari­
ous studies differ drastically. 

The results from  the different studies can  be catego­
rized according to their main conclusions. They are: qual­
ification (upgrading), dequalification (degrading), polar­
ization, requalification and segmentation.20 

Qualification (Upgrading) 

Work for craft printers is a source of involvement and 
commitment. It is not chiefly a means to life, but an ex-

18 Braverman, H.: Labor and  Monopoly Capital - The Degrada­
tion of Work  in the Twentieth Century, Monthly Review Press, 
New York 1974. 
19 Blauner, R.: Alienation and  Freedom, - The  Factory Worker 
and  His Industry, The University of Chicago Press, London 1964. 
20 For a more detailed overview of these 'theses' see Björkman, T.: 
'Reparatörsyrkets utveckling' and *Frân polarisering till omkva-
lificering" in Nyberg, P. et al.: Yrkesarbete  i förändring, 
Carlssons, Stockholm 1984, Broady, D. and Helgeson, B.: 'Farväl 
till arbetsdelningen?' in Broady, D. (ed.): 
Professionaliseringsfàllan, Carlssons, Täby 1985, Björkman, T. 
and Lundquist,  K.: Yrkeskunnande och  datorisering, 
Statskontoret, Stockholm 1986, and Aronzon, G. (ed.): Arbetets 
krav och mänsklig utveckling, Prisma, Stockholm 1983. 

458 

Designing  for Skill 

pression of their selfhood and identity. For craftsmen, 
work is almost the expression of an inner need, rather 
than the grudging payment of a debt imposed by exter­
nal sources. Since the printer is almost the prototype of 
the non-alienated  worker in modern industry,  he can 
provide a useful reference point with which to compare 
the situation  of  workers in a  number of  different in­
dustrial settings. Yet, it is not certain how long printers 
can  maintain  this position, for  technological  innova­
tions and economic developments threaten to eliminate 
not only the typesetter's control but the job itself. The 
newspaper industry has developed a process by which 
printed type can be set automatically by a columnist or 
reporter as he writes out  his copy  on the typewriter. 
The craft  unions may remain strong enough  to resist 
this and other similar technological developments, but 
if they do not, printing may change rapidly from a craft 
to an automated industry, and this chapter will remain 
only of historical interest.21 

This  is  how  Robert  Blauner  ends  his  chapter  on  'The 
printer: a free worker in a craft industry in the classical 
study on Alienation and Freedom. It is for several reasons 
of  interest  to  our  discussion  of  skill  and  technological 
change. 

Blauner found that graphic workers were highly skil­

led, and had considerable freedom and control in the labor 
process.  Work  was  not  very  divided,  and  it  was  mea­
ningfully related  to the total organization of work. Gra­
phic workers even  controlled conditions of employment. 
Their unions were strong. All the graphic workers really 
lacked were ownership of the shop they worked in and the 
rights to the finished product of  their work. This was in 
the U.S.A. in 1964. There is no doubt, that to Blauner the 
craft work of  the printer was an  ideal, the ideal  of  the 
independent craftsman of pre-industrial times. 

21 Blauner, op. cit., pp. 56-57. 

Skills and the  Tool  Perspective 

459 

It is this ideal he compared  with developments in the 
textile, auto and chemical industries. What he generally 
found  when  production  got  more  mechanized  was,  as 
compared  with  the ideal  of  craft  work,  deskilling, less 
control, and alienation of  workers, combined  with a de­
cline in number of jobs. But there was hope for the future, 
the future of automation. The automation workers,  wor­
king with the remaining non-automatable work  in cont­
rol rooms or with repair and maintenance, were the new 
'non-manual' craft  workers replacing the  unskilled alie­
nated  factory  jobs  of  machine  and  assembly-line  tech­
nologies. (Programmers and  designers definitely fit into 
this category  as well.)  Not  that the  new  craft  workers 
shared the traditional manual skill with older crafts, but 
the responsibility required in exercising  judgment gave 
similar opportunities for discretion and  initiative. Com­
pared with mechanization work, there was an upgrading. 
This  was  of  course  good  news for  the  trade  unions. 
Problems and critiques of the consequences arising from 
the introduction  of  new technology  reported from  many 
work  places were important, but could  be seen as tem­
porary,  and  due  to  vanish  when  mechanization  was 
replaced by automatization. This was the dominant trade 
union  view  when  computer  artifacts  started  to  be 
introduced on a large scale in Swedish industry.22 

More  than  twenty  years  have  now  passed  since 
Blauner conducted  his study. We should be able to give 
some of  the answers to what happened  to the printer as 
craft worker. 

In short: The printers' newspaper unions in the U.S.A 
could not resist the introduction of new technology. Many 
typographers have not only lost control over their work, 
but also their jobs. Newspapers have since the mid 1960s 
gone through several drastic changes of  technology and 
organization.  Management  has  actively  Trusted'  their 

22 This was the main analysis in Fackföreningsrörelsen och den 
tekniska utvecklingen, an approved report to the LO, (The 
Swedish Federation of Trade Unions) 1966 congress. 

460 

Designing  for Skill 

unions.  In  Europe  the  peak  of  this trend  was  perhaps 
reached in 1986 when  newspaper capitalist Robert Mur-
dock fired  the typographers  from  the venerable Times, 
and  set  up  a  new  computer-based  printing  factory  in 
Wapping outside London. Typographers and their unions 
were not allowed inside the fences of the heavily protected 
factory.  The  machines  are  now  operated  by  electrical 
workers  with  a  minimum  of  typographic  training  and 
skill. In this sense his chapter on the craft printer remains 
only of historical interest. 

On  the  other  hand  the  same  threat  from  new 
technology has (as has been discussed earlier) been met in 
Scandinavia by other strategies from the graphic workers 
and  their  unions.  The  UTOPIA  project  with  the  tool 
perspective has been part of a strategy of demanding that 
new  technology must maintain and  develop rather than 
decrease quality of work and  products. And  this strategy 
has been quite successful.  Trade unions have  remained 
relatively strong. Many graphic workers still have chal­
lenging skilled  jobs  working with  computer-based  page 
make-up  and  picture  processing.  These  are  results  of 
their acceptance of  new technology on certain conditions. 
The unions have accepted that the number of jobs might 
decrease when new technology is introduced, but the con­
dition for this acceptance  has been  that no one is fired. 
That has been part of  the agreement with management. 
Skilled graphic workers are still demanded in many areas 
of the printing industry. 

However, what we witness today may only be a tempo­

rary prolongation of  craft work in  the printing industry, 
to  eventually  be  replaced  by  work  in  other  media  and 
desktop publishing in the offices. In another twenty years 
we  will  know. Today printing has  and  has  not changed 
'from a craft to an automated industry'. 

Dequalification (Degrading) 
However, what happened in the early 1970s when com­
puter artifacts became commonplace in industry was not 
the automation Blauner had been describing. Computers 

Skills and the  Tool Perspective 

461 

were used in planning and  control systems supporting a 
separation  of  planning from  the  practical  execution  of 
work. Jobs got even more divided and controlled than be­
fore. If anything, we were witnessing a giant deskilling of 
the  work  force  with  the aid  of  computers.  As  was  dis­
cussed  in Part III on  Designing  for  Democracy, Harry 
Braverman's Labor and  Monopoly Capital  had a subtitle 
giving the clear message: the degradation of  work  in the 
twentieth century, which seemed much better to capture 
and explain what was happening. 

As for Blauner, traditional craft work, the worker who 
plans, controls and executes complete tasks, was an ideal 
for  Braverman.  In  modern  computer-based  versions  of 
Taylor's  'scientific  management'  Braverman  saw  the 
ultimate  means of  deskilling workers in the interest  of 
control and profit. Not only was the deskilled worker eas­
ier to control with the new technology, he was also chea­
per to buy. Though Braverman shared with Blauner the 
craft ideal,  his  reading of  Marx  was  certainly different 
from Blauner's, and so were the illustrative cases he pre­
sented. 

As has been mentioned I was deeply involved in action 
research  to  support  industrial  democracy  both  in  the 
printing  industry23  and  in  repair-  and  maintenance 
work.24  And  in  both  cases  Braverman,  rather  than 
Blauner, seemed  to  be  right.  Computer-based  systems 
were  deliberately  used  in  attempts  to deskill  workers, 
make them easier to control and cheaper to buy. Histori­
cal studies by David Noble on the emergence of numerical 
controlled  machines  also  demonstrated  the  deliberate 
aims of designing the new technology so that it required 
less skill to operate and took control away from the work-

23 Ehn, P. et al.: Brytningstid, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1984. 
24 Ehn, P. et al.: Vï  vägrar låta detaljstyra oss, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1978. 

462 

Designing  for Skill 

ers.25  Several  studies  argued  that  the  new  computer 
workers, like computer operators and programmers, also 
seemed to be under the same deskilling attack. Signs of 
standardization of these jobs were already seen.26 

Braverman's dequalification thesis had a similar posi­

tive reception in Swedish trade unions as had Blauner's 
upgrading thesis ten years earlier.27 

However, as was discussed in Part III on Designing for 
Democracy at Work, there were many cases the dequali­
fication  thesis failed to explain. Some managerial strate­
gies advocated  the use of skilled  workers, computer arti­
facts were sometimes used in a way that increased rather 
than decreased qualifications, patterns were different in 
different branches of industry, etc. 

It was in this period  that the UTOPIA  project and the 
tool perspective were born with the idea of counteracting 
the main dequalification trend by actually, as a part of a 
trade  union  strategy, attempting  to  design  skill based 
computer artifacts for newspaper production. This was a 
design approach, an attempt to use action research to in­
vestigate the possibilities for design and  use of  skill-en­
hancing computer artifacts. For more elaborated  qualifi­
cation research the interest in Scandinavia now turned to 
German theoretical and empirical investigations. 

25 Noble, D.: 'Social Choice in Machine Design — The Case of Au­
tomatically Controlled Machine Tools,  and a Challenge for Labor' 
in Politics & Society, nos 3-4,1978. 
26 See e.g. Greenbaum, J.: 'Division of Labor in the Computer 
Field' in Monthly Review, vol 28 no 3,1976 and by Kraft, P.: Pro­
grammers and  Managers - the  routinization of  computer  pro­
gramming in the United  States, Springer Verlag, New York 1977. 
27  In the report Solidariskt  Medbestämmande which was ap­
proved by the LO congress 1976 (LO: Codetermination on the Foun­
dation of Solidarity, Prisma, Stockholm 1977), the control and de-
qualification thesis was the main message in the analysis of the 
use of computers in working life. The 'data ombudsman' (who 
was a woman) also actively supported that Braverman's book  was 
rapidly translated to Swedish. 

Skills and the Tool Perspective 

463 

Polarization 
With  Horst Kern  and  Michael Schumann  the polariza­
tion thesis was introduced in Scandinavian debate.28 What 
they found in their extensive empirical study was neither 
dequalification nor upgrading, but a polarization of skills. 
There was a small group  of  winners in  the automation 
race,  getting  relatively  qualified  and  autonomous  jobs, 
whereas most workers got even more repetitive and alie­
nated conditions to work under. The changes also heavily 
depended  on  type  of  industry  and  production  process. 
However,  these  empirical  results  reported  in  the  now 
classical  Industriarbeit  und  Arbeiterbewusstsein  from 
1970, were already questioned  not only by other resear­
chers, but also by Kern and Schumann themselves when 
the polarization thesis by the end of the 1970s reached the 
Scandinavian debate and took over  as the major expla­
nation. 

The craft ideal may also be seen as the point of  refer­

ence for Kern and Schumann. Autonomy as the possibility 
of  independent and self-governed  work  activities was a 
highly  ranked  property  of  a  job.  This included  autono­
mous planning and control of the work involved, methods 
and tools to be used, when to perform a task, the pace of 
the work, quality and quantity of products, spatial mobi­
lity, etc. 

With German accuracy they defined in detail the qua­

lifications to be measured. A main distinction was between 
process dependent and process independent qualifications. 
Among the process  dependent  qualifications they in­

vestigated craft qualifications like  manual skill, feel for 
materials and knowledge about them; technical qualifica­
tions including knowledge about abstract technical func­
tions and relations; knowledge about construction of the 
technical equipment  used  and  the layout of  the machi­
nery, and knowledge about how to operate the machinery. 

28  Kern, H. and Schumann, M.: Industriarbeit  und  Arbeiterbe­
wusstsein I  und  II, Europäische Verlagsanstalt,  Frankfurt am 
Main 1970. 

464 

Designing  for Skill 

As process  independent  qualifications  they  mention 
flexibility,  technical 'intelligence',  perception, technical 
sensibility, responsibility, accuracy, reliability, and inde­
pendence. 

Other measures had to do with opportunities for social 
interaction, both as actual cooperation in the labor process, 
and as informal contacts. This included aspects like influ­
ence and control from others, and on others' work, oppor­
tunities for cooperation and helping each other, and  op­
portunities to exchange information about production. 

The skill categories Kern and Schumann used in their 
investigation were much more refined than the skill con­
cepts applied by Blauner and Braverman, and doubtless 
more elaborated than the skill concept we were operating 
with in the UTOPIA project applying the tool perspective. 
For further  refinement of  the tool  perspective as an ap­
proach to skill-based  design of  computer artifacts their 
categories seem extremely useful. 

As to the strategic conclusions and  the contradiction 
between  theoretical  technical-scientific  knowledge  and 
the workers' practical empirical understanding Kern and 
Schumann advocated  that the practical base should  be 
maintained, and that production workers should incorpo­
rate theoretical knowledge into their practice, rather than 
strive to become engineers. This position, based on a vast 
empirical material, comes close to the strategy we in the 
UTOPIA  project  tried out as action  research and  actual 
design. 

Requalification 
Still another influential German  research group  is Pro­
jektgruppe  Automation  und  Qualification (PAQ).29  Their 
extensive investigations and their somewhat differing re­
sults, and especially recommendations, are perhaps the 
most  popular thesis in  qualification  research today. To 

29 See e.g. Projektgruppe Automation und Qualifikation (PAQ): 
Widersprüche  der  Automationsarbeit,  Argument  Verlag,  Berlin 
1987. 

Skills and the  Tool Perspective 

465 

them the deskilled or low-skilled end of the polarization 
thesis mainly consists of  'rest functions'.  These are left 
from earlier forms of production. It is work that in princi­
ple can be, but has not yet been, automated. PAQ's position 
has been called the requalification thesis. They focus on 
how work tasks are redistributed and reintegrated, such 
as between typographers and journalists concerning e.g. 
page  make-up, layout, and  editing. They  also focus  on 
completely new tasks and qualifications, like those of pro­
grammers and designers. 

PAQ  present a  much  more  comprehensive  view  than 
Blauner's early study, but it is about as optimistic as his 
concerning  the  promises  of  automation.  Theoretically 
they see automation as a major change of  human work. 
'The  necessary  work'  in  the  future is  what  cannot  be 
automated, like handling fault  and  errors; supervision 
and programming of production equipment; and research 
and development. 

The requalification thesis is of special interest in the 
discussion of skill-based design and the tool perspective. 
Craft work is by  no  means an  ideal for  PAQ.  They ask: 
What reason is there to measure the 'new* with the old as 
its measure? What are we told if we find that a job is more 
or less craft-like, i.e. more or less like a historically specific 
form of  work? 

The point is that not only do old qualifications vanish, 

but also completely new ones develop. And  new integra­
tions occur.  Think of  the typographers in a longer  per­
spective than the one we had in the UTOPIA project. What 
would  they have been without the dequalification of  the 
writing monks? Certainly some important product quali­
ties were lost, but still we are quite happy with Guten­
berg's invention of the movable type. Without  this tech­
nological change there would not have been any typogra­
phers. With computer artifacts for desktop publishing in 
the 1980s a similar change may occur. Maybe the unborn 
typographer is a secretary or a middle manager that will 
integrate graphic design in their other tasks. Beyond the 
typographers, who  will deplore  this change? How will it 

466 

Designing  for Skill 

affect the strength of the trade union movement, not only 
the graphic workers' union? What are the consequences 
for  the  quality  of  different  kinds  of  typographical 
products? Arguing for a tool perspective, we will have  to 
consider  these  kind  of  wider  reflections  on  changes  in 
qualifications. This is especially the case if we make claims 
that the tool perspective is a cornerstone in work-oriented 
design of  computer artifacts as  a strategy for  democra­
tization and skill in the interest of all workers. 

PAQ's position concerning qualifications for automation 
runs counter to the tool perspective. PAQ argues the need 
for  extensive  technical-scientific  knowledge  to  operate, 
maintain,  and  re-program  computer  artifacts.  In  this 
perspective a craft work approach based on the workers' 
practical understanding must seem to be a dead end. 

In my view, PAQ  may have committed  the mistake of 
just  extrapolating  from  the  computer  technology  they 
found in use. But things happen fast in the development of 
computer  artifacts.  Today,  not  many  years  after  their 
study, it is possible to design computer artifacts , based on 
workstation  technology,  where  formal  training  in 
mathematics and logic is far from the most essential qua­
lifications to  operate  and  re-program  this  technology. 
Think of  what a skilled graphic artist can do  with most 
advanced  computer  artifacts for  picture  processing.  Or 
think of all Macintosh users. It is not technical-scientific 
knowledge that marks the master in these achievements. 
A reply could be that these are not 'real systems', that 
this kind of programming is not 'real programming", etc. 
But what reason is there to think that the way computer 
artifacts were designed, and programmed, in the 1970s is 
more real than the new tool-like computer artifacts, dis­
cussed in the  previous chapter, that now are becoming 
more and more commonplace? 

However, the gap between the PAQ perspective and the 
tool perspective may not be as wide as it seems. PAQ has 
observed  that  experimentation is a  main  way  in  which 
workers learn to operate computer artifacts,  and recom­
mends  this kind  of  experimental  practice.  This  is how 

Skills and the  Tool Perspective 

467 

many  professional  programmers  work,  supported  by 
modern  exploratory  programming  environments  de­
signed according to craft-like principles, and it is a basic 
idea in the tool perspective. 

PAQ argues that the practical experimentation must be 

based on scientific theory, as opposed  to the tacit know­
ledge of  craft-like practice. I am not arguing that theore­
tical  knowledge  is irrelevant  when  operating and  pro­
gramming computer artifacts. Some  of the tools for this 
may be highly abstract and theoretical models, but others 
may rather be designed as practical tools reminding one of 
traditional work  practice.  As  discussed  in the previous 
chapter: They already exist, and they are most useful. If 
the user wants to change the size of a circle, why not do it 
right away, by hand, on the screen as direct manipulation, 
instead of  bothering with its theoretical formula and the 
appropriate parameters? 

Segmentation 
Das Ende  der Arbeitsteilung?30  was published in 1984 by 
Kern and Schumann. It was a kind of replication of their 
earlier study, but this time with a new  result. The low-
skilled end in the polarization had  melted away. In  the 
most automated plants there were no need for  unskilled 
labor.  What  was  left  were  the  skilled  workers.  This 
resembles  the  requalification  thesis,  but  there  is  less 
technology optimism.  What automation  really may lead 
to,  according  to  Kern  and  Schumann,  is  even  more 
problematic than the polarization  between high and low 
skilled  workers. It is a  segmentation of  the work force, 
between those who have a  qualified  job, and  those who 
never will get a job at all. 

But  the  whole  situation  is  most  complex.  Kern  and 
Schumann see  new  production concepts and  coming po­
litical changes as determining factors. Trends today can­

30  Kern, H. and Schumann, M.: Das Ende der  Arbeitsteilung? 
Rationalisierung in  der industriellen  Production: Bestandsauf­
nahme,  Trendbestimmung, Verlag S.H.  Beck, München 1984. 

468 

Designing  for Skill 

not just be extrapolated. The coming development cannot 
be reduced to extrapolations from past rationalizations. It 
has become  more  important for  management  to  utilize 
skills and  trade unions as  productive forces to optimize 
profits. To  use the concepts from an earlier chapter:  re­
sponsible autonomy rather than direct control may in the 
era of the computer be the dominant managerial strategy. 
To call this new situation capitalism with a human face 
might definitely be to go too far. But the situation certainly 
opens up some  new  and  challenging  opportunities  for 
skill-based design of computer artifacts. The risk is that 
the democracy aspect of work-oriented design may be lost. 
This risk does not  merely concern the subordination  of 
skill-based design to managerial interests and the loss of a 
clear view of desirable changes in the interest of labor, but 
just as much the risk of skill-based design to be diminished 
to a strategy for the already  privileged, those who  were 
l u c k y  e n o u g h   t o  g e t  a   j o b .   D e s i g n i n g   f o r   s k i l l   a n d  
democracy,  not  the one without the other - that is the 
challenge to work-oriented design. 

Epilogue 

'In all important matters, style, 
not sincerity, is the essential.' 

Oscar Wilde in Chameleon 

Epilogue 
Postmodern  Reflections 
on Work-Oriented Design 
of Computer Artifacts 

What is  the future of  work-oriented  design of computer 
artifacts? 

The times are postmodern, we are told. Everything has 
become style. We live our lives in subcultures, all  with 
their own styles. Life is style, as are science, philosophy, 
art, literature, architecture, etc. In all important matters, 
style, not sincerity, is the essential.  Our conditions are 
postmodern,  because the 'modern  project' of  Enlighten­
ment has failed. The 'master narratives' of emancipation 
have collapsed.  The rationality of  modern science, tech­
nology and industry has taken us beyond the pre-capita-
listic tradition-based society, but brought us to the eve of 
destruction. The  Utopia  of  freedom  through liberalism 
has failed. So  has, however,  the  alternative  Utopia  of 
communism. We  are left with fragmentation and chaos. 
We  live  in  an era  of  lost  innocence - in  a  postmodern 
condition. 

If this is the case; where does it leave us with our project 
of  work-oriented  design  of  computer  artifacts?  In  this 
epilogue I will, as a summary, make a few comments on 
this. I will characterize the outlined project in terms of the 
traditional, the modern, and  the postmodern, and I will 
reflect  about  the future of  work-oriented  design in the 
postmodern condition. 

First it should, however, be noticed that the postmodern 
condition  refers to two quite different,  but interrelated 

472 

Epilogue 

conditions.  One  is a  postmodern  mode  of  thinking, ex­
pressed as trends or styles in philosophy, science, art, lite­
rature, etc. The other is a  characteristic of  our contem­
porary high technology societies in the West, typically re­
ferred to with names like the media society, the informa­
tion society, post-industrialism, etc. 

In other words: The postmodern condition both refers to 
contemporary language-games played in art and science, 
language-games of  resistance to modern rationality, and 
to a fragmented society of subcultures and local language-
games, life-styles rather than social classes. 

The postmodern suggestion in  the postmodern condi­
tion is that we  have  to  abandon all our  master  narra­
tives - scientific and political - and the very idea of  rep­
resentations of 'truth'. What is suggested is a strategy of 
resistance by 'deconstruction' and 'suspecting', not a con­
struction  of  an  oppositional  alternative-a  better  and 
greater 'truth'.  In  art, literature, and  architecture  this 
takes the form of irony and meta-linguistic play. 

This is, of course, a gross simplification of major theo­

retical and artistic discourses today. But it is a challenge to 
'revisit' our own story with some suspicion and irony. 

A True Story? 
What  do  we find  if  we 'revisit' work-oriented  design  of 
computer artifacts in the light of  the postmodern condi­
tion? 
•  A  romantic and  neo-conservative  return to tradition-
based values such as tools, craft, competence, care, and 
relationship? The emphasis on practical understanding 
and tacit knowledge, the ideal of the skilled craftsman 
making high  quality products, and  the frequent  refe­
rences to a  Heideggerian  approach  could  be signs  of 
this. A  return to the good  old  days before  industrial 
capitalism in the era of the computer. 

•  A modern rationalistic project? A late (too late?) exam­
ple of  'the modern  project' of  Enlightenment from the 

Postmodern  reflections 

473 

French  Revolution  and  onwards?  The  emancipatory 
ideal of freedom, change and progress, the emphasis on 
knowledge,  work,  and  technology,  the Marxist  labor 
process approach, and the purpose  of humanizing the 
rationalization process, could  be signs of  this - a per­
sistence in the 'master narrative' of a Utopia of  demo­
cratic socialism, when it, in  practice, has collapsed in 
most so-called  socialistic countries, and  when  only  a 
minority  in  the  societies  of  contemporary  Western 
capitalism seek this ideal. 

•  A postmodern  resistance to machine slavery in an era 
of lost innocence in the simulation culture of the 'infor­
mation and media society'? The critique of the modern 
obsession with rationalistic thinking and 'true' repre­
sentations, the emphasis on local language-games, the 
acknowledgement of the importance of styles in science 
and design as well as in art, and the plea for playfulness 
and pleasurable involvement in the  use of  those arti­
facts we call computers could all be signs of this. 

All these signs are there. Are we then left with an eclectic 
postmodern play with words, without a comprehensive or 
coherent scientific and  political orientation? The question 
becomes even more important to address in the light of the 
philosophical foundations involved.  Frequent references 
are  made  to  a  Heideggerian,  a  Marxist,  and  a 
Wittgensteinian approach, in a  way  corresponding to a 
traditional, a modern, and  a postmodern mode of think­
ing, although the conflicts between them have not  really 
been resolved. The suggestion of a need to transcend the 
disciplinary boundaries,  not only  between human, natu­
ral, and social sciences, but also between art and science, 
and between the language-games of science, design, and 
of use, and the attempt to integrate the knowledge inte­
rests  of  intersubjective  communication,  instrumental 
control, and emancipation, does  not  make the approach 
less eclectic. Eclecticism, what could be worse? Maybe that 
Heidegger really was a Nazi, that Stalin was a  Marxist, 
and that Wittgenstein... 

474 

Epilogue 

Still there is a 'truth' which I have tried to legitimate, 

not innocently, but constructively — an alternative of  op­
position. In summary it reads as follows: 

Work-oriented design of  computer artifacts could be a 
modern  emancipatory  project,  a language-game  among 
many in a political process towards the Utopia of not only 
a democratic, but also a pleasurable and creative working 
life in the era of the computer. This project may be set in 
motion by struggles for qualitative changes in the partici­
pative structures of design and use of computer artifacts, 
emphasizing both  new local democratic procedures, and 
the creation of family resemblance between the language-
games of design and use, beyond the limits of systems de­
scriptions and formalization of skills. 

Furthermore, this modern project suggests that tradi­

tional values of work, like the craft skill ideal and pleasure 
in work, can and should be applied when designing per­
haps the most significant artifact of all in the postmodern 
simulation culture - the computer. 

The project even goes one step further, suggesting that 

computer artifacts can, and perhaps even should, be  de­
signed to transcend the borders between work and play -
the use of computer artifacts at work as a playful and en­
joyable activity. 

Though based on a critical attitude to the contemporary 

social, cultural, political, technological and scientific con­
ditions it is an optimistic view of opposition - an alterna­
tive of opposition argued under the postmodern condition. 

The Postmodern Society 
There  are  family  resemblances  between  postmodern 
thinking and work-oriented design of computer artifacts, 
for example with regard  to the critique of the major con­
tributions of  science and the scientific  method, with re­
gard to the emphasis on language-games and styles, the 
suggested playfulness, and a transcendence of the borders 
between art and science. In short: an acceptance of a post­
modern mode of thinking or  form of knowledge. 

Postmodern  reflections 

475 

After two hundred years of modern 'enlightenment' we 

have in society  reached  a  postmodern condition of frag­
mented language-games and  lost Utopias. This political 
analysis of lost innocence is also shared with postmoder­
nism. However, the postmodern political answer to this 
chaos seems to be  'anarchy' - resistance but no alterna­
tive. In this sense postmodernism as a political practice is 
rejected  by an approach  of work-oriented design of  com­
puter artifacts, especially by keeping to the emancipatory 
ideal, a belief in progress, in work as a fundamental cate­
gory in human life, in democratic rationality, and even in 
an important role for trade unions to play in the future. 

In these 'postmodern' times we are certainly witness­
ing fundamental  changes of  capitalism, and  our condi­
tions  for  living in  an  'information  and  media  society'. 
However,  this  postmodern society  is  more  than ever  a 
market economy. The only really existing rationality is 
success  or  failure  on  the  market.  Not  only  scientific 
rationality, but also the rationality of social institutions like 
local, national and international bureaucracies (which we 
have all reason to be critical of, but also to defend), and the 
rationality of democratic institutions (which we have all 
reason to defend, but also to be critical of) are subordinated 
to the market rationality. We are all free to play our local 
language-games in  a society  of fragmented subcultures 
only related to each other via the market, a market made 
more effective than ever by the use of computers and the 
media industry. However, in this postmodern information 
and  media society  we are not only free,  we are also all 
trapped in networks of products and pictures produced by 
multinational companies. It is a chaotic society where we 
are forced to market ourselves and gain self-respect by as 
much individualism as possible. But we have not gone be­
yond  capitalism.  The  market  keeps  on  producing  in­
equality, and an opposing strategy based on solidarity and 
democracy  has  never  been  more in  need  than today to 
create at least some overview and justice - in society as a 
whole as well as at work. 

Epilogue 

476 
Democracy? 
To transcend the postmodern condition politically it seems 
that, with sincerity (and maybe with some irony) we must 
revisit  our  democratic institutions, including  the trade 
unions,  and  discuss  new  strategic  perspectives.  What 
Marx taught  us about capitalism could still be relevant, 
even if  work and workers look  different today,  the wor­
king class in a broad sense is a most heterogeneous cate­
gory, and the revolutionary model has failed. The forms of 
the  labor  contract  and  the  workers'  collective  have 
changed but still exist in  the postmodern condition.  We 
could, aware of our lost innocence, try to rebuild a Utopia, 
a dream of  different, but peacefully coexisting language-
games  mediated  by  a  democratic  rationality. We  could 
name our  way  towards this Utopia - that we  have  un­
derstood  we  never  will  finish  working on - something 
different than class struggle, for example the creation of 
family  resemblance  between  the  different  language-
games, or the establishment of an open dialogue free from 
coercion, but we would have to challenge the power of ca­
pital. 

The question is whether the practices of work-oriented 
design of computer artifacts can be a contribution in the 
never  ending  emancipatory  process  of  building  this 
Utopia, to help pave the way out of the postmodern frag­
mentation. Is the tool perspective a too traditional answer 
to the postmodern challenge? Is the trade union base an 
outdated modern approach? Is the suggested postmodern 
playfulness  in  use  of  computer  artifacts  just  cynical 
manipulation? 

Work? 
In addition to these questions there is an even more fun­
damental  one  for  a  project  of  work-oriented  design  of 
computer artifacts: If work gets less and less important in 
our lives in  the  postmodern  or  post-industrial society, 
what, then, is the value of a work-oriented approach? 

Postmodern  reflections 

ATI 

Unemployment,  shorter  working-hours,  a  decline  of 
industrial labor and increased service labor, heterogeni-
zation of  the working class, maybe even a  new postmod­
ern  class  of  'information  workers'  or  a  post-industrial 
class of  'care' workers, a new or lost  work morality, and 
many other signs are referred  to as the death of the in­
dustrial work society. The language-games we participate 
in at  work  have changed,  and  their importance in our 
lives may have diminished. We have been made aware of 
the blindness that an emphasis on instrumental skills in 
the labor process creates towards the fundamental com­
municative competence of social interaction. 

Industrial labor may have lost its position as the meg or 
sociological category, but still most of  us live our lives as 
wage-workers,  and  the  computer  is  increasingly  more 
present in these activities. Is it really untimely to propose 
that a  language-game of  work-oriented  design  of  com­
puter artifacts can and should be played as one of  many 
language-games  with family  resemblance  to other  lan­
guage-games we play at work and in everyday life? 

Back to Bauhaus 
and beyond Postmodernism? 
What has been suggested in this book is a design approach. 
It has grown out of  the experiences that I have shared 
with scholars and  workers in research for skill  and  de­
mocracy in design and use of computer artifacts in Scan­
dinavia in the 1970s and the 1980s. But it has also bor­
rowed  shape and  content from  many  past and ongoing 
discourses, discourses in  computer and information sci­
ence, in other design  arts and  sciences, in sociology,  in 
philosophy, in the media, in everyday life, etc. 

As a final attempt to position this approach, I will re­
turn to  two  paradigm  examples from  architectural de­
sign. 

Bauhaus was a beautiful program for the design of ar­
tifacts based on progressive social and cultural values, ar­
tifacts designed to engender social change. It was a style of 

478 

Epilogue 

design based on a democratic and  participative ideal,  a 
merge of arts, craft skills and industrial production, using 
'modern' materials for design of quality products for ordi­
nary people. 

This looks like a blueprint for work-oriented design of 
computer artifacts. The problem is that we know that the 
program failed. As  Bauhaus developed  into Modernism 
and the International Style, it turned into elitism, just in­
strumental rationality, a sheer expression of  the market 
economy, and ugliness and uselessness for ordinary peo­
ple. Yet even so: is there a better design approach to learn 
from in design of computer artifacts? 

Postmodernism  in  architectural  design  rejects  Bau­

haus functionality. It suggests a semiotic play with signs. 
Buildings are understood as sign artifacts. Emphasis is on 
small or local narratives, often with built-in irony, eclecti-
cally gathered from many traditions. 

If buildings can be designed as sign artifacts for post­
modern playfulness, computer artifacts must be the post­
modern artifacts, since they are designed based on a ma­
terial for symbol manipulation. The problem is only that 
we so far really have  not developed  our stylistic compe­
tence to design this playfulness. And  when we have, we 
have in a way come to copy postmodern elitism and cyni­
cism.  I  think  of  the  'double-coding'  of  postmodern 
architecture  to  'reconcile'  the  language-games  of  ordi­
nary users and of experts. 

As an example we can take the postmodern attitude to 

a classical Greek temple. 

The expert could delight in the construction of  the co­
lumns, their shape  and order. The  slaves would  under­
stand nothing of this beauty, although they could appreci­
ate the mythological motive on the frieze. 

A parallel in  our design field:  Real computers for the 
experts to enjoy the subtlety of the design, a metaphorical 
user interface for the 'machine-slaves' to appreciate. And 
still: Is there a  better paradigm example of a design of 
computer artifacts than the Apple Macintosh? 

Postmodern  reflections 

479 

How to create useful and pleasurable, maybe even en­
joyable, narratives in the design and use of the most post­
modern of all artifacts, the computer - this is a question of 
style, competence, moral and sincerity that I find of deci­
sive importance in the  postmodern era of lost innocence. 
In doing this we should accept the challenge of designing 
beyond  'reconciliation' of  the language-games of experts 
and  ordinary  users - a  design  based  on  family  resem­
blance between mediated language-games. 

As a program for the future of work-oriented  design of 
computer artifacts, I suggest that we should 'revisit' Bau­
haus functionality  and  Postmodern  playfulness, but  we 
should do so in a spirit of lost innocence. 

Moral 
The moral of the story: style is important in work-oriented 
design of computer artifacts, but  what really matters is 
sincerity. In addition: There are two  equally  dangerous 
extremes - to shut reason out and to let  nothing else in. 
Blaise Pascal, the 'inventor' of the computer, noted that in 
his Pensées more than three hundred years ago. To criti­
cize reason and style, we have to reason within a certain 
style. That is the irony of our language-games. 

Bibliography 

Abrahams, P.: What is Computer  Science* in Communications 

of the ACM, vol 30, no 6, June 1987. 

Abrahamsson,  B.: Varför  finns organisationer,  Nordstedts, 

Stockholm 1986. 

Ackoff, R.L.:, 'A  Black Ghetto's Research on a University' in 

Operations Research, September 1970. 

Ackoff, R.L.: The Social Responsibility of OR' in Operational 

Research Quarterly, 25,1974. 

Ackoff, R.L.: Redesigning  the Future,  John Wiley, 1974. 
Ackoff R.L.: 'A Theory of Practice in the Social Systems Sciences' 

IIASA International  roundtable on The  Art and  Science of 
Systems  Practice, IIASA, November 1986. 

Aguren, S.  and Edgren,  J.: Annorlunda  fabriker-Mot en ny 

produktionsteknisk  teori, The Swedish Employers' 
Confederation, Stockholm 1979. 

Ahlin, J.: Arbetsmiljösanering - förnyelse  genom  demokratiser­

ing av  planeringsprocessen, Royal  Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm 1974 (dissertation). 

Alexander, C.: Notes on Synthesis ofFormy  Havard University 

Press, Cambridge 1964. 

Andersen, C. et al.: Syskon  - en bog om konstruktion av  data-

maiske  systemer, Gads Forlag, Copenhagen 1972. 

Andersen N.E. et al.: ProfessioneI  Systemudvikling, Teknisk 

Forlag, Copenhagen 1986. 

Andersen, P.B.: Edb-teknologi  set  i  medieperspektiv, University of 

Aarhus 1984. 

Andersen,  P.B.: 'Semiotics  and  Informatics: Computers  as 
Media' in Ingwersen et al.: Information  Technology  and 
Information Use, Taylor Graham,  London 1986. 

Andersen, P.B.  et. al.: Research  Programme  on  Computer 

Support  for Cooperative  Design and  Communication, 
Department of Information Science and Department of 
Computer Science, University of Aarhus 1987. 

Bibliography 

481 

Andersen, P.B. and Madsen K.H.: 'Design and Professional 

Languages' in Larsen, S.F. and Plunkett,  K.  (eds.): 
Computers,  Mind  and  Metaphors  (forthcoming). 

Archer, L.B.: 'What Became of Design Methodology?' in Cross,  N. 
(ed.): Developments in Design  Methodology, John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd, Bath 1984. 

Argyris, C. and Schön,  D.A.: Organizational  Learning: A Theory 

of  Action Perspective, Addison-Wesley, Reading 1978. 

Aronzon, G. (ed.): Arbetets  krav  och mänsklig  utveckling,  Pris­

ma, Stockholm 1983. 

Artificial  Intelligence, no 31,1987. 
Bahro, R.: Die  Alternative -Zur kritik  des real  existierenden 

Sozialismus, Europäische Verlagsanstalt, Köln 1977. 

Bannon, L. J.: Extending  the  Design Boundaries  of  Human-

Computer  Interaction, Institute for  Cognitive Science, 
University of California, San Diego, May 1985. 

Bannon, L. Issues in Design - Some Notes' in Norman, D. A. 

and Draper, S. W. (eds.): User  Centered  System Design -
New  Perspectives  on  Human-Computer  Interaction,  Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, London 1986. 

Bansler, J. and B0dker K.: Experimentelle  teknikker i  systemar-

bejdet, DIKU report no 83/7,1983. 

Bansler, J.: Systemudvikling - teori  og  historié  i  skandinavisk 

perspektiv y Studentlitteratur, Lund 1987 (dissertation). 

Bartholdy, M. et al.: Studie av datorstödd bildbehandling  på 

Aftonbladet, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1987. 

Bergson, H.: Creative Evolution, Henry Holt, New York 1911. 
Bjerknes, G. and Bratteteig, T.: 'Florence in Wonderland -

Systems Development with Nurses' in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): 
Computers and  Democracy-A Scandinavian  Challenge, 
Avebury, 1987. 

Bjerknes, G., Ehn, P., Kyng,  M.(eds.): Computers  and  Democ­

racy -A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, Aldershot 1987. 

Björkman, T.  and Lundqvist, K.: Från Max  till Pia, Arkiv,  Malmö 

1981 (dissertation). 

Björkman, T.: 'Reparatörsyrkets utveckling* and 'Från polarise-

ring till omkvalificering' in Nyberg, P. et. al.: Yrkesarbete  i 
förändring y  Carlssons, Stockholm 1984. 

Björkman, T. and Lundquist,  K.: Yrkeskunnande  och datorise­

ring, Statskontoret, Stockholm 1986. 

Bj0rn-Andersen, N. (ed.) The Human  Side ofinformation 

Processing  North-Holland, Amsterdam 1980. 

482 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Bj0rn-Andersen, N. (ed.): Information Society,  for  richer,  for 

poorer, North-Holland, Amsterdam 1982. 

Blauner, R.: Alienation  and  Freedom - The  factory Worker  and 
His Industry, The University of Chicago Press, London 1964. 

Blomberg, J.: The Variable Impact of Computer Technologies  on 

the Organization of Work Activities' in Proceedings of 
CSCW'86, Austin 1986. 

Boguslaw, R.: The New  Utopians -A Study of  System Design and 

Social Change, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1965. 

Bottomore, T.B.: Karl  Marx - Selected  writings in Sociology  and 

Social  Philosophy, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth 1971. 

Braverman, H.: Labor and  Monopoly Capital - The Degradation 

of Work  in the Twentieth Century, Monthly Review Press, New 
York 1974. 

Briefs, U. et al. (eds.): Systems Design  for, with, and  by the  Users, 

North-Holland, Amsterdam 1983. 

Broadbent, G.: The Development of Design Methods' in Cross, N. 
(ed.): Developments in Design  Methodology, John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd, Bath 1984. 

Broady, D. and Helgeson, B.: 'Farväl till arbetsdelningen?' in 

Broady, D. (ed.): Professionaliseringsfällan, Carlssons, Täby 
1985. 

Brock, S.: Wittgenstein mellem faenomenologi og analytik' in 

Brock, S. et al.: Sprog, Moral & Livsform, Philosophia, Århus 
1986. 

Brown, J. S. 'From Cognitive to Social Ergonomics and Beyond' in 

Norman, D. and Draper, S. (eds.): User  Centered  System 
Design, Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986. 

Brulin, G.  and Ulstad, C.: DESAM  vid  halvlek  (forthcoming). 
Brödner, P.: Fabrik  2000 - Alternative Entwicklungspfade  in die 
Zukunft der Fabrik, Sigma Rainer Bohn Verlag, Berlin 1985. 

Budde R. et al. (eds.) Approaches to  Prototyping, Springer Verlag, 

Berlin 1984. 

Bunge, M.:  Scientific Research. The  Search  for  System. 

The  Search  for Truth, Springer Verlag 1967. 

Bush, V.: 'As We May think' in Atlantic Monthly, July 1945. 
Buxton, W.: There's More to Interaction Than Meets the Eye: 

Some Issues in Manual Input', in Norman, D. and Draper,  S. 
(eds.): User Centered  System  Design, Lawrence Erlbaum, 
London 1986. 

B0dker, S. and Madsen, K.H.: 'More or Less Systems Descrip­

tions' in Lassen, M. and Mathiassen, L.: Report  of the  Eight 

Bibliography 

483 

Scandinavian Conference  on  Systemeering,  part I, Aarhus 
1985. 

B0dker, S.: Utopia and the Design of User Interfaces' in Procee­
dings of  the Aarhus  Conference on  Development and  Use of 
Computer Based  Systems and  Tools, Aarhus 1985. 

B0dker, S. et al.: 'A Utopian Experience* in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): 

Computers  and  Democracy-A Scandinavian  Challenge, 
Avebury, 1987. 

B0dker, S.: Through the  Interface - A  Human Activity  Approach 

to User Interface Design, DAIMI PB-224, Department of Com­
puter Science, University of Aarhus, 1987 (dissertation). 

Carlson, J.,  Ehn, P.  Erlander, B., Perby, M-L,  and Sandberg,  Å.: 
'Planning and Control from the Perspective of Labour: A Short 
Presentation of the Demos Project* in Accounting, 
Organizations and Society. vol 3, no 3/4,1978. 

Checkland, P.B.: 'Systems Thinking in Management: the Devel­
opment of Soft Systems Methodology and its Implications for 
Social Science' in Ulrich, H. and Probst, G.J.B, (eds.): Self-
organisation and  Management  of  Social  Systems, Springer 
Verlag, 1984. 

Checkland, P. B.: The  Politics of  Practice',  IIASA International 

roundtable on The Art and  Science of  Systems Practice, 
IIASA, November 1986. 

Cherns, A.: 'The  principles of socio-technical  design' in Human 

Relations, no 29,1976. 

Churchman,  C.W.: The  Systems  Approach,  Delta, New York 

1968. 

Churchman,  C.W.: The  Design of  Inquiring  Systems - basic con­

cept of  systems and organization, Basic Books, New York 1971. 

Churchman,  C.W.: The  Systems Approach and  its Enemies,  Ba­

sic Books, New York 1979. 

Churchman, C.W.: 'Who Should Be the Client of Systems 

Design', IIASA  International roundtable  on The Art  and 
Science of  Systems Practice, IIASA, November 1986. 

Cooley, M.: Architect or Bee? - The Human I technology Relation­

ship , Langley Technical Service, Slough 1980. 

Cross, N. (ed.): Developments in Design  Methodology, John Wiley 

& Sons Ltd, Bath 1984. 

Dahlkvist, M.: Att studera kapitalet, Bo Cavefors, 1978 (disserta­

tion). 

Dahlbom, B.: Humanisterna  och Framtiden - fyra  varianter över 

ett tema av Max Weber, Science of Science, University of 
Umeå, Draft 1986. 

484 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Dahlström, E. et. al.: LKAB  och demokratin, W & W, Stockholm 

1971. 

Dahlström, E.: Bestämmande  i  arbetet - Några idékritiska  fun­
deringar kring arbetslivets demokratisering, Department of 
Sociology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg 1983. 

Daley, J.: 'Design Creativity and the Understanding of Objects' in 

Cross, N. (ed.): Developments in Design  Methodology, John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Bath 1984. 

Daressa, L and Mayers, J: Computers in Context,  California 

Newsreel 1986 (film). 

Descartes, R.: A Discourse on  Method and  Selected Writings, 

J.M. Dent and Sons, London 1912. 

DIALOG project group: Årsrapport  fòr 1984,  Department of Com­

puter Science, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1985. 
Dilschmann, A. and Ehn, P.: Gränslandet, Swedish Center for 

Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Dreyfus, H.  L. and Dreyfus, S. D.:  Mind  over  Machine - the  power 

of  human intuition and expertise  in the era  of  the computer, 
Basil Blackwell, Glasgow 1986. 

Dreyfus, H. L.: What Computers Can't  Do-A Critique of  Artifi­

cial Reason, Harper & Row, New York 1972. 

DUE project group: Demokrati, udvikling og edb — Rapport  fra 
forste  fase, DUE report no 2, Computer Science Department, 
Aarhus University, Århus 1978. 

DUE project group: Klubarbejde og EDB,  Fremad, Copenhagen 

1981. 

Eco, U.: Postscript to The  Name of  the Rose,  Harcourt Brace Jo-

vanovich, USA 1984. 

Eco, U.: The Name of  the Rosef  Pan Books Ltd, London 1984. 
Edwards, R.: Contested  Terrainy  Heinemann, London 1979. 
Ehn P.: Bidrag till ett kritiskt social  perspektiv  på datorbaserade 

informationssystemt  TRITA-IBADB-1020, Stockholm 1973. 

Ehn, P.  and Göranzon,  B.: Perspektiv  på  systemutvecklingspro­

cessen}  Department of  Information Processing, University of 
Stockholm, 1974. 

Ehn, P. et al.: Demokratisk  styrning och  planering i  arbetslivet -
utgångspunkter  fòr ett  forskningsprojekt om  datateknik,  fack­
förening  och  företagsdemokrati, TRITA-IBADB-1023, 
Department ofinformation Processing, Stockholm 1975. 

Ehn, P.  and Erlander, B.: Vi  vägrar låta detaljstyra oss,  Swedish 

Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1978. 

Bibliography 

485 

Ehn, P. and Sandberg,  Å.: Företagsstyrning och  löntagarmakt -

planering, datorer,  organisation och  fackligt 
utredningsarbete, Prisma, Stockholm 1979. 

Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: 'God utredning 4  in Sandberg, Å. (ed.): 

Utredning och  förändring i  förvaltningen, Liber förlag,  Stock­
holm 1979. 

Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: 'Systems Development - On strategy 

and ideology', in DATA no 4,1979. 

Ehn, P. and Sandberg, Å.: 'Att påverka det påverkbara' in Tre år 

med  MBL, Liber, Helsingborg 1980. 

Ehn, P., Kyng, M.  and Sundblad, Y.: Training, Technology, and 

Product  from the  Quality of Work  Perspective, A Scandinavian 
research project on  union based  development of  and training 
in computer technology  and  work  organization, especially  text 
and  image  processing  in the  graphic industry. (Research 
programme of UTOPIA),  Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Stockholm 1981. 

Ehn,  P. and Sandberg,  Å.: 'Local Union Influence on Technology 

and Work  Organization - some results from the Demos 
Project' in Briefs, U. et al. (eds.): Systems Design  for, with,  and 
by  the Users, Amsterdam^  North-Holland 1983. 

Ehn, P.: UTOPIA-projektet (Status rapport (fas I) och arbetsplan 

(fas II)), Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1983. 

Ehn, P. and Sundblad, Y. (eds.): Kravspecifikation /or datorstödd 
bildbehandling och ombrytning, Swedish Center for Working 
Life, Stockholm 1983. 

Ehn, P.  and Kyng, M.: 'A Tool Perspectivé on Design of Interac­
tive Computer Support for Skilled Workers' in M. Sääksjärvi 
(ed.): Proceedings of  the  Seventh Scandinavian Research 
Seminar on  Systemeering, Helsinki 1984. 

Ehn, P., Perby, M.L., Sandberg, Å.: Brytningstid, Swedish  Center 

for Working Life, Stockholm 1984. 

Ehn, P. et al.: Datorstödd Ombrytning, Swedish Center for Work­

ing Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Ehn, P. and Kyng K.: 'The Collective Resource Approach to Sys­

tems Design' in Bjerknes G. et al. (eds.): Computers and 
Democracy-A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Einhorn, E. and Logue, J. (eds.): Democracy at  the Shop  Floor -

An American  Look  at Employee  Influence  in Scandinavia 
Today, Kent Press, 1982. 

Ekdahl, L.: Arbete mot  kapital, Arkiv, Lund 1983 (dissertation). 
Ekdahl, L.: Att  bli  maskinens herrar, Swedish  Center for Work­

ing Life, Stockholm 1984. 

486 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Emery, F.  and Thorsrud, E.: Democracy at Work: The Report  of 

the  Norwegian  Industrial  Democracy  Program, Martinus Nij-
hoff, Leiden 1976. 

Emery, P. (ed.): The Emergence  of a  New  Paradigm of Workt 

Centre for Continuing Education, The  Australien National 
University, 1978. 

Engelbart, D. C.: Augmenting  Hutnan  Intellect: A  Conceptual 

Framework, AFOSR-3223, Stanford Research Institute, Menlo 
Park 1962. 

Engelbart, D. C. and English,  W.  K.: 'A Research Center for 

Augmenting Human  Intellect' in AFIPS  Proceedings - Fall 
Joint  Computer Conference, 1968. 

Engeström, Y.: Learning by  Expanding,  Orienta-Konsultit, 

Helsinki 1987 (dissertation). 

Erlander, B.: Så här var det på PUB,  Swedish Center for Working 

Life, Stockholm 1980. 

Flensburg, P.: Personlig databehandling,  Studentlitteratur, Lund 

1986 (dissertation). 

Floyd C.: (A Systematic Look at Prototyping' in Budde R. et al. 

(eds.) Approaches  to Prototyping, Springer Verlag, Berlin 1984. 

Floyd, C.: 'Outline of a Paradigm Change in Software Engineer­

ing' in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): Computers and  Democracy -
A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Foged, J. et al.: Håndbog om klubarbejde, edb-projekter og  nye 

arbejdsformer, HK  kommunal, Århus 1987. 

Fox Keller,  E.: Reflections on Gender  and Science, Yale 

University Press, New Haven 1985. 

Freire, P.: Pedagogy of  the Oppressed,  Herder &  Herder, New 

York 1971. 

Frenckner, K.  and Romberger, S.: Datorstödd  Bildbehandling, 

Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Friedman, A.:  Industry  and  Labour,  Macmillan Press,  London 

1977. 

Friedman, A. and Cornford,  D.: 'Strategies for Meeting User 

Demands - An International Perspective' in Bjerknes,  et. al 
(eds.): Computers and  Democracy-A Scandinavian 
Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Fry, J. (ed.): Towards a Democratic Rationality - Making the 

Case  for Swedish Labour, Gower, Aldershot 1986. 

Ghandchi, H.  and Ghandchi. J.: Intelligent Tools - The Corner­

stone of a New Civilization' in The AI  Magazine, fall 1985. 

Bibliography 

487 

Goldberg, A.: Smalltalk-80: The  Interactive  Programming 

Environment y  Addison-Wesley, Reading 1984. 

Goldkuhl, G.: Framställning  och användning  av  informations­
modeller, TRITA-IBADB-4099, University of Stockholm, 1980 
(dissertation). 

Greenbaum, J.: 'Division of Labor in the Computer Field' in 

Monthly Review, vol 28 no 3,1976. 

Greenbaum, J.: The  Head  and  the Heart - using gender analysis 

to study  the  social  construction of  computer systems, 
Computer Science  Department, Aarhus University, Denmark 
1987. 

Greenfield, P.: 'Video Games as Tools of Cognitive  Socialization' 
in Larsen, S.F. and Plunkett, K. (eds.) Computers, Mind  and 
Metaphors  (forthcoming). 

Groat, L.  and Canter,  D.: 'Does  Post-Modernism Communicate* 

in Progressive  Architecture, December 1979. 

Gulowsen, J.: 'A measure of work-group autonomy' in Davis, L. 

and Taylor, J. (eds.): Design of  Jobs, Penguin,  Harmonds-
worthl972. 

Gunnarson, E.: Arbetsmiljökrav,  Swedish Center for Working 

Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Gustavsen, B.: Workplace  Reform and Democratic Dialogue' in 

Economic and  Industrial  Democracy, vol 6, Sage, London 1985. 
Göranzon, B.  (ed.): Datautvecklingens  Filosofi - tyst kunskap  och 

ny teknik, Carlsson & Jönsson, Malmö 1984. 

Göranzon, B.  et al.: Datorn som verktyg-krav och ansvar vid 

systemutvecklingy  Studentlitteratur, Lund 1983. 

Habermas, J.: Erkenntnis  und  Interesse,  Suhrkamp,  Frankfurt 

1968. 

Habermas,  J.: Technik  und  Wissenschaft  als *Ideologie\ 

Suhrkampf, Frankfurt 1968. 

Habermas, J.: Toward a Rational  Society,  Heinemann, London 

1971. 

Habermas,  J.: Theorie  des  Kommunikativen Handelns,  I, II, 

Suhrkamp, Frankfurt 1981. 

Hedberg, B.: 'Using Computerized Information Systems to Design 
Better Organizations' in Bj0rn-Andersen, N. (ed.):  The  Human 
Side of  Information  Processing  North-Holland, Amsterdam 
1980. 

Hedberg, B. and Mehlmann, M.:  Datorer i  bank, Swedish Center 

for Working Life, Stockholm 1983. 

Heidegger, M.: Being and Time,  Harper & Row, New York 1962. 

488 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Helgeson, B.: Arbete, teknik, ekonomi,  Högskolan i Luleå, 1986 

(dissertation) 

Holbaek-Hanssen, E., Håndlykken, P.  and Nygaard, K.: System 
Description and  the  DELTA Language,  Norsk Regnesentral, 
Oslo 1975. 

Hooper,  C.: 'Architectural  Design — An Analogy' in  Norman,  D. 

and Draper, S. (eds.): User Centred  System Design  -New 
Perspectives  on  Human-Computer  Interaction, Lawrence 
Erlbaum, London 1986. 

Howard, R.: 'UTOPIA - Where Workers Craft New Technology'  in 

Technological  Review, vol 88 no 3, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 1985. 

Hutchins, E.L. et'al.: 'Direct Manipulation Interfaces' in Nor­

man, D. and Draper,  S. (eds.): User Centered  System Design, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986. 

mich, I.: Tools for Conviviality, Calder & Boyars, London 1973. 
Ingwersen et al.: Information  Technology  and  Information Use, 

Taylor Graham, London 1986. 

Israel, J.: The Language of  Dialectics and  the Dialectics  of 

Language, Harvester Press, London 1979. 

Ivanov, K.: Quality Control of  Information, Royal Institute of 

Technology, NTIS no PB219297, Stockholm 1972 (dissertation). 

Ivanov, K.:  Systemutveckling och  ADB-ämnets utveckling, 

Department of Computer and Information Science, University 
of Linköping, Linköping 1984. 

Jackson, M.: System Development,  Prentice Hall, 1983. 
Jackson, M.C.: 'The nature of 'soft' systems thinking' in Journal 

of Applied  System Analysis y  vol 9,1982 and vol 10,1983. 

Janik, A.: Om Wittgenstein och Wien, Swedish Center  for Wor­

king Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Janik, A.: Tacit  Knowledge, Working Life  and  Scientific Method, 

Brenner Archive,  Innsbruck University, 1986. 

Janik, L.  G.: 'Some Reflections on the Topic of the Sigtuna Sym­

posium' in Sundin, B. (ed.): Is  the Computer a Tool?, Almquist 
& Wiksell, Stockholm 1980. 

Jencks, C.: Current  Architecture,  Academy Editions,  London 

1982. 

Jencks, C.: The  Language  of  Postmodern Architecture,  Rizzoli, 

New York 1984. 

Jones, J. C.: 'A Method of Systematic Design' in Jones, J. C. and 
Thornley, D. (eds.): Conference  on Design Methods, Pergamon 
Press, Oxford 1963. 

Bibliography 

489 

Jungk R. and Miillert,  N. R.: Zukunftwerkstätten, Wege  sur 

Wiederbelebung der  Demokratie, 1981. 

Kaasb0ll, J.: A Theoretical and Empirical  Study of the  Use of 

Language  and  Computers,  Department of Informatics, 
University of Oslo, forthcoming (dissertation). 

Kammersgaard, J.: 'On Models and their Role in the use of Com­

puters' in  Preceedings of  the  Aarhus Confererence  on 
Development and  Use of Computer  Based  Systems and Tools, 
Aarhus, 1985. 

Kay, A.: The Reactive Engine, University of Utah, 1969 (disserta­

tion). 

Kay, A. and Learning Research Group: Personal  Dynamic 

Media, Xerox Palo Alto  Research Center, Technical Report 
no SSL 76-1,1976. 

Kay, A.: 'Computer Software' in Scientific  American, vol  251, 

no 3, september 1984. 

Kensing, F.:'Generation of Visions in Systems Development' in 

Docherty, P et. al. (eds.) Systems Design  for Human 
Development and  Productivity - Participation and Beyond, 
Elsevier Science Publishers, North Holland, IFIP 1987. 

Kern, H. and Schumann,  M.: Industriarbeit  und  Arbeiterbe-

wusstsein I  und  //, Europäische Verlagsanstalt,  Frankfurt 
am Main 1970. 

Kern, H. and Schumann, M.: Das  Ende der  Arbeitsteilung? Ra­
tionalisierung in der  industriellen Production: Bestandsauf­
nahme,  Trendbestimmung, Verlag S.H. Beck, München 1984. 

Kling, R.: 'Computerization as an Ongoing Social and Political 

Process' in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): Computers and  Democracy -
A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Kosik, K.: Die Dialektik  des Konkreten,  Suhrkampf, Frankfurt 

1967. 

Kraft, P.: Programmers  and  Managers - the  routinization of 

computer  programming  in the  United  States, Springer Verlag, 
New York 1977. 

Kubicek, H.: 'User Participation in System Design' in Briefs, U. 

et. al. (eds.): Systems Design  for, with, and  by the  Users, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam 1983. 

Kuhn, T.S.: The Structure of  Scientific Revolution, Chicago 1962. 
Kyng, M. and Mathiassen, L.: 'Systems Development and trade 

union activities', in Bj0rn-Andersen, N.  (ed.): Information 
Society,  for richer,  for  poorer, North-Holland,  Amsterdam 
1982. 

490 

Work-oriented  design of computer  artifacts 

Langefors, B.: Theoretical  Analysis of  Information  Systems, 

Studentlitteratur, Lund 1966. 

Langefors, B.:  Samband  mellan modell  och verklighet,  IB-ADB 

66, no 1, (rewritten 1971-11-02). 

Lanzara, G.F. and Mathiassen, L.: 'Mapping Situations Within  a 
System Development Project' in Information &  Management, 
no 8,1985. 

Laurel, B.K.: 'Interfaces as Mimesis' in Norman, D.  and Draper, 

S. (eds.): User Centred  System Design  -New  Perspectives on 
Human-Computer  Interaction, Lawrence  Erlbaum,  London 
1986. 

Leontiev, A.N.: Problems of the  Development of  the  Mind, 

Progress, Moscow 1981. 

Lie, M. and Rasmussen, B.: Kan 'kontordamene'  automatisées?, 

IFIM, Trondheim 1984. 

Lindqvist, S.: Gräv där du står-Hur man utforskar ett jobb, 

Bonniers, Stockholm 1978. 

LO: Fackföreningsrörelsen  och den  tekniska  utvecklingen, Report 

to the congress of LO, 1966. 

LO: Handlingsprogram för företagsdemokrati och  data, Swedish 

Federation of Trade Unions, Stockholm 1975. 

LO: Solidariskt  Medbestämmande, Report  to the congress of LO, 

1976. 

LO: Codetermination on the Foundation  of  Solidarity, Prisma, 

Stockholm 1977. 

Lundeberg,  M.: Some  Propositions Concerning  Analysis and 
Design of  Information Systems, TRITA-IBADB-4080, Royal 
Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1976 (dissertation). 

Lundeberg, M.  et al.: Systemering, Studentlitteratur, Lund 1978. 
Lundeqvist, J.: Norm och Modell - samt  ytterligare  några 

begrepp  inom designteorin, Department  of Architecture, Royal 
Institute of Technology of Stockholm, 1982 (dissertation). 

Lundeqvist, J.: Ideological  och teknologi' in Göranzon, B. (ed): 
Datautvecklingens  filosofi, Carlsson & Jönsson,  Malmö 1984. 

Lyotard, J.F.: The  Postmodern Condition -A Report on  Know­

ledge, Manchester University Press, 1984. 

Lysgaard, S.: Arbeiderkollektivet, Universitetsförlaget, Stavanger 

1961. 

Madsen, K.H.: 'Breakthrough by Breakdown - Metaphors and 

Structured Domains' in Klein, H. and Kumar, K.  (eds.): 
Information  Systems Development  for  Human Progress  in 
Organizations, North-Holland (forthcoming). 

Bibliography 

March, L.: The Logic of Design* in Cross, N. (ed.): Developments 

in Design Methodology, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Bath 1984. 

Marx, K: Thesis on Feuerbach,  (first published in 1845), 

(translated in Bottomore, T.B.: Karl  Marx - Selected writings 
in Sociology and Social Philosophy, Penguin Books, 
Harmondsworth 1971). 

Marx, K. and Engels F.: The  Communist  Manifesto, (first 
published 1848), Penguin Books, Harmondworth 1980. 

Marx, K: Wage Labour and Capital, (first published in 1848), 

(translated in Bottomore, T.B.: Karl  Marx - Selected  writings 
in Sociology and  Social  Philosophy, Penguin Books, 
Harmondsworth 1971). 

Marx, K.: Grundrisse  der Kritik  der politischen  Ökonmie,  Diets 

Verlag, Berlin 1953. 

Marx, K: Capital-A Critical Analysis of  Capitalist  Production, 

vol. I-III (first published 1867,1885,1895), Progress 
Publishers, Moscow 1953 -1971. 

Mathiassen, L.: Systemudvikling  og  Systemudviklingsmetode, 

DAIMI PB-136, Department of Computer Science, University of 
Aarhus 1981 (dissertation). 

Mayall, W.H.:  Principles in  Design, Design Council,  London 1979. 
Mead, G.H.: Mind, Self  and Society,  University of Chicago Press, 

Chicago 1934. 

Morton,  A.L.: Three  Works by  William Morris,  News  from 
Nowhere, The  Pilgrims of  Hope, A Dream of  John Ball, 
Lawrence & Wishart, Berlin 1968. 

Morton, A.L.: Political Writings of  William Morris,  Lawrence & 

Wishart, Berlin 1973. 

Mumford, E and Ward,  T.B.: Computers:  Planning  for  People, 

Batsford, London 1968. 

Mumford,  E.: A Comprehensive  Method  for  Handling the  Human 

Problems  of  Computer  Introduction, Manchester Business 
School, 1970(7), mimeo. 

Mumford,  E.: Designing  Human  Systems,  Manchester Business 

School 1983. 

Mumford, E.: 'Sociotechnical System Design - Evolving Theory 

and Practice', in Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): Computers  and 
Democracy-A Scandinavian  Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Mumford, L.: Technics  and  Civilizationy  Harcourt Brace 

Jovanovich, New York 1934. 

Naur, P. and Randell,  B.: Software  Engineering, report from a 

conference sponsored by the NATO Science  Committee, 
Brussels 1969. 

492 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Naur, P.: 'Intuition and Software Development' in Formal  Meth­

ods and  Software Development, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science no 186, Springer Verlag, 1985. 

Newman, W. and Sproull, R.: Principles of  Interactive  Computer 

Graphics, McGraw-Hill, Tokyo 1979. 

Nissen, H.E.: On Interpreting  Services Rendered  by  Specific 

Computer Applications y  Gotab, Stockholm 1976 (dissertation). 

Noble, D.: 'Social Choice in Machine Design - The Case of Auto­

matically Controlled Machine Tools, and a Challenge for 
Labor* in Politics & Society, nos 3-4,1978. 

Nordenstam, T: Två oförenliga traditioner* in Göranzon, B. (ed.): 
Datautvecklingens Filosofi, Carlsson & Jönsson,  Malmö 1984. 

Nordenstam, T.: Technocratic  and  Humanistic Conceptions  of 
Development, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 
1985. 

Norman, D. and Draper, S.  (eds.): User  Centred  System Design -

New  Perspectives  on Human-Computer  Interaction, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, London 1986. 

Norman,  D.: 'Cognitive Engineering* in  Norman,  D. and Draper, 

S. (eds.): User Centred  System Design  -New  Perspectives on 
Human-Computer  Interaction, Lawrence  Erlbaum,  London 
1986. 

Nurminen,  M.: Three  Perspectives  to Information  Systems, Stu­

dentlitteratur (forthcoming). 

Nyberg, P. et. al.: Yrkesarbete  i förändring,  Carlssons, Stockholm 

1984. 

Nygaard, K.  and Bergo, O. T.: Planlegging, Styring og Data­

behandling, part 1, Tiden Norsk Forlag, Oslo 1973. 

Nygaard, K.  and Bergo, O.T.: En vurdering  av styrings-  og infor-

masjonssystemet  KVPOL, Tiden Norsk Forlag, Oslo 1975. 

Nygaard, K. and Bergo,  O.T.: 'The Trade Unions - new users of 

research* in Personal  Review, no 2,1975. 

Nygaard, K.: 'The Iron and Metal Project: Trade Union Partici­
pation* in Sandberg, Å. (ed.) Computers Dividing  Man and 
Work, Swedish Center for Working Life,  Malmö 1979. 

Oakley, K.: Man the Toolmakery  British Museum, London 1965. 
Offe, C.: Disorganized Capitalism,  Polity Press, Oxford 1985. 
Perby, M.L.  and Carlsson, J.: Att arbeta  i  valsverket, Swedish 

Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1979. 

Perby, M.L.: 'Computerization and the Skill in Local Weather 

Forecasting* in Bjerknes, G. et.  al.: Computers and 
Democracy -A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Bibliography 

493 

Polanyi, M.: Personal  Knowledge, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 

London 1957. 

Polanyi, M.: The Tacit Dimension,  Anchor Books,  Doubleday & 

Company, New York 1967. 

Proceedings  from the  Conference  on Computer-Supported  Coop­

erative Work, Austin, Texas 1986. 

Produktionslivets  förnyelse - teknik,  organisation,  människa, 

miljö, conference in Uppsala, The  Swedish Work  Environment 
Found, 1978. 

Projektgruppe Automation und Qualification: Theorien über Au­
tomationsarbeit , Argument-Sonderband AS 31, Berlin 1978. 

Projektgruppe Automation und  Qualifikation : Widersprüche  der 

Automationsarbeit,  Argument Verlag,  Berlin 1987. 

Qvale, T.: 'A Norwegian strategy for democratization of industry* 

in Human Relations, no 5,1976. 

Ressner, U.: Den dolda hierarkin,  Tema Nova, Stockholm 1985. 
Rittel, H.: 'Second-generation Design Methods',  in Cross, N. (ed.): 
Developments in Design  Methodology, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 
Bath 1984. 

Rommetveit, R.: 'Meaning,  Context, and Control - Convergent 
Trends and  Controversial  Issues in Current Social-scientific 
Research on Human Cognition and Communication9, in 
Inquiry, no 30,1987. 

Rosenbrock, H.: Social  and Engineering  Design of an FMS>  CAPE 

83, Amsterdam 1983. 

Ryle, G.: The Concept of  Mind, Penguin Books 1949. 
R0nnow, U.: Ny  Teknologi - UTOPIA, Danmarks Radio, 1984 

(film). 

Sandberg, T.: Work  Organization and  Autonomous Groups,  Liber 

Förlag, Uppsala 1982 (dissertation). 

Sandberg, Å.: The  Limits  to  Democratic  Planning - knowledge, 
power and  methods in the  struggle  for the  future, Liber, Stock­
holm 1976 (dissertation). 

Sandberg, Å. (ed.): Computers  Dividing  Man and  Work -Recent 
Scandinavian Research  on Planning  and  Computers  from a 
Trade Union Perspective, Swedish Center for Working Life, 
Malmö 1979. 

Sandberg, Å.  (ed.): Forskning  för  förändring - Om metoder  och 
förutsättningar  för  handlingsinriktad  forskning i  arbetslivet, 
Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1981. 

494 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Sandberg, Å.: From Satisfaction to Democratization - On socio­

logy and  working life changes in Sweden, Swedish Center for 
Working Life, Stockholm 1982. 

Sandberg, Å.: 'Trade  union-oriented research for democratization 
of planning in work life - problems and potentials' in Journal 
of Occupational Behaviour, vol 4,1983. 

Sandberg, Å.: Mellan  alternativ  produktion och industriell FOU, 

Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1984. 

Sandberg, Å.: Technological  Change  and Co-determination in 

Sweden-Background and  analysis of trade  union and 
managerial  strategies, Temple  Press (forthcoming). 
Sartre, J.P.: Critique de la Raison Dialectique,  Librairie 

Gallimand, 1960. 

Schneidermann,  B.:  Designing  the  User  Interface,  Addison-

Wesley, USA 1987. 

Schädlich, C.: Bauhaus i  Dessau 1925 -1932, Catalogue from 

Randers Art Museum, 1985. 

Schön D. A: The  Reflective  Practitioner - How  Professionals 

Think  in Action, Basic Books, New York 1983. 

Searle, J.: Speech Acts,  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 

1969. 

Seymour, J.: The Forgotten  Arts -A practical  guide to  traditional 

skills y  Dorling Kindersley, London 1984. 

Shotter,  J.: 'Consciousness,  Self-consciousness,  Inner Games, 
and Alternative Realities', in Underwood,  G. (ed.):  Aspects of 
Consciousness y  vol 3., Academic Press, London 1983. 
Simon, H.: The  Sciences of  the  Artificial, The  MIT Press, 

Cambridge 1969. 

Sjögren, D.  (ed.): Nyhetsblad  från Snickeriprojektet,  Swedish 

Center for Working Life, 1979-83. 

Sjögren, D. (ed.): Bakom Knuten, newsletter from the KNUT 

project, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm, 
September 1987. 

Skjervheim, H.: Deltagare  och åskådare y  Prisma, Halmstad 1971. 
Smith, D.  C. et al.: 'Designing the Star User Interface* in Byte 

Magazine y vol 7, no 4, April 1982. 

Steen, J. and Ullmark, P.: De anställdas Mejeriy  Royal Institute of 

Technology, Stockholm 1982. 

Steen, J. and Ullmark,  P.: En egen väg - att göra  fackliga han­

dlingsprogram y  Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1982 
(dissertation). 

Strandh, S.: Maskinen genom tiderna,  Nordbok, Göteborg 1979. 

Bibliography 

Sundin, B. (ed.): Is the Computer a Tool?, Almqvist  & Wikseil, 

Stockholm 1980. 

Sutherland, I.E.:  Sketchpad-A Man-Machine  Graphical  Com­

munication  System, MIT, Cambridge 1963 (dissertation). 

Svensson, L.: Arbetarkollektivet och  facket - en lokal  kamp  fòr 

företagsdemokrati, Studentlitteratur, Lund 1984 (dissertation). 

Sveriges Standardiseringskommission: Riktlinjer  for admini­

strativ systemutveckling, SIS-Handbok 113, Stockholm 1973 
(English version: Systems  Development  -A Constructive 
Model, SIS handbook 125, Stockholm 1975). 

Taylor, F.W.:  Principles of  Scientific Management,  1911. 
Teitelman, W  and  Masinter, L.: 'The  Interlisp Programming 

Environment' in Computer, April 1981. 

Tempte, T.: 'Is the Computer a Tool? - A Craftsman's View' in 

Sundin, B. (ed.): Is  the Computer a Tool?, Almquist & Wiksell, 
Stockholm 1980. 

Thorsrud, E.  and Emery, F. E.: Mot en  ny  bedriftsorganisation, 

Tanum, Oslo 1970. 

Thyssen,  O.: Teknokosmos - om  teknik  og  menneskerettigheder, 

Gyldendal, Viborg 1985. 
Tidningsteknik, no 2,1984. 
Trist, E.  and Bamforth,  K: 'Some social and psychological  conse­

quences of the longwall method of coal getting* in Human 
Relations, no 4,1951. 

Tsichritzis, D.: 'Objectworld' in Tsichritzis,  D. (ed.): Office 

Automation, Springer Verlag, Berlin 1985. 

UTOPIA project group: An Alternative  in Text  and  Images, Graf­

fiti no 7, Swedish Center for Working Life, Stockholm 1985. 

Vedung, E.: Det rationella  samtalet, Aldus, Stockholm 1977. 
Vygotsky, L.S.: Thought  and  Language, The MIT Press, 

Cambridge 1962. 

Websters New World  Dictionary, 1982. 
Weinberg,  G.M.: The  Psychology  of  Computer  Programming, 

Van Nostrand Reinholt, New York 1971. 

Weizenbaum, J.: Computer  Power and  Human  Reason-from 
judgment  to calculation, W.H. Freeman and Company, San 
Francisco 1976. 

Wellmer, A.: 'The Dialectic of the Modern and the Postmodern' in 

Praxis  International, no 4,1984. 

Williams,  R.: 'Democratising  Systems Development - Techno­

logical and Organisational Constraints and  Opportunities' in 

Work-oriented  design of  computer artifacts 

Bjerknes, et al. (eds.): Computers and  Democracy - A 
Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury, 1987. 

Winch, P.: The Idea of a Social Science  and its Relation to Philos­

ophy, Routledge & Kegan Paxil, London 1958. 

Wingert, B.  and Riehm, U.: 'Computer  als Werkzeug - Anmer­

kungen zu einen verbreiteten Missverständnis', in Rammert, 
W. et al. (eds): Technik  und  Gesellschaft, Jahrbuch 3, Campus 
Verlag, Frankfurt 1985. 

Winograd, T.  and Flores,  F.: Understanding  Computers  and 

Cognition-a new  foundation  for design, Ablex, Norwood 1986. 

Wittgenstein, L.iTractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Kegan Paul, 

1923. 

Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical  Investigations, Basil Blackwell, 

Oxford (1953) 1963. 

Wynn, E.: Office Conversation  as an  Information Medium, 

University of California, Berkeley 1979 (dissertation). 

Yourdon, E.: Managing  the  System Life  Cycle,  Yourdon Press, 

New York 1982. 

Zimbalist, A. (ed.): Case Studies on the Labor  Process,  Monthly 

Review Press, New York 1979. 

Österberg, D.: Metasociologisk  essä, Verdandi,  Stockholm 1971. 

WORK-ORIENTED DESIGN OF COMPUTER ARTIFACTS 

THIS BOOK is an inquiry into the design of 

computer artifacts. The background is the 

author's experience with research on design 
and use of computer artifacts in Scandinavian 
working life since the early  1970s, and a com­
mitment to two design ideals: 
•  Industrial democracy, the attempt to extend 
political democracy by also democratizing the 
workplace. 
• Quality of work and  product, the attempt 
to design skill-enhancing tools for skilled 
workers to produce highly useful quality 
products and services. 

Pelle Ehn's reflections on these design ideals 
and their  realization are referred  to as work-
oriented design  of computer artifacts. 
Though based on a critical attitude to con­
temporary social and technological conditions, 
the book gives an optimistic and constructive 
view of opposition. What is suggested is an 
emancipatory project, a language-game 
among many in a political process towards 
the Utopia of not only a democratic but also 
a pleasurable and creative working life in the 
era of the computer. 

International distribution: 
A L M Q V I S T  &  W I K S E L L  I N T E R N A T I O N A L  

ISBN 91 86158 4 5  7 /  ISBN 9 1  22 01231 1  

