Knowledge Infusion
Leslie G. Valiant
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences Harvard University

Abstract The question of how machines can be endowed with the ability to acquire and robustly manipulate commonsense knowledge is a fundamental scientific problem. Here we formulate an approach to this problem that we call knowledge infusion. We argue that robust logic offers an appropriate semantics for this endeavor because it supports provably efficient algorithms for a basic set of necessary learning and reasoning tasks. We observe that multiple concepts can be learned simultaneously from a common data set in a data efficient manner. We also point out that the preparation of appropriate teaching materials for training systems constructed according to these principles raises new challenges.
Introduction
Perhaps the most important advance that might be made to make computers more useful to humans is that of empowering them with the ability to acquire and manipulate commonsense or unaxiomatized knowledge. Knowledge infusion is a particular approach to handling unaxiomatized knowledge. We define it here to mean any process of knowledge acquisition by a computer that satisfies the following three properties: 1. The stored knowledge is in such a form that principled
reasoning on it can be carried out computationally feasibly. In particular two or more pieces of knowledge can be chained together so as to derive a conclusion, and the confidence in the conclusion that is justified can be estimated in a principled way. 2. The stored knowledge and principled reasoning are such that the reasoning is robust to errors in the inputs to the system, to uncertainty in the knowledge, or to the gradual changes in the truth of various pieces of knowledge. Robustness is ensured and brittleness avoided by means of a large-scale continuous process of learning from an environment. 3. The knowledge acquisition can be done automatically on a massive scale, and simultaneously for many concepts, being permitted both by the computational efficiency of This work was supported by grants NSF-CCR-03-10882, NSF-CCF-0432037 and NSF-CCF-04-27129. Copyright c 2006, American Association for Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

the algorithms as well as by their economy in the use of external data.
In this paper we propose a theoretical basis for knowledge infusion in terms of robust logic. Knowledge infusion based on robust logic can be distinguished from other current approaches to reconciling learning and reasoning, in three important respects. First it provides a common semantics for both the learning and the reasoning. Second it places at the forefront the criterion of the existence of efficient, in particular polynomial time and data efficient, algorithms for all aspects of the process, including learning, reasoning and dealing with multiple objects and relations. Third, its goal is quite ambitious - in contrast with the term "knowledge extraction" as widely used - its aim includes the extraction from data of knowledge that will be useful in contexts not foreseen at the time of the extraction.
In this paper we discuss five issues. First, we describe the algorithmic approach and point out that the robust logic is able to address the necessary challenges because it has an appropriate semantics, and also because it incorporates a quantitative notion of working memory. Second, we observe that beside algorithmic issues there is the additional problem of preparing data or, in our terminology, teaching materials, for such systems. Third, in knowledge infusion there is no one fixed target for the learning - one needs to attempt to learn as many targets as possible from the available data. The question arises as to the needed sample complexity of simultaneously learning many concepts from the same data set. Fourth, if we are assuming that the source of knowledge is data, the question arises as to why we need reasoning at all. Can answers to all queries be derived equally well by memorizing all the data, and answering each query as it arises by analyzing the data anew, as suggested in Khardon and Roth (1997)? Lastly, for completeness, we briefly describe a simplified robust logic on which such systems might be based.
Knowledge Infusion
Knowledge infusion was first outlined as a goal in (Valiant 2000a) where an architecture for systems for achieving it was described. It was soon realized that some more foun-

1546

dational work was required to define a semantics for knowledge infusion, and (Valiant 2000b) took a first step in that direction by introducing robust logics. In particular, the latter paper described polynomial time algorithms for both the learning and reasoning processes there described, and, perhaps most importantly, a common semantic basis for both.
The philosophical approach we use can be summarized very simply as follows: We adapt the semantics of learning so that it also applies to the reasoning problem. Good empirical performance on previously unseen examples is the accepted criterion of success in supervised learning. It is exactly this criterion that we believe needs to be achieved for reasoning systems to be viewed as robust.
The most immediate theoretical problems that have to be addressed are: 1. Knowledge infusion has both a logical aspect needed for
reasoning, as well as a statistical learning aspect needed to ensure that the knowledge base is maintained robustly so as to resist errors and inconsistencies. A common semantics is needed that works for both aspects. 2. A theory of knowledge infusion has to provide efficient computational solutions in an area where there are at least three separate identifiable sources of potential exponential complexity: learning (even in a propositional setting), reasoning (even in a propositional setting), and handling multi-object or relational representations. In order to address (1) we have rules that may be chained as logical rules, but their semantics is that of learning. A rule, which may have been either preprogrammed or learned, is not assumed to be true in any logical sense. Instead it is constantly tested against examples observed in the world and the degree of belief that is justified in it depends empirically on how often it is found to be true. In order to address (2) we have to have a learning framework that allows relational expressions but is nevertheless polynomial time bounded. Learning in a relational setting has been explored in a variety of contexts (Haussler, 1989; Quinlan, 1990; Lavrac et al. 1991; Kramer et al. 2001; Cumby and Roth, 2002, 2003; Valiant, 1985.) It clearly offers some challenges, both computational and conceptual, beyond those of propositional learning. The proposed formalism is based on Valiant (2000b) and is, very briefly, of the following form. The rules learned are equivalences. The right hand sides are simple predicates. The left hand sides may be complex conditions, typically a linear inequality in terms of features that are themselves conjunctions of basic relational predicates with local quantifications. The rules, though equalities, may be chained together in reasoning. Polynomial time algorithms exist for both learning and sound and complete reasoning, in senses there defined, provided the base relations have constant arities. An important aspect of this robust logic is that it adapts the notion of "working memory" from cognitive science (Miller, 1956; Newell 1987; Miyake and Shah, 1999) into mathematical logic and learning theory. In this new formalization, existential and universal quantifications are over objects in the working memory, and not an unlimited and

ill-specified world. Using learning algorithms one aims to learn rules that are highly reliable on the distribution of the contents of the working memory, which we call scenes.
Working memory can be viewed as having two important roles. First, it makes the computations internal to a cognitive system possible. This role may be thought of as loosely analogous to that of registers in computer hardware, in providing rich computational capabilities on a limited amount of data locally brought together, capabilities which would be too onerous to be feasible without this limitation. Second, it restricts and localizes the system's view of the outside world to a window that is small enough that it provides a domain that is learnable. It is this second role that we emphasize here. In robust logic this second role is exploited to provde for algorithmic efficiency in learning and reasoning, independent of any assumptions about how the first role might be implemented in cognition.
Teaching Materials
The first task, the one we emphasize in this paper, is that of understanding the algorithmic possibilities and limitations inherent to knowledge infusion. There is, however, the additional problem of understanding how best to create teaching materials for such systems. This choice of terminology is made in acknowledgement of the fact that enormous efforts are expended by humans in preparing such materials for every stage of human education. We interpret this to mean that even if a system has viable algorithms for knowledge infusion, as presumably humans have, there is still the need for carefully prepared teaching materials. Hence, we believe that even when the algorithmic issues are well understood, substantial problems may remain with regard to creating teaching materials. In particular, one expects that the content of such materials will need to be organized into layers. The system may need to learn one layer well before it can learn the next layer.
Learning Many Concepts Simultaneously From Few Examples
When presented with a scene it is legitimate to view it as an example of every concept that occurs in it, and a counterexample of every concept from a given vocabulary that does not. Knowledge infusion therefore raises fundamental issues regarding the efficiency with which knowledge can be extracted from data, in the case that the same piece of data is to be used to learn many concepts simultaneously.
One basic question is whether when one learns N distinct functions, rather than just one, does one need more, say N times as many, examples? The fortuitous answer is that the number of examples needed increases little with the number of target functions.
In computational learning theory the question of how much time and how many examples are needed for learning a single propositional concept from a concept class has been studied extensively (Valiant, 1984; Blumer et al. 1989; Ehrenfeucht et al. 1989). The definitions and some simple results can be easily adapted to the problem of learning many concepts simultaneously.

1547

Definition For a polynomial m(n, , ) in arguments n, 1/, 1/, algorithm L is an m(n, , )-PAC learning algorithm for concept class C iff for any n, , and , any distribution D of inputs over n variables, and any function c  C with n variables, after seeing m(n, , ) random examples from D, L will with probability at least 1 - output a hypothesis for c of accuracy at least 1- . Also, L is an m(n, , , N ) - simultaneous - P AC learning algorithm for C if for any D after seeing m(n, , , N ) random examples, it can with probability at least 1 -  learn a set of N hypotheses for N arbitrary concepts c1, и и и , cN  C, each one accurate to at least 1- . Proposition If there is an m(n, , )-PAC learning algorithm L for concept class C then there is an m(n, , , N )-simultaneous-PAC learning algorithm for C, where m(n, , , N ) = m(n, , /N ).
Proof We take a sample of m(n, , ) random examples from D and on this common set apply L to learn each of the N target functions in turn. Then the probability of obtaining a hypothesis with error greater than  is at most  for each one, and the probability of getting such an error in any one of the N hypotheses is, by the union bound, at most N . Substituting  = N  gives the result.
This observation is already very encouraging since it says that the cost of simultaneous learning of N concepts to confidence  is simply that of learning a single concept to a higher confidence of /N . In the well-known bounds on sample complexity this requires a multiplicative increase of at most log N , and often much less. This is illustrated by the following case of attribute efficient learning. Littlestone (1988) showed that for learning disjunctions of at most k variables out of a set of n variables there is a polynomial time O(k log n) mistake bounded algorithm. From this it follows by applying a general conversion to PAC learning (Littlestone, 1989; Schurmans and Greiner, 1995) that there is a O((1/)(k log n + log(1/)))-PAC learning algorithm. Hence, we can deduce the corollary that: Corollary Disjunctions of at most k variables out of a set of n variables have a O((1/)(k log n + log(N/)))simultaneous-PAC learning algorithm.
In the standard setting Littlestone's result has the consequence that when we are to learn a function of n variables the sample size dependence on n is only logarithmic, as opposed to the general linear lower bound (Ehrenfeucht, et al. 1989). The restriction needed is that each concept depends on only a few, namely k, of the n variables. This k appears as a factor in the bound, but provides a great saving if it is small, constant or logarithmic, say. The simultaneous version expressed by the corollary above states the following: when N concepts are to be learned simultaneously, the number of examples needed goes up by at most a factor of two if N < nk, and by at most an additive (log N )/ in general. We note that Littlestone's result, is more general than stated here, and applies not just to disjunctions but to certain more general linear separators. The PAC translations for that class convert to simultaneous learning results in a similar way.

The phenomenon that attribute-efficient learning is possible even in the simultaneous learning setting we regard as an essential prerequisite for cognitive computations. It is also fundamental to our implementation of knowledge infusion, in which variables proliferate according to general combinatorial schemas.
While the simple arguments above are satisfying, we go on here to spell out what happens in the more general case that some of the concepts we attempt to learn do not lie in the class of concepts that the learning algorithm at hand is able to learn. This addresses the practical problem that among the many concepts that may be targets, some may be too complex for the algorithm with respect to the features, while others may be learnable. We formulate a Simultaneous Occam Theorem for this general case. In particular, we shall observe, that the now classical Occam bounds (Blumer, et al. 1987) on sample size hold unchanged for any value N . Thus, to this level of analysis, we are at liberty to reuse the same sample set to learn any number of concepts. This observation provides some explanation, we believe, of how it is possible, for humans to learn apparently so much from experiences that are relatively so few though possibly complex.
In formulating this result we will go the further step of considering error measures that are appropriate when the function learned is unbalanced. First we note that the simplest way of measuring the error of a hypothesis h is to say Error(h) = Prob[h(x) = f (x)], where f is the true function that is being learned, and probabilities are taken over random draws of an example x from distribution D. If f is not balanced, so that it is true very rarely, then it is useful to measure error using:

Precision(h) = Prob[h(x) = f (x) = 1]/Prob[h(x) = 1], Recall(h) = Prob[h(x) = f (x) = 1]/Prob[f (x) = 1],

and to define Precision Error(h) = 1 - Precision(h), and Recall Error(h) = 1 - Recall(h).

Simultaneous Occam Theorem Suppose examples are

drawn from a domain Xn over variables x1, и и и , xn accord-

ing to a fixed unknown distribution Dn. Suppose that we

have a list where each

F = {f1, и и и one classifies

s,ofmNe}fuonfcttaiorgneftkf(uYnkc)tiaocncsotrodilnegarton

the values of Yk where Yk is a subset of {x1, и и и , xn}. Sup-

pose that A is a learning algorithm that when given labeled

examples from Xn returns hypotheses h1, и и и , hN from a class Hn for the functions in F . Suppose that in one experiment a set S of m randomly and independently chosen

examples from Xn was drawn, and on this set the learning algorithm A returned hypotheses for F such that for some

nonempty subset H of these hypotheses, all the hypotheses

in H predict all the sample points in S correctly. Then for

iafn, yfomr ev>er(y1h/(i2)H)(lo,g2i|=HnP|r+obl[ohgi(2x(1)/=)1)]a, nd any



<

1 2

,

(i) Prob[There is some hi  H with error(hi) > ] < ,

(ii) Prob[There /i] < , and

is

some

hi



H

with

precision

error(hi)

>

1548

(iii) Prob[There is some hi  H with recall error(hi) > /(i - )] < .

Proof The probability that any fixed function h  Hn that

has error greater than  agrees with all m examples in a set

S drawn randomly and probability distribution

independently from Dn is less than (1-

X)mn .acScinocrdeitnhgetroe

are |Hn| such possible functions it follows that the probabil-

ity that even one of the possibly many functions h  Hn

that have error greater than  agrees with S is, by the union

bound, clearly

less than |Hn|(1 upper bounded by

- )m. But this last quantity is  if (1/)|Hn|(1 - )m < 1. Tak-

ing natural logarithms gives

loge(1/) + loge |Hn| + m loge(1 - ) < 0. Then the required

m > (1/(2))[log2 |Hn| + log2(1/)]

follows since (2 loge 2) if 

<log12e.(1

-

)

=



+

2/2

+

3/3 +

иии

<

By definition,

Error(h) = Prob[h(x) = 1 &f (x) = 0] + Prob[h(x) = 0 &f (x) = 1].
Also Precision(h) equals Prob[h(x) = f (x) = 1]/Prob[h(x) = 1] = (Prob[h(x) = 1] - Prob[h(x) = 1]&f (x) = 0])
/Prob[h(x) = 1] = 1 - Prob[h(x) = 1&f (x) = 0]/Prob[h(x) = 1]  1 - /,
and result (ii) follows, for otherwise (i) would be contradicted.

Finally Recall(h) equals Prob[h(x) = f (x) = 1]/Prob[f (x) = 1] = (Prob[f (x) = 1] - Prob[f (x) = 1&h(x) = 0])/ Prob[f (x) = 1] = 1 - Prob[f (x) = 1&h(x) = 0]/Prob[f (x) = 1]  1 - /(Prob[h(x) = 1] - Prob[f (x) = 0&h(x) = 1])  1 - /( - ),
and result (iii) follows.
We note that there are no assumptions on the source of data except that they are drawn from a fixed distribution. Surprisingly, this bound on m does not depend on the size of H. Consider, for example, the case that (1/), log |Hn| and log(1/) and hence m, are all polynomially bounded in terms of the number of variables n, but F is exponentially large in terms of n. Suppose that after a run of the algorithm an exponentially large subset H of predicted hypotheses turn out to agree exactly with the sample. Then we are justified in having high confidence 1- in every single one of the even exponentially many hypotheses that are found to agree with the training set. This applies also to parts (ii) and (iii) which require estimates of the fraction of the distribution on which the various hi  H have value 1.
We interpret the above observations as strong evidence that knowledge infusion does not require an inordinate amount of data.

Are Rules Superfluous?
We now discuss the following fundamental question: If we have access to observations why can we not make predictions directly from the observations rather than first learn rules and then make deductions. For example, learning A  B and B  C from examples, and then chaining these two rules together on an instance for which A holds is superfluous if the data that provides overwhelming evidence for A  B and B  C both holding also provides the same evidence for A  C holding. Khardon and Roth (1997) offer a theory of "learning to reason," in which reasoning is made redundant in some such sense. Here we discuss three justifications for the value of rules in the current context.
First, we illustrate one aspect of the probabilistic semantics of reasoning in robust logic. Consider the two simple rules:

Aиии  B and

(1)

(B  C)  и и и  D.

(2)

If these have been learned to accuracy 99% then that

means that on a random natural scene drawn from the given distribution the probability that one side is satisfied but not the other is less than 1%. The deduction process of the ro-

bust logic will chain these rules together to deduce that for a random scene from the same distribution for which A  C holds, D will hold also. This is justified in the sense that even if the two rules are not independent but arbitrarily correlated, it follows from a simple union bound argument that the conclusion must hold with error at most the sum of the

errors of the two rules, namely 2%. A robust logic based system can be viewed as performing
a thought experiment when chaining. It is not given a com-

plete scene but one where some of the features have been "obscured" and it has to deduce what these values are likely to be in natural cases. Suppose that B holds for 10% of the distribution, and of these instances a half are accounted for by A being also true (i.e. A holds for 5% of the distribution.) Suppose that D holds for 18% of the distribution, and of this a third (6% of the distribution) is accounted for by B  C. In this case the system will make the deduction that D holds, if both A and C hold, even though the fraction of the distribution on which A and C both hold may be arbitrarily small, and too small for any direct observations as to whether D holds for those instances.
The above example shows that deduction in robust logic has the following semantics: For situations that are too rare to observe the deduction will effectively assume that the relevant rules are probabilistically independent, but for situations that are frequent enough to observe, the logic will protect against invalid conclusions. In the case of the above example, if on 3% of examples A and C both hold but D is false, then at least one of the rules (1) or (2) has error greater than 1%, and it would have been erroneous to learn it.
With this backdrop, we now list three reasons for why reasoning is useful in our setting, even when learning is available.

1549

First, as we illustrated in the example, while the robust logic protects against drawing false conclusions in situations in which there is significant statistical evidence to the contrary, it also chains rules to derive conclusions in situations that are too infrequent for the statistics of the data to strongly support a deduction. In those cases the rules effectively invoke some independence assumptions, in an arguably plausible manner.
Second, the robust logic learns equivalence rules of certain forms. In any resulting deduction, some rule equivalent to chaining several of the simple rules that have been learned may be implicitly invoked. In the previous paragraph we pointed out that this implicit rule may not be statistically supported by the data. Another possibility is that it is too complex to be predicted directly from the data using a given algorithm.
Third, if programmed rules are allowed as inputs to the system in addition to the training data, then reasoning cannot be immediately supplanted by learning. For example, in a natural language setting useful equivalents of programmed rules are dictionaries, of synonyms or antonyms, for example. There is the issue of how the programmed rules are to be interpreted in the robust logic. In general they can be updated in the same way as learned rules. However, in the case of dictionaries, for example, a simple progmatic approach is to regard them as always true and not subject to updating by learning. Then in learning other rules, instead of learning from the input scenes directly one can augment the scenes by deriving all consequences of them using the programmed rules, and regard the distribution of augmented scenes so produced as the training set for the learned rules.
Finally, we note that while the strength of the robust logic described is that it has a principled semantics, we do not advocate that pragmatism be avoided altogether when building systems based on it. For example, deductions about a predicate typicaly will be made on scenes where the truth-value of the predicate is unknown, rather than known but obscured.

A Simplified Robust Logic

For completeness we describe here a simplified of robust

logic that, we believe, is a good basis for knowledge infusion

systems.

We consider a fixed set (i) respectively, where

R all

of t the

base (i)

relations Ri of arities  . A scene con-

sists of n generic token objects A = {a1, и и и , an}, and a

vector L that for all Ri  R and all n(i) substitutions of token objects for the (i) arguments of Ri states whether Ri holds for that substitution. The components of L have values "1" or "0" indicating the case of Ri for each combination of objects, e.g., one component of L may indicate R7(a2, a3, a8) = 0.
The examples input to our learning and reasoning systems

will be such scenes, each derived, for example, from a natu-

ral language sentence or paragraph. Before we proceed with

the rest of the formalism we need to explain our treatment

of incomplete information in this simplified system:

We shall interpret a value 1 in L as "determined to be true"

and a value 0 as "unspecified or determined to be false." The

learning algorithm will therefore take inputs of this form and make predictions according to these two categories. Note that if for each relation we add a second relation that represents its contrary then we can express the "determined to be false" case also. Then, in effect, a three-valued logic will be realized using two binary variables for each relation.
When analyzing reasoning we use the further notion of partial information, that of obscuring. An obscured scene is a scene in which some of the components of L have been replaced by the third value "obscured". When we test the success of a deduction algorithm for making correct predictions on a relation Ri, we obscure a possibly known component of L, such as R7(a2, a3, a8), and see whether that obscured information can be accurately predicted by the deduction process applied to the other components of L. We note that in standard PAC learning the target variable to be predicted can be viewed as obscured in the training process in exactly this sense.
Let D be a distribution on the vectors L over such scenes. It corresponds to the distribution of natural examples that arise from the world as perceived in the mind's eye of one agent. In this simplified RL we assume here that D is symmetric under permutations of the token objects, reflecting the total absence of structure among the tokens.
A rule q is of the form x1, x2, и и и , x(i) [lhs  rhs] where rhs is of the form Ri(x1, x2, и и и , x(i)) and lhs has the same set x1, x2, и и и , x(i) of free variables and is some expression q from some permitted universe E of expressions involving R. We call the class of such rules (E, R)-rules.
An independently quantified expression, or IQE, for a relation T , of arity three for example, is of the form e = xyzT (x, y, z) where each occurrence of  may be either an existential quantifier , or a null quantifier. Further, the non-null quantifiers, here the existential ones, are totally independent of any other IQE. In other words, those of the variables x, y, z that have an existential quantifier are local to just the one relation T . The remaining variables are the free variables. Both bound and free variables refer only to tokens in the scene. For any one unobscured scene, any IQE such as e = xzT (x, y, z), and any binding of the free variables of e, in this case y, to the objects in the scene, a Boolean truth value is determined therefore.
Now given a set of base relations R we shall define a schema of IQEs as follows: We consider a bounded number of ways of conjoining members of R each with some quantification, but with a common set of free variables. For example
{R1(x), yR2(x, y), yR3(y)R4(x, y),
yzR5(x)R6(y)R7(x, y, z)}
is such a schema having four forms, with the common free variable x. A schema of IQEs for R is then the set of such quantified conjunctions with all possible combinations of substitutions of members of R with the appropriate arities as specifed by the forms allowed in the schema. Each form specifies a combination of the syntax allowed for a T and the syntax of its quantifiers.

1550

The class of (E, R)-rules that will form the basis of our RL can now be defined. To obtain E from a base set of relations R we generate all possible members of a specific schema of IQEs (e.g. schema {R1(x), yR2(x, y), yR3(y)R4(x, y)}) and let E be a class of Boolean functions that is easily learned and has this set of IQE's as its Boolean variables.. A very convenient choice of learning algorithm is Littlestone's Winnow (Littlestone, 1987) since this has provably good learning properties and performs well in practice on natural data sets (Golding and Roth, 1999). In that case E will be linear threshold functions. In general, if we apply a propositional learning algorithm to the Boolean vector of values of all possible IQEs of schema, then we can exploit the propositional learning algorithm in the normal way, and all its properties, such as sample bounds, attribute-efficiency and resilience to errors will be inherited in the relational domain.
Thus rules of the specified kind can be learned that are accurate in the PAC sense on the distribution of possible scenes. It is shown in (Valiant 2000b) that these rules can be chained to derive deductions about individual scenes. The chaining process is sound and complete in a defined sense. For efficient computaition one needs that all the base relations have bounded arities, say   3. Given this one assumption all the learning and reasoning processes require only polynomially bounded resources in terms of the number of tokens, the number of base relations, and the inverse of the errors that are to be tolerated.
The simplified robust logic described here can be extended in various natural ways. The treatment in (Valiant, 2000b) can be viewed as an extension in the following four directions: preconditions are allowed for each rule, the distribution D need not be symmetric, bindings need not be one-to-one, and universal quantifiers are allowed in addition to existential quantifiers.
Acknowledgement
It is a pleasure to thank Loizos Michael for numerous conversations.
References
Blumer, A.; Ehrenfeucht, A.; Haussler, D.; and Warmth, M. 1987. Occam's razor. Inf. Process. Lett. 24(6):377Г 380. Blumer, A.; Ehrenfeucht, A.; Haussler, D.; and Warmuth, M. 1989. Learnability and the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension. JACM 36(4):929Г965. Comby, C., and Roth, D. 2003. On kernel methods for relational learning. ICML 107Г114. Cumby, C., and Roth, D. 2002. Learning with feature description logics. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Inductive Logic Programming. 32-47. Ehrenfeucht, A.; Haussler, D.; Kearns, M.; and Valiant, L. 1989. A general lower bound on the number of examples needed for learning. Inf. Comput. 3:247Г261.

Golding, A., and Roth, D. 1999. A winnow-based approach to context-sensitive spelling corrections. Machine Learning 34(1-3):107Г130. Haussler, D. 1989. Learning conjunctive concepts in structural domains. Machine Learning 4:7Г40. Kearns, M., and Valiant, L. 1994. Cryptographic limitations on learning boolean formulae and finite automata. JACM 1:67Г95. Khardon, R., and Roth, D. 1997. Learning to reason. JACM 697Г725. Khardon, R.; Roth, D.; and Valiant, L. 1999. Relational learning for NLP using linear threshold elements. IJCAI99 911Г917. Kramer, S.; Lavrac, N.; and Flach, P. 2001. Propositionalization approaches to relational data mining. In Dzeroski, S., and Lavrac, N., eds., Relational Data Mining, 262Г291. Springer-Verlag. Lavrac, N.; Dzeroski, S.; and Grobelnik, M. 1991. Learning nonrecursive definitions of relations with linus. In Kodratoff, Y., ed., Proceedings of the 5th European Working Session on Learning, volume 482, 265Г281. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Springer-Verlag. Littlestone, N. 1988. Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes abound: a new linear-threshold algorithm. JACM 2(4):2850Г318. Littlestone, N. 1989. From on-line to batch learning. In Proc. COLT89, 269Г284. Morgan Kaufmann. Miller, G. 1956. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psych. Rev 63:81Г97. Miyake, A., and Shah, P., eds. 1999. Models of Working Memory: Mechamisms of active maintenace and executive control. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Newell, A. 1987. Unified Theories of Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Havard University Press. Pitt, L., and Valiant, L. 1988. Computational limitations on learning from examples. JACM 35:965Г984. Quinlan, J. 1990. Learning logical definitions from relations. Machine Learning 5:239Г266. Roth, D., and Yih, W. 2001. Relational learning via propositional algorithms: An information extraction case study. IJCAI'01 1257Г1263. Schuurmans, D., and Greiner, R. 1995. Sequential PAC learning. In Proc. 8th COLT, 377Г384. ACM Press. Terwijn, S. 2005. Probabilistic logic and induction. J. of Logic and Computation 15(4):507Г515. Valiant, L. 1984. A theory of the learnable. CACM 27(11):1134Г1142. Valiant, L. 1985. Learning disjunctions of conjunctions. In Proc. 9th IJCAI, 560Г566. Morgan Kaufmann. Valiant, L. 2000a. A neuroidal architecture for cognitive computation. JACM 47(5):854Г882. Valiant, L. 2000b. Robust logics. In Artificial Intelligence Journal, 642Г651. 117 (2000) 231-353.

1551

