Business Excellence 2003 ­ 1st Int. Conference on Performance measures, Benchmarking, and Best Practices in

New Economy, Guimarães, Portugal, 10-13 Jun 2B00u3s.iness Excellence '03

[Towards a foundation for virtual organizations]

[Camarinha-Matos, Abreu]

TOWARDS A FOUNDATION FOR VIRTUAL ORGANIZATIONS
Luis M. Camarinha-Matos*, New University of Lisbon, Portugal, cam@uninova.pt, António Abreu, New University of Lisbon, Portugal, ajfa@fct.unl.pt
Abstract: After an initial phase in which the basic virtual organizations infrastructures and pilot cases, mostly biased by traditional business practices, were developed, there is a vital need to conduct fundamental research in order to understand the emerging behavior of new collaborative organizational forms. There is no single formal modeling tool/approach that adequately covers all perspectives yet. In this direction, a research approach to establish a sound theoretical foundation is proposed. As a starting basis, contributions from different disciplines, such as complex systems theory, game theory, etc, are suggested. Finally a roadmap for future research to understand, characterize, and better support this paradigm is briefly introduced.
Keywords: virtual organizations, collaborative networks, and formal models.

INTRODUCTION
The business environment has faced dramatic challenges in recent years, which are boosted by the continuous advances in the information and communication technologies, and leading to the emergence of a large variety of collaborative networks [5]. Advanced and highly integrated supply chains, virtual enterprises / virtual organizations (VO), virtual (professional) communities, and value constellations, represent only the tip of a major trend in which organizations seek complementarities that allow them to participate in competitive business opportunities and provision of advanced emerging services in both commercial and public domains. Cooperation among enterprises is certainly not a new phenomenon, but it has gained a new dimension in the last decade. According to [18] there are three environmental factors that have had the most decisive influence to encourage cooperation among organizations. The first is economic globalization. The world economy at the start of the twenty-first century is experiencing one of its moments of greatest dynamism and change. This dynamism is reflected in the growing interdependence of markets for goods, services and factors of production. The second factor is the increase in business uncertainty. The speed under which changes are occurring in the economic world is introducing large uncertainty. This is specially the case in business areas where constant transformations, resulting from reductions in technological and product life-cycles, improvement in productive processes, and so on, which are often difficult to predict, demanding greater follow-up capacity from enterprises in order to adapt to the new surrounding conditions.

Finally, the third feature is the high level of competitive rivalry. The increased customer requirements and market saturation are forcing the enterprises to constantly dig deeper in their search for competitive advantages to improve their position in the market. As a result of this, there is a tendency for enterprises to concentrate on core know-how, or on those aspects of the added value chain they really master.
STATE OF THE ART
During the last decade, and in parallel with the development and spreading of Internet technologies, traditional collaboration networks have found new leveraging tools and the new collaborative business forms have emerged. In fact there is a dual interaction here: Emerging ICT infrastructures induce new organizational forms but emerging organizational forms will require new support infrastructures and tools (principle of coevolution). In terms of research, there has been significant activity during the last decade especially in Europe in the area of Virtual Organizations [5]. From the EC funded activities more than 60 projects can be identified, which are complemented by a large number of national initiatives. However these initiatives correspond to fragmented research and in most cases due to the funding criteria, target very short-term objectives, focused on solving a specific problem, and too biased by "fashionable" short-life technologies. In summary, the situation regarding these projects is characterized as follows:
· Research on VO has created a critical mass and the European-wide intuitive understanding of the area.

1/6

[Towards a foundation for virtual organizations]

Business Excellence '03

[Camarinha-Matos, Abreu]

· Required basic supporting infrastructures and relevant technologies are well identified, but

the developments are often focused on

particular needs and are based on ad-hoc

experiments, hardly re-utilizable.

· Generic functions or harmonization of

achievements are addressed only in few

projects.

· Efforts on general plug-and-play architecture

and interoperability are to a large extent

missing. Consequently, no generally accepted

reference model or interoperability base is

available.

· Although several disciplines are concerned, the

main focus has been on the ICT infrastructure.

Research on social/organizational, including

management, is mainly focused on best

practice. Integration with technological

development and impacts on organizational

structures are not covered. In addition little

research is focused on the social and

organizational issues created by VOs.

Nevertheless there is a growing awareness that

the VO developments should be based on

contributions of a multidisciplinary nature, namely

from the information and communication

technologies,

socio-economic,

operations

research, organizational, business management,

legal, social security, and ethical areas, among

others.

Need for a formal foundation. Ad-hoc approaches and poor understanding of the behavior of the collaborative structures and processes mainly characterize past developments in the area of virtual organizations. One of the main weaknesses in this area is the lack of appropriate formal modeling methods and theories to define the collaborative, networked organizations paradigm. Dramatically enough there is not yet even a commonly accepted definition for basic concepts such as virtual organization or virtual enterprise. This situation can be summarized by:
· Lack of formal methods for collaborative networks, collaborative decision-making and collaborative behavior modeling. Ad-hoc modeling techniques have become too pragmatic in recent years focusing on shortterm results. As a consequence the VO area is not recognized as a scientific discipline yet, being also difficult to guarantee VO effectiveness.
· VO reference models are missing. · Most available modeling methods and tools
were developed for single enterprises, not suitable for VO. · Enterprise reference models previously developed are also too focused on the single enterprise.

· Models integration (models interoperability) is missing.
· Poor approaches to model the social and human aspects in collaborative networks (soft modeling).
· Poor support for dynamic Ontology creation and maintenance in a networked environment.
Nevertheless, some theories and paradigms defined in other areas, have been suggested by several research groups as promising to be applied for modeling certain aspects of the collaborative networks; for instance, to help understand and characterize the emerging behavior of collaborative organizational forms. Examples of such paradigms include multi-agent system theories, coordination models, federated systems paradigm, game theory, complexity theory, etc. More recently some groups also suggest the "soft computing" area as a suitable approach to model aspects of human behavior in collaborative organizations, and to handle the issues of decision-making and behavior management in the context of incomplete knowledge [6]. Furthermore, the VO research community has some strength regarding the modeling and support theories such as:
· Wide experience with process-oriented businesses;
· Visual modeling techniques facilitate the comprehension of linkages and can be used as communication tools;
· Increased awareness of limitations of current ad-hoc approaches;
· Variety of tools that can be "borrowed" from other disciplines, as starting basis.
Departing from this situation, a big challenge now is the development of a research agenda aimed at establishing a formal theoretical foundation to help in the:
· Understanding of the collaborative networks and emerging collaborative (complex) behaviors;
· Measurement of performance in collaborative networks;
· Definition of new value systems and determination of the added-value of each node / actor in the network;
· Improvement of the management principles and overall efficiency of the collaborative networks / VOs.
SUGGESTED APPROACH
In order to define a research agenda for a sound theoretical foundation for VOs, the suggested approach is not to "re-invent the wheel" but rather to take into account and adapt possible contributions from other disciplines (e.g. game

2/6

[Towards a foundation for virtual organizations]

Business Excellence '03

[Camarinha-Matos, Abreu]

theory, agent-base modeling, graph theory,

complexity theory, social actors networks, etc). It

is, however, necessary to take into account that

both these approaches and corresponding tools

have been developed for different contexts.

Therefore their application to the VO paradigm

requires assessment, adaptations, and further

developments. Furthermore, there are a large

number of different perspectives in a collaborative

process, which cannot be covered by a single

theory or single modeling approach.

Therefore, as a first step, the main purposes for

modeling in collaborative networks (e.g. describing

and understanding, engineer new business

processes, performance evaluation, re-

configuration, selection of partners, interfaces) and

their requirements need to be identified and

characterized. Then the most promising disciplines

need to be assessed in terms of their potential

contribution to the various identified modeling

purposes.

Current limitations of existing methods and

approaches point out to the key actions of a

research agenda (roadmap).

This general approach is being considered in the

context of the IST THINKcreative [6] and VOmap

[7] projects. THINKcreative aims at identifying and

characterizing

emerging

organizational

collaborative forms and their required

infrastructures, modeling and application tools, as

well as the corresponding socio-organizational

needs for the next 5, 10 and 20 years. VOmap is a

roadmapping initiative that aims at identifying and

characterizing the key research challenges,

required constituency, and implementation model

for a comprehensive initiative to affirm the

European leadership on dynamic collaborative

virtual organizations.

MODELING COLLABORATIVE, NETWORKED ORGANIZATIONS
As mentioned above, collaborative, networked organizations can be modeled from multiple perspectives or for different purposes. Identifying and characterizing the modeling purposes is thus a necessary first step. As an illustration, let us consider four modeling perspectives: i) relationships model, ii) roles model, iii) process, and iv) deontic / values model. Figure 1 shows how these modeling perspectives partition the VO modeling problem in more tractable sub-problems. Each of these individual views can be described and supported by specialized methods without having to incorporate the corresponding relationships to the other views.
Relationships model describes the forms of

interrelationship that can occur between components within a network. For instance, the following types of relationships can be identified:
- Control relationships ­ which identify the authority structure within a network.
- Dependence relationships ­ which identify the topologic dependences between agents.
- Ownership relationships - which define the boundaries of each agent.
- Peer relationships ­ which identify agents at the same level.

PROCESS MODEL

R E L A T I O Organizational structure N M O D E L

Enterprise A

Enterprise B

VO

Enterprise C

Enterprise D

C

Coordinator Project Manager

Broker

Auditor

D E O N T I C / V A L U E S M O D E L

ROLE MODEL

Fig. 1. Four modeling purposes in collaborative networked organizations

Roles model describes all roles and their positioning within the network structure. A role model implicitly defines a topology of interactions and can describe a network structure in terms of "master role" and "slave role". Process model focus on dynamic courses of events. Some generic concepts such as activity and actor, time dependencies such as equal, during, starts, finishes, and resource-related perspectives such as necessary, sufficient, have to exist. Deontic / Values Model defines constraints for all agents within a network at different levels, such as:
- Computational level ­ interoperability constraints,
- Organizational level ­ behavior constraints, for example a clerk cannot contradict or ignore an order of his manager,
- Economic level ­ financial constraints, - Operational level ­ for example task B must be
done before task A.

PROMISING APPROACHES TO MODEL COLLABORATIVE NETWORKS
Figure 2 shows some promising theories and approaches that can contribute to establish a sound theoretical foundation for collaborative, networked organizations.

3/6

[Towards a foundation for virtual organizations]

Business Excellence '03

[Camarinha-Matos, Abreu]

Game Theory

Complex systems theories

Graph theory

Social Actors Networks theory

Multi-Agent Systems

Semiotics & Deontic
logic

Theories

Short Description

Applicability

A mathematical framework designed for analyzing the interaction between several agents whose decisions affect each other. An interactive situation is described as a game that has an abstract description of the players (agents), the courses of actions available to them, and their preferences over the possible outcomes. It is assumed that players employ rational decision-making, that is, each player's objective is to maximize the expected value of his own payoff, which is measured in some utility scale. [16][1]. A complex system is formed of critically interacting components (that has rich information neither static nor chaotic) that self-organize to form potentially evolving (environmental variation selects and mutates attractors) structures exhibiting a hierarchy (multiple levels of structure and responses appear - hyper-structure) of emergent system properties (new features).[2] A branch of mathematics concerned about how networks can be encoded and their properties measured. The main goal is to represent a network in symbolic terms, abstracting reality as a set of linked nodes. [20] Extension of graph theory to include relationships between social actors. Social Actors Networks are a way to highlight the structural relationships among social actors, enabling the conceptualization of their actions in a systematic way[15].
A multi-agent system is a loosely coupled network of problem-solver entities that work together to find answers to problems that are beyond the individual capabilities or knowledge of each entity. Hence, it is concerned with coordinating intelligent behavior among a collection of autonomous intelligent agents, how they can jointly coordinate their knowledge, goals, skills and plans to take action or to solve problems [8]. Semiotics is a science of signs and/or sign systems. Deontic logic is a logic of obligations. Together they provide a normative approach for systems modeling. [9] A way to incorporate Formal Methods into the software development process to enhance the rigor (methodology), comprehensibility (human), and tool supportability (software tools) of software development process and consequently the quality of the final software product. [3,4,12] Formal theories are based in mathematical tools (like: logic, set theory, algebra, etc) that is used for describing system properties, and for producing systems that satisfy those properties [3,4,12]
Metaphors are an integral part of our society and language (informal or semi-formal language that can use graphic description like bubbles, arrows, charts, matrices) which makes it a form of communicating that is deeply ingrained and understood intuitively by Western cultures. That is one of the most important tools for trying to comprehend partially what cannot be comprehended totally. [14] A mathematical approach to decision-making, which seeks to determine how to best design and operate a system (optimization process), usually under conditions requiring the allocation of scarce resources. [13][19].
Ontology is a formal explicit description of concepts in a domain of discourse (classes, sometimes called concepts), properties of each concept describing various features and attributes of the concept (slots, sometimes called roles or properties), and restrictions on slots (facets, sometimes called role restrictions). Ontology together with a set of individual instances of classes constitutes a knowledge base [17], [11].

· Non cooperative game theory: good for selecting partners, sustaining cooperation and trust
· Cooperative game theory: distribution of responsibility and resources.
· Analysis of self-organizing behavior,
· Learn how to manage chaotic dynamics,
· The "small words" case can give some insights on understanding VOs
· Represent networks of relationships - topology, routing, activity, flow
· Perform computations on flows · Optimization · Analysis of social and
organizational structure of VOs (connectiveness, trust, awareness, etc.) · Creation / reconfiguration phases of collaborative networked organizations. · Model societies of autonomous, heterogeneous, evolving entities · Coalition formation and negotiation · Simulate self-organizing behavior
· Model responsibility relationships and commitments
· Prescribe norms and roles, legal support
· Capture system requirements · Describe the operational behavior
of VO · Formulating operational plans
that bind partners in VO · Verifying formally that the plans
are indeed satisfied by the operational behavior · Solve design problems: architecture, protocols, network creation-Specify systems, verify specifications according to correctness and completeness · Test and verification implementations versus specifications or standards · Quick description for human communication (a possible help in expressing complex ill-defined concepts) · Use in early stages (conceptual design)
· Can be used mainly at operational level to support:
· Network creation, · Network Optimization, · Operations and production
management, · Logistic management · Creation / Design · Communication · Understanding basic principles

Fig. 2. Promising disciplines vs. modeling purposes

Limitations/Challenges · Need to identify all "players" · Need to know all possible "moves"
and associated results · Assumes that player's behavior
does not change once the game starts · It is difficult to capture subjective relationships.
· Models studied for other domains (e.g. biology, physics) cannot be easily applied in VOs,
· Further work is necessary for complex systems with social actors (human elements)
· Basic theory is very rigid - needs extensions to represent non tangible, qualitative relationships (fuzzy dimensions), and multicriteria
· Offers a structural view on the VOs but does not provide any means to model an agency point of view i. e., what, how and why activities are performed in a VO.
· Needs to be used with a business process engineering method.
· Need further developments in social aspects of agency, dealing with uncertainty and interoperation with other models (e.g. process modeling languages)
· Reasoning in deontic logic may lead to paradoxes; difficult to automate reasoning
· An promising approach: integration with agent logic
· Difficult to develop and understand · Economic and social aspects
cannot be represented. · Need intermediate-level formalisms
and methods to bridge the gap between abstract formalism and practical ICT implementation · Lack of knowledge of formal methods in the current engineering community · Need practical approaches for scalability · Need to consider developments in communication networks · Risk of taking metaphors too strictly · Needs further evaluation and research in consistent understanding in the creation and interpretation of metaphors · Needs to be combined with formal methods · High level of abstraction and notation, · Difficult communication, · Heavy and computationally demanding tools.
· Only captures static domain knowledge (not dynamic knowledge)
· Several conceptualization possibilities even for a given wellknow domain,
· Building them is still an art.

4/6

Formal Engineering
Methods

Formal Theory

Metaphor Theory

Operations Research

Ontology

[Towards a foundation for virtual organizations]

Business Excellence '03

[Camarinha-Matos, Abreu]

The above table is not exhaustive, as several other existing and/or emerging theories and approaches might have a positive contribution to model virtual organizations. Fig. 3 shows an attempt to relate these approaches to the four modeling purposes.

Informal view

Semi-formal view

Metaphors theory

Metaphors theory

Metaphors theory

Metaphors theory

Graph Theory Social Actors Network Theory Multi-Agent Systems Game Theory Complex Systems Theory Relation Model

Graph Theory Social Actors Network Theory Multi-Agent Systems
Roles Model

Graph Theory Multi-Agent Systems Ontologies
Game Theory Formal Theory Operations Research Formal Engineering Methods Process Model

Graph Theory Social Actors Network Theory Multi-Agent Systems Game Theory Deontic/values
Model

Formal view

Fig. 3. Promising disciplines vs. modeling purposes

For each modeling purpose several views can be considered. Fig. 4 shows an example for the process model.

Organizational Model

Role Model

VO
Process Model

Deontic /Values Model

Management Engineering
Information

Management Engineering

Process Views

Exemple of specific problems

Process

Production scheduling, Resources management, Skill management, Simulation.

Process

Property Rights, Transaction Cost, Mechanism Design, Trust/loyalty.

Information Tecnology
Process

Missing of Information links, Information redundancy, Interoperability, Identification of security critical points.

Modelling approach Metaphor Theory Operations Research Graph Theory Multi-Agent Systems Metaphor Theory Graph Theory Game Theory Multi-Agent Systems
Metaphor Theory Formal Engineering Methods Formal Theory Ontogoly

Fig. 4. Process model views

Establishing a foundation for collaborative networks requires a fully multi-disciplinary approach; there is no single formal modeling tool/approach that adequately covers all perspectives ­ no "universal language" for all problems. Even for each purpose there might be a need to use more than one tool.

A RESEARCH ROADMAP FOR VO
Although a fundamental backbone for the development of future virtual organizations, the theoretical foundation is only one of the aspects that need further research. The definition of a comprehensive research roadmap for virtual organizations will certainly depend on the vision or aimed future for this area. The VOmap vision considers that "In 2015 most enterprises shall be part of some sustainable collaborative networks that will act as breeding environments for the formation of dynamic virtual organizations in response to fast changing market conditions" [7]. Taking this general vision but also considering the multi-disciplinary scope of VOs, the following main focus areas can be considered: the socioeconomic, the VO management, the ICT infrastructure, the support services, and the formal theories and modeling (Fig.5).

S o c io e co n o m ic F ocus A rea

O v e ra ll V is io n fo r N e tw o rk e d
Econom y

F o rm a l M o d e ls a nd T h eory F ocus A rea

VO M anagem ent
F o cus A rea

IC T In fra s tru ctu re
F ocus A rea

S upp ort S e rv ic e s F ocu s A rea

Fig. 5. Focus areas for implementing the vision Socio-economic focus area, which is concerned with the societal boundary conditions and support for virtual organizations, and the people working in a networked environment. It looks at areas beyond the control or responsibility of individual VOs, companies or professionals. VO management focus area, which looks at the individual VO, company or professional level and what these players require to be equipped as successful participants in a networked economy. Formal theories and models focus area, the main issue discussed in previous sections and that provide a theoretical foundation and reusable models for virtual organizations as solid basis for longer-term developments.

5/6

[Towards a foundation for virtual organizations]

Business Excellence '03

[Camarinha-Matos, Abreu]

Socioeconomic
Focus

Education and training schemas

Socrioe-seecaornchomic

Life smcahienmteansance

VO support institutions and services

Regiocnoaml &mpurnoitfieesssional

Legal framework & ethical code

TIME REFERENCES
[1] R. Axelroad, The Evolution of

VO Management
Focus

Business models & financing schemes

Concepts & guidelines for organiz. design

Evaluation, improvements & individualization

Plan. & performance measurement tools

Application of new value paradigms

Cooperation, Basic Books, 1984. [2] Y. Bar-Yam, Dynamics of Complex Systems, AddisonWesley, 1997.

Formal Theories and models
Focus

Establish formal theoretical foundation
Elaborate approaches for models interoperability

Define reference models

Models evolution and maintenance

Elaborate soft modeling approaches

[3] J.P. Bowen, M.G. Hinchey, Seven More Myths of Formal Methods, in: IEEE Software, Vol.

Support Services
Focus

Breeding environment management system

Business models for support services

Services for VO life cycle support

VO's inheritance management Traceability and interVO transactions

12 (1995) 34-41. [4] J.P. Bowen, M.G. Hinchey, Ten Commandments of formal Methods, in: IEEE Computer, Vol.

ICT Infrastructure
Focus

Reference architecture Business models for

principles

infrastructure

Reliability and responsibility approaches

Invisible, affordable Migration and systems

infrastructure

integration

"Do it yourself" framework

Short term

Medium term

Long term

28 (1995) 56-63. [5] L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh ­ Dynamic virtual organizations, or not so dynamic?, in Knowledge and technology

Fig. 6. A roadmap for virtual organizations research

integration in production and services, Kluwer

Support services focus area, which looks at specific ICT business applications and services

Academic Publishers, ISBN 1-4020-7211-2, 2002. [6] L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh ­

that can support the total lifecycle of the virtual

Interim Green Report on New Collaborative

organization.

Forms and their Needs, THINKcreative report,

ICT Infrastructures focus area, which addresses the underlying ICT infrastructures and architectures for the virtual organization, which are required to run business applications and services on them.

2002. [7] L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh ­ Draft
research roadmap for virtual organizations, VOmap report D5, Feb 2003. [8] J. Ferber, Multi-Agent Systems An Introduction to Distributed Artificial Intelligence, Addison-

Considering the specific needs of these focus

Wesley, 1999. [9] J. Filipe, L. Kecheng -The EDA Model: an

areas a set of strategic research actions is

organisational semiotics perspective to norm-

suggested as a "research roadmap" [7] (Fig.6).

based agent design, Workshop on Norms and

Institutions in MAS, Barcelona, 3-7 June 2000.

[10] D.H. Freedman, Is Management still a science?,

CONCLUSIONS
There is an urgent need to consolidate the

in: Harvad Business Reviee, Vol. NovemberDecember (1992) 26-38. [11] T.R. Gruber, A Translation approach to portable

existing knowledge on virtual organizations /

ontology specifications, in: Knowledge

collaborative networked organizations (CNO)

Acquisition, Vol. 5 (1993) 199-220.

and to launch a sound theoretical foundation for the area. Developing formal theories and models will not only help to better understand the area, but also to support decision-making in all phases of the future CNO life cycle. A decision-making process based on well argued and verified models and

[12] A. Hall, Seven Myths of Formal Methods, in: IEEE Software, Vol. 7 (1990) 11-19.
[13] F.S. Hiller, G.J. Lieberman, Introduction to Operation Research, McGraw-Hill, Inc, 1995.
[14] G. Lakoff, M. Johnson, Metaphors we live by, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1980.
[15] E. Lazega, Network Analysis and Qualitative Research: a Method of Contextualization, in: G.

methodologies provides the basis for both the

Miller, R. Dingwall (Eds.), Context and Method in

ICT-based support for business and

Qualitative Research, Sage, London, 1997.

organizational development and operation, as well as for education, training, and operation management of CNOs.

[16] R.B. Myerson, Game Theory Analysis of Conflict, Harvard University Press, 1997.
[17] N.F. Noy, D.L. McGuinness, Ontology Development 101: A guide to Creating Your First

Ontology, www.smi.stanford.edu/projects/protege/

Acknowledgements

publications/ontology_development/ontology101.pdf. [18] N.A. Penã, J.C.F. Arroyabe - Business

The results included in this paper are partially developed in the context of two European IST projects: THINKcreative and VOmap.

Cooperation, Palgrave Macmillan, 2002. [19] H.A. Taha - Operation Research: an introduction,
Prentice-Hall International, Inc, 1997. [20] R. Wilson, J.J. Watkins ­ GRAPHS: An

Introductory approach, John Wiley&Sons, 1990.

6/6

