JRAP 38(3): 243-254. © 2008 MCRSA. All rights reserved.
Economic or Amenity Driven Migration? A Cluster-Based Analysis of County Migration in the Four Corners States
Ronald J. Gunderson, James V. Pinto, and Robert H. Williams Northern Arizona University - USA

Abstract. Numerous studies have confirmed the importance of both economic and non-economic
(or amenity) factors on net domestic migration flows across county boundaries in the U.S. over the past several decades. This study focuses on the counties within the states comprising the Four Corners Region (Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah) of the U.S. Initially, regression analysis was employed to explain a proportion of the variation in net migration rates within the region from 1995-2000. Cluster analysis was then used to classify counties into groups that exhibit similar characteristics. The results of the study suggest that only a few of
the traditional variables were correlated with migration activity in the Four Corners states; however the cluster-based technique identified four separate county groups which demonstrate the importance of both economic and amenity-based variables.

1. Introduction
The influence of migration patterns on economic growth or decline across geographic locations has provided a focus for research across the United States (U.S.) for several decades. Traditionally, economic advantage` in the form of employment in the extractive industries, or in government or manufacturing, has provided the impetus for increased flows of new migrants into many regions. Thus, the ability to successfully interpret changes in migration flows has provided a useful tool for community leaders and for economic developers who are charged with attracting new jobs and promoting economic development in a region.
However, the impacts of a favorable climate and the presence of numerous natural amenities have been recognized as legitimate pull-factors in migration flows as long ago as the 1950`s when Ullman (1954) stated that pleasant living conditions ...are becoming the sparks that generate significant population increase. The shift from an economic to an environmental basis to explain portions of migration flows has taken on increased significance as changes in demographic and income levels in the U.S. have resulted in increased longevity thus spurring new interest in tour-

ism, retirement and second home activities that do not
spring from economic necessity, but result instead, from the desire to engage in lifestyle changes provided by recreation-based or retirement-oriented communities.
Although amenity-based migration has been observed in numerous locations across the U.S., the shift in trends within the Mountain West region of the
country appears to be more pronounced than in many other areas. Vias (1999) and Shumway and Otterstrom (2001) have specifically pointed to the evolving nature of the regional economy in these mountain states where dependence on the extractive sectors ­ mining, logging, ranching and farming ­ has been
partly replaced by a dependence on environmental amenities as well as the growth of service industries to support the new lifestyle that has emerged.
Vias (1999) specifically attributed the changing patterns of migration flows to emerging residential preferences that emphasize environmental amenities
and rural lifestyles` along with the increased importance of nonemployment income which has generated an increased number of potential migrants who are motivated to relocate for reasons other than economic opportunity.

244
While changes in the rationale that underlie the migration decision in the U.S. are well-documented in the literature, this paper examines the relationship for a particular subset of counties within the U.S. Net migration flows from 1995 to 2000 were examined for counties located in the states comprising the Four Corners Region of the U.S. using a number of economic and amenity-based variables. We extend the basic analysis through the use of cluster-based techniques to gain a better understanding of the effects of the predictor variables on net migration.
The Four Corners region is located within the states of Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah, and represents an area whose natural boundaries are both culturally and geographically intertwined. Although the political boundaries of the region overlap portions of the four states, the need for political and economic cooperation was formally recognized with the establishment of the federally sponsored Four Corners Regional Planning Commission in 1967.
The increasing importance of regions in establishing rural policy has been addressed numerous times in the literature (Drabenstott and Sheaff 2002; Anesi et al. 2002; Gómez 2000.) The power of regions to shape rural policy is particularly important in instances when the economic foundations of an area undergo major shifts. This has been the case in sections of the states which comprise the Four Corners Region where growth was initially tied to successes in the natural resource and extraction industries. However, today, these activities have been largely supplanted by the growth of tourism with a host of new challenges and issues for the entities located within these boundaries (Gómez 2000.)
The counties which make up the area formally recognized as the Four Corners Region are largely rural and contain no major cities. Access to health care, major airports and a highly developed infrastructure is somewhat limited forcing residents and businesses alike to look to the metropolitan regions in these states to satisfy their need for these services. Thus the region of study for our analysis was broadened to include 93 counties throughout Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah in order to capture the linkages and interdependencies that are typically available within the broader political boundaries of the states. Each of the counties contained a minimum of 10,000 permanent residents in 1995. An additional 48 counties in these states with populations of less than 10,000 residents were not included in the analysis for two reasons. Many of the variables used in this study rely on percent changes over periods of time. These changes may appear quite sizeable when the base numbers are very small, thereby producing large percentage changes

Gunderson, Pinto, and Williams
when in fact, the absolute size and resulting impacts are minimal. Furthermore, the sampling process to obtain the migration flow data can result in numbers too small to be statistically significant for counties with smaller populations.
Predicting migratory flows is often accomplished by reliance on empirical relationships that have been identified over time. Occasionally this procedure is complicated by migration turnarounds that have been observed since the 1970`s (Fuguitt and Beale 1978; and Fuguitt and Tordella 1980) in works that confirmed a reversal of long-time migration trends in many rural counties across the nation.
Economic opportunity was often credited with providing a pull-factor that counties could count on to attract new residents into an area (Muth 1971; Olvey 1972; Greenwood 1975, 1985; Partridge and Rickman 2006). However, other studies have also demonstrated the importance of the benefits derived from positive quality of life measures (Cushing 1987; Cebula 2005; Cebula and Payne 2005) as well as the role of locationspecific amenities in particular locations in the decision to migrate (McGranahan 1999; Green 2001; Deller et al., 2001; Gunderson and Ng 2006.) Earlier, Graves (1973, 1979, 1980) concluded that generalized increased levels of income and wealth are related to location-specific amenities and leisure activities, which in turn could influence migration into a region. Johnson and Stewart (2005) used urban proximity to demonstrate the relationship between second-home ownership and eventual migration to areas influenced by recreation and amenities in southeastern Wisconsin. Porell (1982) addressed tradeoffs between economic and amenity factors to explain migration occurring in metropolitan regions between 1965 and 1970.
Similarly, Roback (1982) argued that positive quality-of-life factors in many locations will not only influence levels of wages and rents, but individuals are also willing to trade off higher wages and pay higher rents so that they might live in these communities. Blanchflower and Oswald (1994) extended Roback`s work and found that individuals are frequently willing to accept higher levels of unemployment in order to live in high-amenity locations. Barkley et al. (1998) and Dorf and Emerson (1978) employed factor analysis techniques to generate underlying dimensions that explain manufacturing plant location in nonmetropolitan regions and examined the role for local school quality in assessing the growth of employment and population. Cebula and Alexander (2006) found the presence of hazardous waste sites and toxic chemical releases were negatively related to net state inmigration in the 2000-2004 period. Thus, an increasingly diverse amount of research supports the hypo-

Economic or amenity driven migration?
thesis that both economic factors and life-style amenities (both positive and negative) each play a role in the decision to migrate.
Measuring the effects of amenity-related variables on migration is complicated by how these attributes link to economic performance in each county. In selected cases, it is quite apparent that the presence of amenities contributes to a healthy economy and generates increased permanent migration into the region. While in others, recreation and entertainment amenities may attract large numbers of visitors and contribute to a healthy economy, yet the added employment opportunities brought about do not, in turn, induce additional migration into these areas. Thus, the influence of amenity-related variables on migration is contextual.
2. Data
Ninety-three counties from Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah were included in this analysis constituting all counties with 10,000 or more permanent residents in these states. In the initial phase of the research, separate analyses for the rural versus urban-based counties were conducted; however, the interpretations of the separate models did not improve based upon the unique treatment of the two county types.
Data were collected from numerous sources commencing with 1990 and 2000 decennial U.S. Censuses of Population and Housing. Additional information for 1995 was obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Regional Economic Accounts. Data were also selected from the National Outdoor Recreation Supply Information System (NORSIS) data set prepared and maintained by the USDA Forest Services' Wilderness Assessment Unit, Southern Research Station, Athens, Georgia. The NORSIS data set contains large numbers of variables ranging from population density, land use, access to water and recreation activities, climate and numerous additional items designed to identify amenities that may contribute to increased migration into a region.
3. Empirical results
The criterion variable used for this study was the domestic five-year net migration rate from 1995 to 2000 in each of the 93 counties. Migration data are available from the Census 2000 long form question on residence. The Census Bureau calculates the net migration rate as the ratio of the difference between in migration and out migration for each county to the intercensal 1995 census estimate of population for each

245
county. During the five years from 1995 to 2000, 55 of the counties in the study area experienced net positive migration flows, while 38 counties experienced net migration outflows.
Initially, a large number of economic and amenityrelated variables that have been identified in the literature cited above and which have been used to predict migration flows in the U.S. in similar studies were included in this analysis. However, based upon bivariate correlations between the dependent and predictor variables and upon the intercorrelations among the predictor variables, only five variables were selected from the larger set to focus on economic, lifestyle and amenity characteristics in the counties located in this region. Many of the variables initially investigated were found to be ineffective in predicting net migration in the region.1 Consequently, the five variables ultimately included in our equation were:
per capita wages and salaries as a percent of overall per capita personal income; percent of local municipality tax revenues derived from property taxes; average January temperature in each county; percentage change in total county employment as a percent of county population; percentage of county employment attributed to manufacturing.
Based upon the descriptions that follow, we consider the first three of these variables to be amenity-related and the remaining two as economic variables.
3.1 Description of the variables
Wages and salaries per capita in 1995 as a percent of overall personal income per capita (abbreviated as WSP) were used to measure the portion of overall personal income originating from wage and salary sources in each county. Wages and salaries represent only one of several components of overall personal income which also includes proprietors` income, dividends, retirement income and transfer payments such as social security income, veteran`s benefits and various welfare payments to the unemployed or disabled. While the hypothesis here is complex, two scenarios are plausible. One hypothesis emerges when wages and salaries represent a high percentage of total in-
1 Among the variables that were non-significant were the metro/nonmetro status of counties, percentage of residents over age 65, education levels of county residents, annual snowfall amounts, percentage of the labor force employed in various industries outside of manufacturing as well as numerous other agricultural, forest and mountain characteristics pertaining to each county.

246
come. This could be an indication of economic prosperity and consequently a stimulus for migration into the county; thus, the need for fewer transfer payments which would generate a higher ratio of wages and salaries to overall income. The second scenario might apply to high-retirement counties where individuals who possess significant wealth and receive dividends and retirement income but little if any earnings, move into a community for the various lifestyle amenities. In this scenario, the wages and salaries portion of overall personal income will be lower compared to the results in the initial scenario. An inverse relationship between wages and salaries and overall personal income will occur at the same time higher net in migration occurs in a county. Therefore, we are initially unable to predict the sign of the coefficient prior to analyzing the data.
The percent of local municipality revenue (revenue accruing to cities, towns and county governments) generated from property taxes (abbreviated as PROPERTY) was obtained from the NORSIS data set compiled for 1986-87, which is near the time of the initial period of analysis used in this study. This variable provides an indication of the significance of the property tax in a county, and our hypothesis is that when property tax collections as a percent of total revenue increase, a portion of this increase in revenue may have resulted from greater numbers of new residents who are driving the increased development. Thus, we expect a positive relationship between net migration and PROPERTY.
The 30-year mean average January temperature in each county was used as a proxy for climate conditions that could impact the decision to migrate into or out of a region. The terrain across this region varies considerably and January temperatures range from moderate in the desert climates in portions of the region, to frigid in the more mountainous areas. We expect a positive sign on this coefficient to indicate people are more likely to migrate on a permanent basis to warmer climates. This is consistent with previous findings in the literature (Cebula and Alexander 2006; Conway and Houtenville 1998).
The first of the two economic-related variables which were significant for this study was the change in the percentage of the county population that was employed in each county from 1989 to 1999 (abbreviated as EMP CHANGE.) This variable measures the change in the percentage of the county population that was employed over this period. We hypothesize that if the percent change in total employment increased from 45 to 55 percent over the decade, this suggests that people are moving into the county for economic reasons. On the other hand, if the percent change in

Gunderson, Pinto, and Williams
employment as a percent of the population declined in a county while the migration rate was still positive, then people may be moving to the county for retirement or other non-economic related reasons and we would expect the sign on the change in employment coefficient to be negative.
Finally, the percent of employment that existed in the manufacturing sector in 1990 was also expected to influence the net migration rate since high levels of manufacturing employment in many counties may serve as an indicator of economic health. Thus, additional manufacturing jobs would provide an attraction for individuals to migrate into the county as well as establish a source of resistance for persons to move out. Therefore, a positive sign is expected for this variable.
Prior to developing the regression equation, two variable plots between the criterion variable (the domestic five-year net migration rate for each county from 1995-2000) and each of the predictor variables were analyzed. Each of the relationships was approximately linear with simple positive correlations ranging from 0.37 to 0.76. All but the JAN TEMP variable were found to have statistically significant relationships with net migration at the .01 level, and the JAN TEMP was significant at the .05 level.
4. Regression analysis
Based upon the variable selection process described in section three above, a stepwise regression model utilizing SPSS 15.0 for Windows was used to ascertain the relative contribution of the variables in the equation. This approach introduces the five predictor variables into the model in the order of the highest positive contribution to the coefficient of multiple determination.
The equation relating migration to the five predictor variables possesses an F value of 45.2 with a significance level of less than 0.001. Each of the regression coefficients was significantly different from zero at the 0.05 level or less. The coefficient of multiple determination for the five-variable model was 0.722 with an adjusted R Square of 0.706. The results of the multiple linear regression model are presented in Table 1. The standardized coefficients indicate which of the independent variables is most important for determining the response variable. The explanatory variables are arranged in Table 1 from the most important (EMP CHANGE) to least important (JAN TEMP.)

Economic or amenity driven migration?

247

Table 1. Multiple linear regression (R Sq = 0.722; Adj. R Sq = 0.706; n = 93; Breusch-Pagan = 0.0678)

Predictor CONSTANT EMP CHANGE WSP MFGR PROPERTY JAN TEMP

Coefficients -0.13428 0.16579 -0.14307 0.00323 0.00136 0 .00137

Standardized Coefficients
0.634 -0.215 0.191 0.188 0.128

t Stat -2.73 9.36 -3.17 3.22 3.16 2.12

P-value 0.0073 <.0001 0.0021 0.0018 0.0021 0.0369

VIF
1.433 1.432 1.100 1.106 1.140

5. Discussion
Several important factors emerge from the regression results presented in this analysis. First, the percentage change in employment as a percent of county population over the period from 1989 to 1999 was responsible for the majority of the predictive power of the equation. The sign on this coefficient was positive indicating the importance of this economic-based variable. However, even as employment increased, wages and salaries were becoming a smaller percentage of total personal income in the region. The negative sign on the WSP variable carries significant importance since it indicates the existence of households whose levels of wealth and income do not rely primarily on wage and salary income. This confirms our hypothesis that households whose incomes derive from nonwage sources may dominate the flow of migrants into some of these counties and thus account for the negative sign. The migration flows observed in many highamenity, recreation-oriented counties in the region follow this pattern. Several counties are identified in our analysis where quality-of-life factors are positively correlated with the migration rate and where the WSP variable was below the average found across the region. As examples, these include Mohave and Yavapai counties in Arizona, Douglas and La Plata counties in Colorado, Santa Fe and Valencia counties in New Mexico and Summit and Wasatch counties in Utah. Representative cities within these counties include well-known areas such as Lake Havasu City, Park City and Santa Fe that have experienced rapid growth and have flourished in recent years.
The EMP CHANGE and MFGR variables are generally considered to be primarily economicallyoriented in terms of their impact as opposed to the other three variables which can be considered part of

an amenity-related profile that might contribute to positive net migration. Positive coefficients on EMP CHANGE and MFGR are expected in locations where increasing rates of economic activity, and in particular, the presence of manufacturing activity, serve to attract new migrants into the county. This would be most apparent in the more highly populated counties. A review of the counties in the Four-Corner states enables us to confirm this relationship in many of the highly populated areas including Maricopa County in Arizona which includes Phoenix; Utah County which includes Provo-Orem; Douglas, and Larimer counties in Colorado which contain portions of Denver and Ft. Collins; and Sandoval County in New Mexico, the home of Albuquerque.
Logically, the PROPERTY variable should move in concert with the employment variables, and should exhibit a positive sign when net in migration increases. This occurs as a result of the additional influx of new households seeking employment in the county. Alternatively, in instances where positive migration flows can be attributed to high-end homebuyers moving into the county for recreation or retirement purposes, the property values will also increase to reflect the increased pressure on the demand for land in these locations.
Finally there is a minor but significant impact of average January temperature on migration. The sign on this coefficient is positive, and indicates higher January temperatures are associated with positive net in migration into counties within this region.
6. Testing the assumptions of the model
SAS 9.1 for Windows was used to confirm the SPSS analysis to determine the variance inflation factors (VIF) and to complete the Breusch-Pagan test

248
(Breusch and Pagan 1979). The VIFs in all the models revealed values less than 10 which indicate the absence of significant multicollinearity among the predictor variables. When a set of explanatory variables is uncorrelated, the individual VIFs will be equal to one. The VIFs have values between 1 and 2 in this study.
The Breusch-Pagan test is also used to test for heteroscedasticity. This test is particularly important when cross-section data are modeled. The BreuschPagan test assumes that the error variance varies functionally with a set of regressors. Using this test, the null hypothesis is homoscedasticity; thus, we wish to fail to reject the null hypothesis with large p-values. If the observed level of significance is greater than 0.10, then there is no significant heteroscedasticity in the model. When the p-value is between 0.01 and 0.05 it is important to know the value of alpha in order to make a decision about the null hypothesis. The BreuschPagan test shows an observed value of significance of 0.067 indicating that the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity is not rejected at the 5 percent level of significance. Furthermore, the residuals were normally distributed with a mean of zero.
7. Cluster analysis
In order to develop a better understanding of the effects of the five predictor variables on net migration, cluster analysis was applied to the 93 counties and the five predictor variables used in this study. Cluster analysis relies on a high-level descriptive technique to form groupings of cases (i.e. counties) that are similar across a profile of variables. For this study, the cluster technique partitions counties into groups that exhibit

Gunderson, Pinto, and Williams
similar traits, for example, high employment growth vs. low employment growth counties, or warmweather counties vs. those with cooler temperatures. There are several approaches and computer algorithms available to perform cluster analysis but in general they work by starting with the first case and then searching all of the other cases until the one most similar to the first case (across the profile of the five predictor variables) is located. This most similar case is then grouped with the first case. This process continues until in theory all of the cases are in one group. The K-Means approach to cluster analysis was used in this study because of its simplicity and its effectiveness in grouping the 93 counties using the five variables.
The selection of the number of groups to interpret and analyze is typically left to researcher judgment and frequently requires some trial and error. For this study, three, four or five groups or clusters were profiled and evaluated for meaningful interpretation and understanding. After performing one-way analysis of variance tests on each of the five variables with the three, four or five groups, it was determined that four groups were most illustrative of the effects of both economic and amenity variables on domestic migration. The results of the one-way analysis of variance are presented in Table 2. Pair-by-pair mean comparisons were also completed and are shown in Table 3. Note that domestic migration was not used in the cluster formation process but was evaluated only after the groups or clusters were established. Nevertheless, significant differences in the domestic migration rate were found among the four groups that were ultimately determined to provide the most insight into the domestic migration process.

Tables 2. Means of four cluster groups on five explanatory variables on migration, F-values and significance levels.

Group 1 (n=24)

Group 2 (n=11)

Group 3 (n=42)

Group 4 (n=16)

F Value

Significance Level

EMP CHANGE

.284

.414

.533

.486 2.58

.059

WSP

.509

.448

.484

.418 1.49

.222

MFGR*

7.008

8.500

11.126

7.312

3.65

.022

PROPERTY

48.863

75.527

67.014

83.100

111.63

.000

JAN TEMP*

32.596

47.282

27.543

25.169

38.27

.000

MIGRATION

.036

.066

.059

.046 6.87

.000

*Homogeneity of variance assumption not met for MFGR and for JAN TEMP. Consequently, the Welch robust test of equality of means was used for these two variables.

Economic or amenity driven migration?
Table 3. Pair by pair mean comparisons on five explanatory variables and migration rates

249

EMP CHANGE*

Only Group 1 is significantly different from Group 3 at the .05 alpha level.

WSP

No pair by pair significant differences at the .05 alpha level.

MFGR

Only Group 1 is significantly different from Group 3, and Group 3 is significantly different from Group 4 at the .05 alpha level.

PROPERTY

All pair by pair comparisons are significantly different at the .05 alpha level.

JAN TEMP

All pair by pair comparisons are significantly different at the .05 alpha level except for Group 3 versus Group 4.

MIGRATION Group 1 is significantly different from Group 2, 3 and 4 at the .05 alpha level. Other pair by pair comparisons are not significantly different.

*Tukey HSD test used for EMP CHANGE, WSP, PROPERTY AND MIGRATION. The Games-Howell Test was used for MFGR and JAN TEMP.

8. Review of the clusters
Four distinct clusters emerged in the analysis of the 93 counties. Appendix A provides a listing of the counties contained in each cluster. Appendix B provides a similar categorization using a map to show the counties in each cluster. The emerging relationships among the clusters resulted from differences in economic characteristics as well as climatic and demographic conditions. Table 4 introduces the names of the four clusters as well as the number of counties contained in each.
Cluster 1 contains 24 counties, primarily drawn from New Mexico including most of the counties north of Albuquerque, and includes Santa Fe and Taos as well as much of southern and eastern New Mexico. These counties contain no large cities, are primarily rural in nature, and most of the counties experienced

net out migration flows over the 1995-2000 time period.
Cluster 1 is distinguished by the following characteristics:
Eighteen of the 24 counties experienced net out migration flows Primarily comprised of rural counties in New Mexico Lowest reliance on property taxes among the 4 clusters Lowest rate of manufacturing activity among the 4 clusters Smallest percentage increase in overall county employment rates among the 4 clusters Highest ratio of wages and salaries as a percent of total income among the 4 clusters

Table 4. Cluster names

Cluster #1 Cluster #2 Cluster #3 Cluster #4

Rural, Low Growth Areas Warm Weather, Retirement Areas Growth Centers Rural , Non-wage Income Dependent Areas

N = 24 N = 11 N = 42 N = 16

250
Cluster 2 contains only 11 counties, primarily from southern Arizona. The Phoenix and Tucson areas are included as well as Washington County which includes St. George, Utah, and also Sierra County in southern New Mexico. The dominating characteristic of this cluster is the high mean January temperature experienced in these counties as compared to counties in the other three clusters. The cluster average January temperature of 55.4F is almost 20 degrees warmer than most of the other cluster means on this variable. These are warm-weather counties that have attracted large numbers of retirement-age populations who depend upon non-wage income for their earnings. Netmigration flows in almost all of these counties were positive over the 1995-2000 period.
Non-wage income which is measured in our WSP variable (Social Security receipts, dividends, interest receipts, government support payments) was higher in this cluster than in two of the other three clusters. This is anticipated in counties experiencing inflows of retirement-aged migrants who derive much of their income from sources not related to current employment.
Cluster 2 is distinguished by the following characteristics:
Nine of 11 counties experienced net in migration flows Primarily comprised of southern, warm-weather counties in Arizona Highest average January temperatures among the 4 clusters Relatively low ratio of wages and salaries as a percent of total income among the 4 clusters. Instead non-wage income is dominant which is characteristic of high-retirement areas.
Cluster 3 is the largest of the groups and contains 42 counties. This cluster is the most widespread geographically, comprising counties from throughout Colorado and Utah as well as from northern Arizona. The cluster also contains most of the largest metropolitan areas in the region including Denver, Salt Lake City and Albuquerque. This cluster is dominated by high-growth counties, often called growth centers or growth poles which serve to attract individuals seeking employment. Net-migration flows in these counties were mostly positive over the 1995-2000 period. Cluster 3 is distinguished by the following characteristics:

Gunderson, Pinto, and Williams
Thirty-one of the 42 counties experienced net in migration flows, and in the counties experiencing net out migration, the outflows were close to zero Very high levels of manufacturing activity when compared to the other clusters High rates of increase in overall employment rates over the period of study Primarily cold-weather counties exist in this cluster
Cluster 4 is in some ways similar to Cluster 1 in that its counties are drawn mostly from rural regions and each experienced less reliance on the manufacturing sector when compared to Clusters 2 and 3. However, while the Cluster 1 is dominated by New Mexico counties, Cluster 4 is primarily populated by counties located in eastern Utah and northern Arizona as well as a small number from Colorado, and only one from New Mexico. There are 16 counties in this cluster and over one-half of these gained population from net in migration although many are situated in cold-weather locations within the Four Corners region. The heightened significance of the property tax for this cluster, in contrast to what occurred in Cluster 1 may have resulted primarily from the increase in net in migration alone. The new migrants in Cluster 4 counties may account for the increase in property tax revenues as a result of the heightened levels of activity generated by the rise in demand for land and housing units associated with the presence of the new residents. By comparison, in Cluster 1 where 3 out of every 4 counties experienced net out migration, we would expect a lesser contribution of the PROPERTY variable on local budgets.
Cluster 4 is distinguished by the following characteristics:
Nine of the 16 counties experienced net in migration Primarily rural, cold-weather counties Manufacturing as a percent of total employment is considerably lower than what occurred in Clusters 2 and 3 Wage levels as a percent of total income are the lowest among the 4 clusters. Several of these counties rely on government support such as welfare-related payments Very high property tax rates which suggest the increase in new migrants has pushed up land and home values in these counties thus generating higher property tax revenues and increasing the relative importance of the property tax in local budgets.

Economic or amenity driven migration?
Clusters 1 and 4 are closely related; however, #1 is almost exclusively New Mexico counties and #4 is largely Utah-based. They also differ in the following ways:
Wages and salaries as percent of income -- Cluster 1 is highest, Cluster 4 is lowest Mean employment change over the period -- Cluster 1 is lowest, Cluster 4 is much higher Property taxes as a percent of local budgets -- Cluster 1 is lowest, Cluster 4 is highest
To summarize, we have identified four clusters. One is primarily a warm-weather growing region. A second one is characteristic of an economically healthy high-growth region. The remaining two clusters are more rural, cold-weather regions; however, one of these two experienced more out migration and had high levels of wages as a percent of income, while the other experienced a more balanced level of in and out migration along with low levels of wage income and higher amounts of government-support income payments. Thus each of the clusters is characterized by a different set of attributes.
9. Conclusions
The findings from this study, while specific to locations within the states of the Four Corners Region, can also assist policymakers in other locations who are charged with shaping the future of their economies. Regions across the nation characterized by low population densities and limited labor pools, and which also contain resources renowned for their natural beauty and recreational opportunities, can expect to experience similar migration patterns as the economic base of these regions is transformed by changes in lifestyle preferences and other factors that have changed the economic landscape across the nation.
In this study, we investigated county net migration flows for counties within the states comprising the Four Corners Region of the U.S. from 1995 to 2000. Fifty-five of the 93 counties in these states whose populations exceeded 10,000 in 1995, experienced positive net migration over this period. We identify both employment-related and amenity-related factors that exerted positive influences on the migration flows.
The net in migration rate is positively impacted by a low wage and salary ratio to overall personal income in these counties. Although this may initially appear counterintuitive, this result was confirmed through experiences in several counties where either retirees or other residents whose incomes were not wagedependent migrated to these locations. These resi-

251
dents are frequently not employed thus they do not contribute to the earnings stream; however, they bring nonwage earnings in the form of dividends and other unearned income, thus lowering the wages and salary to overall income ratio.
The greater numbers of new migrants also contribute to an increase in the percentage of local government revenue generated from property taxes which moves in tandem with increased demand for real property under these conditions, and in this way contributes to higher valuations and increased revenues for local governments. Therefore, an influx of wealth and income into recreation-based, high-amenity counties within this region is partially driving the net migration. However, traditional economic variables also continue to influence the flow of migrants into the region. Increases in county employment as a percent of county population exerted the largest force on the migration rate. In addition, the relative importance of the manufacturing sector in each county was also highly significant. Therefore, county officials should not disregard the importance of expanding the existing industries as well as attracting new industries to the county in order to stimulate local job creation since the time-honored tradition of people following jobs remains a significant force in the continued inflow of new residents into these counties. However, the significance of the amenity-based variables in the model also highlights the importance of jobs following people into new areas.
The final step was to group the counties based on similarities in the profile of the explanatory variables used in this study. The grouping of counties using various cluster techniques can improve the qualitative explanation of how the variables impact net migration. Four groups were selected using the K-Means clustering technique to distinguish different attributes among the counties. The cluster analysis confirmed that economic, climatic and demographic factors each contributed to the explanation of the migration flows that occurred in this region from 1995 to 2000 but the reasons behind the migration activity differ among the clusters. Furthermore, many of the traditional variables often associated with migration flows nationally did not appear as significant factors in explaining migration in this model.
References
Anesi, G., Eppich, D. and T. Taylor. 2002. Lines in the sand: A Four Corners regional perspective. Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 4th Quarter: 91-105.

252
Barkley, D. L., M.S. Henry and S. Bao. 1998. The role of local school quality in rural employment and population growth. The Review of Regional Studies 28:81102.
Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald. 1994. The Wage Curve. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Breusch, T. and A. Pagan. 1979. A simple test for heteroscedasticity and random coefficient variation. Econometrica 47:1287-1294.
Deller, S.C., T.S. Tsai, D.W. Marcouiller and D.B.K. English. 2001. The roles of amenities and qualityof-life in rural economic growth. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 83:352-365.
Cebula, R.J. 2005. Internal Migration Determinants: Recent Evidence. International Advances in Economic Research 11:267-274.
Cebula, R. J. and J.E. Payne. 2005. Net migration, economic opportunity and the quality of life, 19992000. International Review of Economics and Business 52:245-254.
Cebula, R. J. and Gigi M. Alexander. 2006. Determinants of net interstate migration, 2000-2004. Journal of Regional Analysis and Policy 36(2):116-123.
Conway, K.S. and Andrew J. Houtenville. 1998. Do the elderly vote with their feet? Public Choice 97: 663-685.
Cushing, B. J. 1987. Location-specific amenities topography, and population migration. Annals of Regional Science 21:74-85.
Dorf, R. J. and M. J. Emerson. 1978. Determinants of manufacturing plant location for nonmetropolitan communities in the West North Central Region of the U.S. Journal of Regional Science 18:109-120.
Drabenstott, M. and K.H. Sheaff. 2002. The new power of regions: A policy focus for rural America--A conference summary. Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2nd Quarter: 1-15.
Fuguitt, G. V. and C. L. Beale. 1978. Population trends of nonmetropolitan cities and villages in subregions of the United States. Demography 15:605-620.
Fuguitt, G. V. and S. J. Tordella. 1980. Elderly net migration: The new trend of nonmetropolitan population change. Research on Aging 2:191-204.
Gómez, A. R. 2000. Quest for the Golden Circle: The Four Corners and the Metropolitan West, 1945-1970. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.
Graves, P. E. 1973. A reexamination of migration, economic opportunity and quality of life. Journal of Regional Science 13:205-211.
Graves, P. E. 1979. Income and migration reconsidered. Journal of Human Resources 14:112-121.
Graves, P.E. 1980. Migration and climate. Journal of Regional Science 20:227-238.

Gunderson, Pinto, and Williams
Green, G.P. 2001. Amenities and community development. Journal of Regional Analysis and Policy 31:2:61-76.
Greenwood, M.J. 1975. A simultaneous-equations model of urban growth and migration. Journal of the American Statistical Association 70:797-810.
Greenwood, M.J. 1985. Human migration: Theory models, and empirical studies. Journal of Regional Science 25:521-544.
Gunderson, R.J. and P. Ng. 2005. Analyzing the effects of amenities, quality of life attributes and tourism on regional economic performance using regression quantiles. Journal of Regional Analysis and Policy 35(1):1-22.
Johnson, K.M. and S.I. Stewart. 2005. Recreation, amenity migration and urban proximity. In: Gary Green, Steven Deller and David Marcouiller, (eds.) Amenities and Rural Development. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
McGranahan, D.A. 1999. Natural amenities drive rural population change. Agricultural Economic Report Number 781. Washington, DC: Economic Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
Muth, R.F. 1971. Migration: Chicken or egg? Southern Economic Journal 57:295-306.
Olvey, L.E. 1972. Regional growth and interregional migration - Their pattern of interaction. Review of Regional Studies 2:139-163.
Partridge, M.D. and D.S. Rickman. 2006. An SVAR model of fluctuations in U.S. migration flows and state labor market dynamics. Southern Economic Journal 72:958-980.
Porell, F. W. 1982. Intermetropolitan migration and quality of life. Journal of Regional Science 22:137-158.
Roback, J. 1982. Wages, rents and quality of life. Journal of Political Economy 90:1257-1277.
Shumway, J.M. and Samuel M. Otterstrom. 2001. Spatial patterns of migration and income change in the mountain west: The dominance of service-based, amenity-rich counties. Professional Geographer 53(4):492-502.
Ullman, E.L. 1954. Amenities as a factor in regional growth. Geographical Review 44(1):119-132.
Vias, A.C. 1999. Jobs follow people in the rural Rocky Mountain West. Rural Development Perspectives 14(2): 14-23.

Economic or amenity driven migration?

Appendix A. Table A1. Counties contained in each of the clusters

Cluster 1 Chaves, NM Cibola, NM Colfax, NM Curry, NM Denver, CO Dona Ana, NM Eddy, NM Grant, NM Lea, NM Los Alamos, NM Luna, NM McKinley, NM Mesa, CO Otero, CO Otero, NM Pitkin, CO Quay, NM Rio Arriba, NM Roosevelt, NM Sandoval, NM Santa Fe, NM Socorro, NM Summit, CO Taos, NM
Cluster 2 Cochise, AZ Gila, AZ Graham, AZ La Paz, AZ Maricopa, AZ Pima, AZ Pinal, AZ Santa Cruz, AZ Sierra, NM Washington, UT Yuma, AZ

Cluster 3 Adams, CO Alamosa, CO Arapahoe, CO Bernalillo, NM Boulder, CO Box Elder, UT Cache, UT Chaffee, CO Coconino, AZ Davis, UT Delta, CO Douglas, CO Eagle, CO El Paso, CO Fremont, CO Garfield, UT Gunnison, CO Iron, UT Jefferson, CO La Plata, CO Larimer, CO Lincoln, NM Logan, CO Montezuma, CO Montrose, CO Navajo, AZ Prowers, CO Pueblo, CO Rio Grande, CO Routt, CO Salt Lake, UT San Juan, CO San Miguel, CO Sanpete, UT Sevier, UT Teller, CO Tooele, UT

Cluster 3 (cont'd) Utah, UT Valencia, NM Weber, UT Weld, CO Yavapai, AZ
Cluster 4 Apache, AZ Carbon, UT Duchesne, UT Elbert, CO Emery, UT Las Animas, CO Millard, UT Moffat, CO Mohave, AZ Morgan, UT Park, CO San Juan, UT Summit, UT Torrance, NM Uintah, UT Wasatch, UT

253

254
Appendix B.

Gunderson, Pinto, and Williams

Figure B1. Map of county clusters for the states in the Four Corners region

