Perception, 1993, volume 22, pages 1121-1130
Object and head orientation effects on symmetry perception defined by shape from shading
Peter Wenderoth, Neil Hickey Department of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia Received 15 December 1991, in revised form 20 May 1992
Abstract. A grey disc which exhibits a vertical gradient of shading usually appears convex if lighter above and concave if lighter below. This phenomenon was investigated by Howard et al (1990) who varied both the shading axis relative to gravity and the orientation of the head. Their results indicated that head-centric or retinocentric coordinates determined the depth effect rather than gravitational axes. However, several possible problems with their study were noted, not the least of which was the possible intrusion of response rather than perceptual factors in the task they used. Here, we attempted to use an indirect measure of the perception of depth from shading: rather than asking subjects whether discs looked convex or concave, we constructed ensembles of shaded discs which, in terms of depth from shading, were or were not bilaterally symmetrical about an horizontal axis. These stimulus displays were briefly flashed to prohibit the intrusion of conscious assumptions about direction of light sources. Subjects were never asked whether any discs looked concave or convex, merely whether the set of discs was or was not depth symmetrical. Results were generally consistent with those of Howard et al and supported the conclusion that depth from shading is largely a low-level and automatic mechanism.
1 Introduction Normally, observers will judge a flat disc viewed monocularly as a 'bump' if its upper surface is light and its lower surface is dark but as a 'dent' if the shading is reversed. It is often held that this is so because illumination is assumed to come from above.
In a recent investigation of this phenomenon, Howard et al (1990) reported observers' judgments of shape from shading when using computer-generated shaded discs, such as those in figure 1. For each disc, they defined the shading axis and the polarity. The shading axis refers to the axis along which the disc changes from light to dark (vertical or horizontal) and the polarity refers to the arrangement of the light and dark portions with respect to a frame of reference. Thus, if the frame of reference under consideration is vertical, the two possible polarities are light above dark and dark above light. If the frame of reference is horizontal, polarity can be light at left, dark at right or light at right and dark at left. Howard et al were primarily interested in whether the judgment of a shaded disc as convex (a protuberance) or concave (a dent) was determined by a gravitational frame of reference or the top-of-the-head frame of reference, or both.
To provide an answer, they used 3 head-tilt conditions [upright (or 0°), 90°, and inverted] and 2 shading-axis conditions [vertical (or gravitational) and horizontal]. The crossing of these conditions thus provided 6 conditions in which the shading axis was coincident with (1) both the head axis and the gravity axis, when these had either the same (la) or opposite (lb) polarity; (2) gravity only; (3) head only; and (4) neither, with a horizontal shading axis and the head either upright (4a) or inverted (4b).
In each case, a display containing 4 discs was presented. On half the trials the shading axis was vertical for all 4 discs and on half it was horizontal; 2 of the 4 discs had one polarity and 2 had the other. The number of each disc was indexed by 1 - 4 small dots alongside it and each display was presented for 5 s. The observers' task was to "call out the numbers of each disc that appeared convex"; the "other discs were assumed to appear concave." (Howard et al 1990, page 525).

1122

P Wenderoth, N Hickey

There are several problems with this methodology. First, as 90° rotation of figure 1 demonstrates, discs which have their shading axis horizontal with upright head may appear neither convex nor concave, that is they may lack apparent depth. Second, response factors can easily intrude into judgments if subjects are asked
mmmmmmgmmtm ·^^!pp· ? mHmm«mimMm
·
J^HHBIPTM J^mHp iiHitfjlfiBfr
·
^HB| J H B ^^h

^PflP^ ^PPPP^ ^ l l ^ l r

(a)"
·
·I^IB ^^^P^

^^
fi^lfliiWiiii. l^i^lPBPl jm^Hmim*
^ ^ ^ ^ B i^^^H ^i^tttt^
^?sppi??' «lf!§f|plF v H ^ H v

^HH& flHHfc ^ f l ^
^ P H ^ "^P^P IHHHM
·

JH|
«

^^^
w

wM

^tt|
W

Figure 1. One of the stimulus displays used in the experiments, (a) Depth judged from shape from shading is symmetrical about the horizontal axis, (b) Depth is not symmetrical; the left disc in the second row has been inverted.

Symmetry perception defined by shape from shading

1123

merely to indicate which discs 'look' convex. For example, a disc with a vertical shading axis and light-above-dark polarity may 'look' convex in the sense that it is logically convex if light is assumed to come from gravitationally above; but it may nevertheless appear flat. It would be useful to have some indirect index of threedimensional appearance.
Ramachandran (1988a, 1988b) noted that displays such as those in figure 1 can appear compellingly symmetrical (figure la) or asymmetrical (figure lb) about an horizontal axis in terms of perceived depth. It is critical for the reader to note at this point that the display in figure la is bilaterally symmetrical about its horizontal axis only in terms of perceived depth: the upper and lower halves are not mirror images in terms of (flat) shades of grey. That is, discs which appear depth symmetrical, such as the two central discs in the left-hand column of figure la which both look convex, are in fact translations rather than mirror reflections in terms of flat shading. According to Ramachandran, the apparent depth-symmetry suggests that shape from shading is processed before symmetry, a moot point which need not be discussed here. Rather it is sufficient to note that the perception of depth symmetry in these figures is a relatively effortless phenomenon which could in principle be used indirectly to measure the effects of different reference frames on the perception of shape from shading. That is, instead of asking subjects whether a disc appears concave or convex, an indirect measure of this perception of depth could be obtained by presenting patterns such as those in figure 1, with head upright or horizontal and with the shading axis gravitationally vertical or horizontal, with the task of the subject to judge simply whether the array is or is not bilaterally symmetrical in apparent shape-from-shading.
In these experiments, we produced displays such as those in figure 1 and subjects indicated whether, in terms of apparent convexity or concavity, the pattern was or was not symmetrical about the horizontal axis of the figure. The shading axis of the 16 discs varied systematically from 0° to 180° in 11.25° steps, although within any one display all 16 discs had the same shading-axis orientation. In these terms, we assumed that a decreasing proportion of correct responses would indicate a decreasing ability to perceive the discs as concave or convex and hence to respond correctly in terms of the symmetrical/asymmetrical criterion.
We also chose to alter another parameter of the Howard etal (1990) study. They presented each display for 5 s and scored accuracy (see below). However, Santee and Egeth (1982) and Pashler (1990) suggest that accuracy effects are more likely to become evident with short exposures because "response accuracy may be more sensitive to processes occurring during the early perceptual stages of processing, whereas RT [reaction time] may be more sensitive to later decision and response processes" (Santee and Egeth 1982, page 491). Pashler (1990) states that purely response factors, which may occur with both the long exposures and the limited response time typical of reaction-time studies, should disappear with short, data-limiting exposures, instructions on accuracy, and virtually unlimited time to respond. Thus, the long presentation time used by Howard et al reinforces the possibility that subjects' judgments may have included response factors as well as perceptual factors. On the other hand, the combination of a pop-out task, brief (333 ms) presentation, and accuracy instructions used here should, in Santee and Egeth's terms, heighten the possibility that purely perceptual processes are involved.
Another convention used by Howard etal (1990) renders the results virtually uninterpretable. Recall that subjects stated which discs appeared convex and it was assumed that the others appeared concave. In addition, a response
"was scored positive with respect to the gravity frame if the perceived depth of the disc corresponded with illumination coming from above (a disc with light-side up called convex

1124

P Wenderoth, N Hickey

or one with dark-side up called concave)*1). Otherwise it was scored negative with respect to the gravity frame. A response was scored positive with respect to the head frame if the perceived depth of the disc corresponded with illumination coming from the top of the head ... For each subject, positive and negative responses for each frame of reference were accumulated ... For a particular frame, a 100% score indicated that all judgements were in conformity with that frame and a score of -100% indicated that all judgements were in conflict with that frame. A score of 0% ... indicated that the subject was guessing" (pages 525-526).
The major difficulty with this scoring procedure, as mentioned above, is that discs with left-right shading relative to the head frame can often appear to lack depth altogether. Therefore, they would not be responded to as convex. If each subject saw, say, 100 discs of which 50 were convex for the frame under consideration, and the subject truly perceived 10 of these as convex but the other 40 'convex' discs as flat, presumably the allocated score would be +60%: the 10% convex responses plus the 50% "concave' discs not called convex. But this would be the score even if none of the 'concave' discs was perceived as concave and all were seen as flat.
Now, one of the major aims of Howard et al was to test the suggestion of an earlier experiment by Yonas et al (1979) which indicated that as children became older they responded more in terms of the gravity frame when the head was tilted 90° than did younger children. That is, older children with head tilted 90° more often chose as convex discs with a vertical shading axis and light-above polarity. Did this mean, asked Howard et al, that adults rely on the gravity frame even more? In their first experiment, Howard et al reported that, when their adult subjects had heads tilted 90°, their scores for vertically shaded discs were 47% and, in a second experiment with the same subjects, 72% and 60%. However, for horizontally shaded discs, the scores were about 85%, 88%, and 92%. Yonas et al (1979) had found that 4-year-old children give more weight to the head frame than the gravity frame, but 7-year-olds give the two equal weight. The larger proportion correct obtained by Howard et al's adult subjects in the head frame rather than the gravity frame condition was taken by Howard et al to suggest that the trend noted by Yonas et al might reverse in adults.
None of these data, either those of Howard et al or those of Yonas et al, can really be accepted as indicating anything about reliance on various frames. Yonas et al found only that the overall effect of age "approached significance" (page 499). The main difference obtained was between 3-year-old and other, older children. Only children who were able to point correctly to the 'convexity' when all reference frames were vertical (gravity, light source, head) were used in the second part of the experiment. This second part was completed on a later day for the 3-year-olds but in the same session for the older children. Thus, the older children may have chosen vertically shaded discs correctly more often with head tilted because they had recently completed the all-frames condition in which vertically shaded discs were seen and classed as convex. The data of Howard et al suffer from the difficulty in interpretion of the scores; and it is of some concern that the gravity frame scores rose from 47% to 60% and 72% when the same adults were retested, an increase which may reflect perceptual or response factors or both.
In a second experiment, Howard et al rendered gravity irrelevant by having subjects look face down at the monitor, which could be tilted relative to the head, and the same procedures as in the first experiment were used to obtain judgments when the shading axis was oriented 20°-80° relative to the median plane of the head, in 10° steps. The 6 subjects had been used in experiment 1. A score of approximately 40% was obtained with a tilt of 70° but with a standard error of about 20%, this was not
W Since only apparently convex discs were reported, this presumably should read "... or one with dark-side up not called convex".

Symmetry perception defined by shape from shading

1125

significantly different from zero. At lesser tilts the scores were greater than zero and the critical orientation that yielded a 50% positive score by interpolation was 67° from the median plane of the head.
Given all of the difficulties associated with the experiments of Howard et al, including the use of what by then must have been highly practised observers in experiment 2, in our study we attempted to obtain further data on the effects of reference frames on the perception of shape from shading. To reiterate: displays such as those in figure 1 were briefly flashed for 0.33 s with the shading axis for the discs in the different pictures varying from vertical or 0° (as in figure 1) to 180° in 11.25° steps and subjects judged as accurately as they could whether or not the display was convex concave mirror-symmetrical about the horizontal axis. The main score was proportion correct. The aims in the experiments were to establish whether this methodology could be used indirectly to obtain data on the effect of reference frames on the perception of shape from shading and, if so, to see how the data compared with those of Howard et al and Yonas et al.
Two experiments were conducted. In the first, subjects were upright; in the second, they lay on their sides but viewed the same displays used in the first experiment. On the assumption that the extraction of shape from shading is tied to retinal rather than gravitational axes, we expected proportions correct to be greatest when the shading axis was vertical in experiment 1 but greatest when it was horizontal in experiment 2; and worst performance was expected for horizontal shading in experiment 1 but for vertical shading in experiment 2.
2 Experiment 1 2.1 Method Displays were presented on a Macintosh Applecolor RGB 33 cm monitor by means of a Macintosh Ilfx computer with an 8.24 GC accelerator card. Mindlab V2.1 (Courseware Development Group, Dartmouth College, 1988) was used to construct trials and to prepare the experiments; the program allows the sequencing of events such as displays (fixation points, pictures, etc), interstimulus intervals, and clock resets within a trial, and it can automatically measure and store whether a response is correct as well as reaction time. Complex displays such as those used here take time to draw on the screen but the graphics accelerator card made the screen drawing much faster and close to immediate. In addition, drawing time was constant for all patterns and the comparison between patterns was the primary variable of interest.
A paint program, Studio 32 (Electronic Arts) was used to generate shaded discs by means of a linear directional gradient tool. First, an asterisk pattern of oriented lines was drawn with component lines oriented from 0° to 180° in 11°-12° steps. A grey disc was drawn on top of this asterisk brush and filled with a linear grey scale gradient in one of the 17 orientations of shading axis.(2)
By selecting 'Mask last objects only' from the Studio 32 menu, it was then possible to clear the screen leaving only the mask (the shaded disc) but erasing the asterisk template used to draw the directional gradient.
Once single discs shaded in all orientations had been created these were used as brushes to produce 4 x 4 patterns such as those in figure 1. Each disc was 1.8 cm in diameter with 0.6 cm between discs so that the total display size was 9 cm x 9 cm. At the viewing distance of 57 cm, this meant that the display subtended 9 deg of visual angle. The luminance of the bright white background was 76.78 cd m"2 and the lightest and darkest segments of the discs had luminances of 68.43 cd m~2 and 7.68 cd m~2, respectively, so that contrast of the discs with respect to the background, (2) At first attempts were made to create just one vertically shaded disc and tilt it by various amounts but this produced totally unsatisfactory results with many distortions.

1126

P Wenderoth, N Hickey

defined as (Lmax-Lmin)/(Lmax + Lmin), varied from 0.06 to 0.82. When the 4 x 4 patterns were symmetrical, they were symmetrical about the horizontal axis separating the top two rows and the bottom two rows; 4 of the discs in each symmetrical half were shaded with the light-dark gradient proceeding from orientation a ° to (a + 180)° and 4 were shaded light-to-dark in the opposite direction, from (a + 180)° to a °. There were 3 different patterns, each with randomly chosen positions of the 4 discs which had a light-to-dark gradient from a ° to ( a + 180)°. Although 3 patterns is a small number, effectively the number was 6 because beyond 90° tilt, the discs that appeared concave begin to appear convex, and vice versa. In total, there were 17 orientations of disc x 3 patterns x symmetrical/nonsymmetrical patterns giving 102 patterns in all. Nonsymmetrical patterns were constructed by randomly rotating the direction of the light-to-dark gradient of one of the discs by 180°.
The Mindlab software accepts a maximum of 60 trial types so that the 102 trial types were subdivided into two subexperiments, with 54 trial types in one and 48 trial types in the other. Within each of these, each stimulus was judged 4 times giving a total of 408 trials in all. The 54-trial-types experiment included shading-axis orientations between 0° and 180° in 22.5° steps while the 48-trial-types experiment included the other orientations between 11.25° and 168.75°, also in 22.5° steps.
2.2 Subjects
Subjects volunteered in return for nominal course credit and 20 subjects drawn from
an introductory Psychology course successfully completed the experiment. Subjects
were used only if they claimed to comprehend the task and if they were then correct
at least 67% of the time when the disc-shading axes were vertical. Since the task was
deliberately made difficult by using very brief exposure, some subjects (12) were
rejected because they behaved at or near chance level in all conditions. Others simply
could not comprehend the task or see depth in the stimuli, even with unlimited expo-
sure (11). Another 4 subjects failed to complete the experiment in the time available.
2.3 Procedure
To ensure that most subjects understood the task, it was found necessary to provide
an aluminium sheet in which a 'bump' (convex) and a 'dent' (concave) had been
punched and there were also written instructions, as follows:
"Below you can see two sets of six spheres. They are shaded so as to make them look either like 'bumps' which stick out of the page or like 'dents' which go into the page. The key difference between the left and right picture is that the left on is mirror symmetric about the black line axis. That is, the upper row is like a mirror image of the lower row: from left to right in the top row we have bump-dent-bump; and the same is true of the lower row. The right hand pattern does not have such symmetry: its upper row has bump-dent-bump whereas the lower row has bump-dent-dent. So the right hand pattern is not mirror symmetrical about the horizontal axis.
Your task in this experiment is to look at patterns like this which contain not 6 but 16 spheres without any black lines marking the horizontal axis and to decide whether they are or are not mirror symmetrical in terms of their 'bumps' and 'dents', about a horizontal axis. Half of the patterns will be symmetrical and half will not. If you think a pattern is symmetrical, you are to press the 's' for 'same' key; if you think the pattern is not symmetrical, press the 'd' for 'different' key. Please do this without making any errors if you can avoid making any. However, as soon as you have decided press the appropriate key immediately.
You should be warned that it will not always be so easy as on the sheet of paper or the aluminium to see 'bumps' and 'dents'. Sometimes the impression of depth will be missing. When that happens, just try to do your best but never simply guess. Also, please try to remember that you are to make your judgment on the apparent depth in the picture, not on other things like where the shading is. Finally, when a pattern is not symmetrical only one of the bumps or dents will be non-symmetrical. OK. Can you repeat to me what you are to do?"

Symmetry perception defined by shape from shading

1127

To try to facilitate perception of depth, subjects viewed the display monocularly with the preferred eye, wearing an eye patch on the other eye. Subjects were randomly assigned to two conditions, one in which the 0° to 180° orientations were judged first and the other in which the 11° to 168.75° conditions were judged first. One reason for this is that there were clear practice effects, with most subjects performing much more confidently and better in the second subexperiment. Subjects sat 57 cm from the screen and initiated each trial by pressing the keyboard space bar while fixating a small cross at the centre of the screen. This flashed the stimulus display for (nominally) 333 ms (20 ticks) after which the subject responded, with reaction time measured from the offset of the stimulus display. After 1 s the fixation cross reappeared and the subject initiated the next trial when ready. All subjects were asked to write down all relevant comments on how the task was done, after completion of the experiment.
3 Results and discussion Mean proportions of correct responses are shown as a function of shading-axis orientation in figure 2, together with standard errors. A simple one-way analysis of variance with planned contrasts showed that whereas linear trend was not significant (^1,304 -- 2.54, p > 0.01), quadratic trend was significant (F1>304 = 42.77, p < 0.0005). Higher-order trends were not tested: the linear and quadratic trend components together accounted for 70% of the sum of squares. As noted in section 1, the brief display coupled with accuracy instructions were expected to influence proportion correct rather than reaction time but, as shown in figure 3, there was also a reaction-time effect: responses were slowest for a horizontal or near-horizontal shading axis. As with proportion correct, linear trend was not significant (^1304 = 0-015, p> 0.9), but quadratic trend was significant (F1>304 = 9.79, p < 0.005).
A surprising result, which will be discussed in more detail below, was that the proportion correct remained so high around the 90° shading-axis orientation. At 90°, the proportion correct was 0.70 and, with a standard error of 0.017, this was significantly greater than chance (0.50) {t19 = 11.76, p < 0.0005). That is, although the quadratic trend without linear trend indicated that performance was best for nearvertical shading axes and worst for near-horizontal shading axes, performance in the latter case was still better than chance.

1.0 c

1--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--r

0.9 E-

^ tT
<D F *

_ -~ T
jT T T 1 j

| o.81- YKTI n \

JJTT^-

at

TTIVF/T U A A T

o f I T ^/-Tv x / J / T \ T

'£ 0.7 E- T tfT\L4 ^ ^ H F T

o fc A v f i +

°< i T J / I T

-1 I - L

<kl T T
I vkl T
1 Iv T 1

o F Ip 1 1

]\ Q

^ o.61 Y\

yi

Q5E

i i i i '''' i ' ' ' ' '!»'
0 45 90 135 180 Orientation/0

Figure 2. Proportion of correct responses as a

function of orientation of shading axis, experi-

ment 1 (filled symbols) and experiment 2 (open

symbols). Error bars show ± standard error.

0 45 90 135 180 Orientation/0
Figure 3. Reaction times, experiments 1 and 2.
Symbols are as for figure 2.

1128

P Wenderoth, N Hickey

The high rate of subject attrition in this experiment was surprising to us, probably because we, as practised observers, found the judgments required were extremely simple, an almost 'pop-out' task. That a high proportion of our subjects could not do the task, and the fact that subjects reported that the task became progressively easier suggests that there is some learning involved. We are grateful to a referee who suggested that the learning is probably akin to that required with random-dot stereograms, where latency to perceive depth decreases significantly with practice.
4 Experiment 2 The aim in experiment 2 was to attempt to see whether optimum performance of the symmetry-detection task used in experiment 1 was tied to head rather than gravitational coordinates, as Howard et al (1990) found. However, they used only two extreme head and shading orientations, vertical and horizontal, so that the angle between head frame, gravity frame, and shading axis was always 0° or 90°. In their second experiment, shading-axis angle was systematically varied by tilting the monitor but in that experiment subjects looked down on the monitor so that only head axis was available as a relevant axis.
4.1 Method All aspects of method were identical to those of experiment 1 except that subjects were required to lie horizontally on their sides on a row of pillowed chairs with head horizontal on a pillow. Apart from suitable modifications to take account of the change in body position, the experimental instructions were identical to those used before.
4.2 Subjects There were 8 subjects, drawn from the same population as those in experiment 1. Approximately the same proportions of subjects were rejected for similar reasons to those in experiment 1.
5 Results and discussion Figure 2 shows the proportion of correct judgments for both experiment 1 and experiment 2, together with standard errors. As in experiment 1, the means in experiment 2 showed no significant linear trend [Fhll2 = 0.11, p > 0.7), but they did show quadratic trend (Fhll2 = 28.21, p < 0.0005). As the data show, with body prostrate, the stimulus displays with gravitationally horizontal shading (90°) resulted in the highest proportion correct, implicating the head axis as the most relevant.
It is noticeable that the differences in proportion correct between the gravitationally vertical shading axes and the horizontal shading axis were larger in experiment 2 than in experiment 1: 0.13-0.14 in experiment 1 and 0.18-0.22 in experiment 2, a point discussed below.
Figure 3 shows the reaction-time data for the two experiments. With only 8 subjects in experiment 2 the data are very noisy. Nevertheless there is a suggestion of an inverted U-shape in the data and, although linear trend was not significant (^i ii2 = 0.33, p > 0.56), quadratic trend was just not significant (F1 112 = 3.88, p = 0.514).
Of the two proportions correct at 0° and 180°, the latter was greater than chance (0.50) when tested against its own standard error (t7 = 2.60, p < 0.05) while the former was not (t7 = 1.82,/? > 0.1).
6 Display effects One of the puzzling aspects of the data was the greater-than-chance performance in the 90° shading-axis condition in experiment 1 and in the 180° shading-axis condition

Symmetry perception defined by shape from shading

1129

in experiment 2. Although there appear to be individual subject biases towards judging left or right horizontal retinal shading as convex or concave (Howard et al 1990), there is no reason why this bias should be unidirectional across subjects. It may be the case that a systematic bias is not necessary, that any bias, provided it is constant within a subject, is sufficient to perceive depth in a retinally horizontally shaded display. This possibility requires investigation. As it turned out, inspection of the subjects' protocols suggested an explanation for our results: despite instructions to the contrary, many subjects reported using direction of shading rather than depth as a cue. This led us to look again at the three stimulus figures and to notice that for two of them (patterns 1 and 3), the disc which varied from symmetrical to asymmetrical was in the row closest to the horizontal axis of symmetry; whereas in the other display (pattern 2) this disc was in the outer row. If subjects were using shading as the cue, that is whether the perceived-as-flat shading was reflected or translated, then this would have been much more easy to use in patterns 1 and 3 when the discs were juxtaposed across the horizontal axis than when they were separated by two other discs. This suggestion is consistent with studies which show that bilateral symmetry or violations of symmetry or translation in dot patterns are more easily detected when the symmetry or its violation are located nearer the axis than more distally from it (Bruce and Morgan 1975; Barlow and Reeves 1979) and with the fact that symmetry is harder to detect in eccentric vision, even after M-scaling dot separations (Saarinenl988).
Accordingly, proportion correct was recalculated for each of the 3 patterns individually and these data are shown in figures 4a and 4b. It is evident in both experiments that performance was far superior for patterns 1 and 3 than for pattern 2. There is also a suggestion that subjects in experiment 2 used this cue less than subjects in experiment 1 since their proportions correct at 0° and 180° were around 0.6 for patterns 1 and 3, compared with about 0.75 at 90° for subjects in experiment 1. Whether or not this difference is real, it is clear that in future experiments one should avoid placing key variable elements of the display in juxtaposition across the axis if subjects are not to use the strategy of comparing shading orientation.
The fact that a high proportion of subjects had such difficulty performing the symmetry judgment task may suggest that the exposure duration we used was simply too short, or that the display, 9° x 9°, was too large to allow global judgments. The comments from some subjects indicated that it was difficult to process the entire display at once. It might be profitable in further studies to see whether reaction-time effects can be obtained with unlimited display time, although the intrusion of response rather than perceptual factors then becomes a possibility.

1.0 [

1--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--i--r

0 45 90 135 180

0 45 90 135 180

(a)

Orientation/0

(b) Orientation/0

Figure 4. Proportion correct for patterns 1 (circles), 2 (squares), and 3 (triangles), obtained in experiment 1 (a) and experiment 2 (b).

1130

P Wenderoth, N Hickey

7 General discussion The major aim in this study was to determine whether the apparent convexity or concavity of shaded discs could be measured indirectly by having subjects judge the 'depth' symmetry of stimuli such as those used by Ramachandran (1988a, 1988b) in which arrangements of shaded discs look symmetrical in depth (convexity or concavity) when in fact they are asymmetrical in two-dimensional shading. The quadratic trends obtained in proportion of correct judgments in both experiments showed that this indirect measure does work: subjects were less able to judge depth symmetry when the shading axis was orthogonal to the median plane of the head than when it was parallel to that plane; and there was a gradual reduction in proportion correct as the shading axis departed from the median plane of the head.
The aim in experiment 2 was to see whether the function in experiment 1 would flip 180°, thus implicating the head axis as the main axis relevant to the perception of shape from shading. This did occur. An important question for future studies is to examine whether the upright and prostrate performances are equivalent when the shading axis is parallel to the median plane of the head. If adult subjects do utilise the gravitational frame more than young children do then the proportion-correct function should be flatter as a function of shading-axis orientation for prostrate than for upright adults subjects, compared with the same differences in children. The data presented here do, however, support the conclusion of Howard et al (1990) that the perception of relief from shading is predominantly a low-level and head-centric or retinocentric mechanism. The fact that subjects who can perform the task can do so with exposures as brief as 333 ms also supports their hypothesis that this shading in retinal coordinates directly signals convexity/concavity without the need to invoke conscious or unconscious assumptions.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by an Australian Research Council grant to Peter Wenderoth and it provided for the research assistant position of Neil Hickey. After the paper was accepted for publication a closely related study with some similar findings appeared (KleffnerDA, Ramachandran V S, 1992 "On the perception of shape from shading" Perception &Psychophysics 52 18-36).
References Barlow H B, Reeves B C, 1979 "The versatility and absolute efficiency of detecting mirror
symmetry in random dot displays" Vision Research 1 9 7 8 3 - 7 9 3 Bruce VG, Morgan M J, 1975 "Violations of symmetry and repetition in visual patterns"
Perception 4 239-249 Howard IP, Bergstrom S S, Ohmi M, 1990 "Shape from shading in different frames of
reference" Perception 19523-530 PashlerH, 1990 "Coordinate frame for symmetry detection and object recognition" Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 16 150-163 Ramachandran V S, 1988a "Perception of shape from shading" Nature (London) 331 163-166 Ramachandran V S, 1988b "Perceiving shape from shading" in The Perceptual World Ed. I Rock
(New York: W H Freeman) pp 127-151 Santee J L, Egeth H E, 1982 "Do reaction time and accuracy measure the same aspects of letter
recognition?" Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 8 489-501 Saarinen J, 1988 "Detection of mirror symmetry in random dot patterns at different eccentricities" Vision Research 6 7 5 5 - 7 5 9 Yonas A, Kuskowski M, Sternfels S, 1979 "The role of frames of reference in the development of responsiveness to shading information" Child Development 50 495 - 500
p © 1993 a Pion publication printed in Great Britain

