196

IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 1, NO. 3, JULY 2004

Seafloor Classification Using Echo-Waveforms:

A Method Employing Hybrid
Neural Network Architecture

Bishwajit Chakraborty, Vasudev Mahale, Carlyle de Sousa, and Pranab Das

Abstract—This letter presents seafloor classification study
results of a hybrid artificial neural network architecture known
as learning vector quantization. Single beam echo-sounding
backscatter waveform data from three different seafloors of the
western continental shelf of India are utilized. In this letter, an
analysis is presented to establish the hybrid network as an efficient
alternative for real-time seafloor classification of the acoustic
backscatter data.

Index Terms—Learning vector quantization, neural network
architecture, seafloor classification, self-organizing feature map
(SOFM).

I. INTRODUCTION

S EAFLOOR classification and characterization using re-

mote high-frequency acoustic system has been recognized
as a useful tool (see [1] and references therein). The seafloor’s
characteristics are extremely complicated due to variations of
the many parameters at different scales. The parameters include
sediment grain size, relief height at the water–sediment inter-
face, and variations within the sediment matrix. Sound signal
scattering is generally controlled by these factors, and seafloor
studies using a multiparameter scattering model are generally
employed. Use of backscatter model studies to identify finer
scale bottom roughness (water–sediment interface and sediment
volume roughness) has been carried out previously. Results
of the model-based studies considering parametric forms of
seafloor roughness distribution for single beam echo-sounding
backscatter signal from the Arabian Sea continental shelf
were presented from three varying seafloor sediment types
(sand, silty sand, or clayey silt) [2]. Rice PDF-based studies
[2] implemented in this area’s echo waveform backscatter
data do not satisfy the estimated seafloor parameters for
fine-grained sedimentary seafloor like clayey silt sediment.
Again, the analytical method pertaining to the determination
of the sediment grain size distribution using sampled sediment
imposes an additional hindrance for seafloor characterization.
Therefore, a methodology needs to be developed for real-time
estimation of the seafloor sediment type distribution other than
the conventional parametric model studies [3].

An unsupervised architecture of the artificial neural network
(ANN) known as Kohonen’s self-organizing feature map

Manuscript received October 6, 2003; revised April 15, 2004. This is the

National Institute of Oceanography’s Contribution 3889.

B. Chakraborty, V. Mahale, and P. Das are with the National Institute of

Oceanography, Dona Paula, Goa 403 004, India.

C. de Sousa is with the B-24 Goa Housing Board, Porvorim, Goa 403 004,

India.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LGRS.2004.831206

(SOFM), has been applied for pattern recognition problems [4].
The application of the SOFM for the seafloor echo-waveform
data has shown improved seafloor classification results with
some preprocessing (moving average) of the data prior to the
classification [5]. However, it has also been observed that
the direct application of echo-waveform data for seafloor
classification indicates poor classification [6]. The application
of the echo signal preprocessing prior to the classification is
unwarranted because it affects real-time classification activity.
Therefore, possibilities to explore a better technique may then
become essential. In this regard, a hybrid ANN architecture
known as learning vector quantization (LVQ), which functions
as a supervised network in conjunction with the unsupervised
SOFM architecture, is expected to have suitable application [7].
In order to align the input space into coarser clusters, SOFM
exercises unsupervised competitive learning on unknown data.
Here, for echo-waveform data of Arabian sea sedimentary
areas, application of LVQ architecture reinforced supervised
learning for fine-tuning of cluster boundaries formed in the
SOFM precursor.

In this letter, a comprehensive presentation of the results of
the two ANN architectures like unsupervised SOFM and hybrid
LVQ are made from three different Arabian Sea seafloor regions
of the western continental margins of the India. Study involves
detailed implicational aspects of the hybrid LVQ neural net-
work architecture for seafloor classification applications using
echo-waveform data. Here, Section II provides background of
the survey area and acquired echo waveform data. Section III
gives an assessment of the SOFM architecture-related study re-
sults. Section IV deals with the developed LVQ architecture
for improved seafloor classifier performance. Finally, Section V
summarizes the work and draws inferences.

II. SURVEY AREA DATA

The survey region between Kochi and Mangalore in the
western continental shelf of India is shown (Fig. 1). Areas A
and B consist of coarse grain sediments, i.e., sand and silty
sand, respectively. Area C consists of fine-grain clayey silt
of the areas of
sediment. Mean sediment grain sizes
sand, silty sand, and clayey silt sediments in logarithmic scales
are given as 1.67 , 2.76 , and 6.57 , respectively (
units) [2]. The sediment samples were collected during the
RV Gavesheni cruises (RVG-30 and RVG-207). The ground
conditions in the areas were rigorously studied [8] and have
N
been used for present study. Area A is located around
E, and the areas B and C are around
N,
and

in

1545-598X/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE

CHAKRABORTY et al.: SEAFLOOR CLASSIFICATION USING ECHO-WAVEFORMS

197

echo waveform structures are observed to be extended in time
for fine-grained sediment seafloor like clayey silt.

III. SEAFLOOR CLASSIFICATION USING SOFM

SOFM is characterized by the formation of a topological map
of the input patterns in which the spatial locations of the neurons
in the lattice correspond to inherent features of the input pat-
terns. Once the classification network is designed for distinctly
known sediment areas, identification of the seafloor sediment
types can be carried out in real time. Here, the echo waveform
data from three known seafloor sediment types form three clus-
ters in the SOFM. We have assigned 200 samples from each
1 input grid and initial 100
snapshot as an input vector. A 200
1 output grid were chosen for this study. When an input vector
belonging to a particular class is presented during the training,
a reinforcement of only a few selected weights takes place. The
detailed sequence of activities during the training phase includes
[6] the following.

1) Network initialization, i.e., initializing weights to small
random values (varying between 0.0–1.0), which have di-
mensions equal to the number of inputs and the output
neuron grid size and presentation of representative input
snapshot of the echo-waveform data from a particular
seafloor to the network. In order to allow a uniform dy-
namic range to ensure compatibility with the weights, the
echo waveform values are normalized within the limits of

1 to

1.

2) Distance calculation between the input and the weights
associated with each output node, and designate the
output node with the computed minimum distance as a
winning node.

3) The essential weight update for the designated output
node and its neighbors, which are defined by the neigh-
borhood size.

4) Continuation of new updated weights around the node for
a neighborhood size for the next presentation of the same
training snapshots.

5) Use of an adaptation term (learning rate), which varies
between 0 and 1 and decreases with the number
of iterations. The learning rate decreases as per the
, where is the iteration number.
function,
The training iterations continue until the computed value
of distance is less than the prespecified error value

.

Dimensionality reduction is one of the main aspects of our
ANN-based study. Therefore, for an architecture having 200
1 inputs, output neuron grid size is required to be less. In order
to find a suitable structural size, we have initiated our study for
1 output neurons, and then output grids having a smaller
100
number of neurons were studied. In order to evaluate the
classifier, we have divided 200 echo waveform snapshots from
each area seafloor sediment type into three sets, i.e., snapshot
numbers: 1–60, 61–120, and 121–200. For SOFM training
we have used three different snapshots such as 10th, 70th,
and 130th, which belongs to the 1–60, 61–120, and 121–200
dataset of each seafloor sediment type [9]. Such division of
data is important for classifier training and testing, especially
when data are small, which is required to produce statistically

Fig. 1. Seafloor sediment distribution and representative echo waveform data
from three study areas.

E and

N,

E, respectively. The water depths

vary from 45–60 m in the three areas.

The echo waveform signal from these three areas was
acquired during the ORV Sagar Kanya scientific expedition
(SK-74: June–July, 1992) utilizing a 12-kHz deep-sea echo
sounder (Honeywell-Elac). The same data were also utilized
during the previous studies [2] and [6]. The received echo signal
was applied to a PCL-718 high-performance data acquisition
card installed in the personal computer. The analog-to-digital
(A/D) conversion was performed in the external pulse trigger
mode, whereby the conversion would begin only on the arrival
of the external pulse. The external pulse was generated by the
delay circuit electronics. The delay circuit tracked the received
echo, and a gate was set for digitization of the complete
received signal length. The received signal was sampled at a
frequency of 50 kHz, utilizing the interface card (PCL-718),
and the output of this card consists of 12-bit data stored in
the computer’s hard disk. Each snapshot is comprised of 200
samples (receiving window of 4.0 ms) for each transmission.
The transmission pulse-length of the echo sounder was fixed at
1.0 ms for the present experiment. Two hundred echo waveform
snapshots were acquired from each area, e.g., A, B, and C
(Fig. 1). For average ship speed of 8.0 kn at the study area depth
range (within 100 m) of three sedimentary provinces, the echo
data were acquired within the distances between 500–800 m.
In this study, equal gain settings of the echo-sounder were
maintained for these three data collection areas. The sampled
echo-waveforms from the three areas are provided in Fig. 1.
In general, the echo waveforms data indicate the variations
according to the nature of seafloor material and roughness. The

198

IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 1, NO. 3, JULY 2004

TABLE I

COMPARATIVE STUDY RESULTS (AVERAGE VALUES) USING SOFM (WITHOUT

MOVING AVERAGE PREPROCESSING) AND LVQ ARCHITECTURES

(MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM VALUES IN PARENTHESIS)

average results. The training process attempts to cluster the
nodes on the topological map to reflect the range of class types
found in the training data (coarse mapping). Each time a new
input snapshot is applied to the network, the winning node must
first be located. This identifies the region of the map that will
have its weights updated. Individual data snapshots belonging
to the three different classes are fed as input vectors, and the
winning neuron for each snapshot is ascertained. From this, we
deduce the neuron neighborhood for each sediment type. Once
training of the echo waveforms is completed, the network is
tested using the entire dataset (other than the training snapshot)
to analyze the network performance. The percentage classifi-
cation result is obtained by observing the number of neurons
firing within the neighborhood of the particular sediment type
data. The average classification percentages of 51.8%, 47.8%,
and 71.0% are obtained for sand, silty sand, and clayey silt
seafloor sediment, respectively (Table I). The maximum and
the minimum limits of the percentage classification values
are given in the parenthesis for each sediment type even for
different output grid sizes. In order to bring about a reduction
in the network’s computational complexity, an output grid of
1,
smaller size is preferable. For an output network size of 50
average classification percentages like 51.8% and 47.8% for
sand and silty sand sediment, respectively, are observed, but
the lowest classification value (average) are seen for clayey
silt sediments (3.8%). No improvements in the average clas-
sification results (53.2%, 52.3%, and 5.7% for sand, silty
sand, and clayey silt sediment seafloor, respectively) are seen,
1
while further decreasing the output neuron grid size to 25
(Table I). Fig. 2(a)–(c) shows percentage excitation frequency,
i.e., 74.0%, 49.0%, and 7.0% for sand, silty sand, and clayey
silt, respectively, by a SOFM-generated weight function using
the 130th snapshot of each dataset having 200 snapshots, which
is hereafter referred to as the prototype generated by the 130th
snapshot. The above-mentioned percentages are given for the
neighborhoods (14–16), (17–19), and (4–6) for sand, silty sand,

Fig. 2. Output neuron excitation frequency with respect to the 25  1
output neuron grid size for (top) SOFM, (middle) LVQ1, and (bottom) LVQ2
architectures for three different sedimentary areas. Initial prototype was
generated using the 130th snapshot number from each seafloor area during the
SOFM training and 1–20 snapshot numbers for LVQ training.

1, and 25

1 output
and clayey silt sediment seafloor, respectively, of 25
1,
neuron grid size. For various output neuron grid sizes (100
1), it is observed that the neuron neighborhood
50
for sand and silt sand sediment type is independent of the snap-
shot utilized for SOFM training, but is not true in case of clayey
silt. The study results signifies that using raw echo-waveforms
as input, the classification efficiency of the SOFM is found to
be poor and needs to be modified using supervised architecture,
though improved classification efficiency is obtained using the
moving average technique, which was successfully proposed
for echo-waveform snapshots belonging to three different
sediment areas for various grid sizes of output neurons. Details
regarding this preprocessing technique are given in [6] and will
not be repeated. Use of the moving average technique (data
smoothing), raises many critical situations, and this technique
may not be considered suitable due to practical reasons. For
example, optimum averaging of the 35 snapshots will reduce
significantly the number of data samples [6]. Moreover, during
the higher order smoothing, occasional shifting of the echo
peaks and troughs in time axes of the echo waveform data

CHAKRABORTY et al.: SEAFLOOR CLASSIFICATION USING ECHO-WAVEFORMS

199

may change the echo waveform structure [10]. Application of
the SOFM technique without such a preprocessing technique
(moving average) results toward low classification percentages,
and according to [7], pattern classification percentages can be
improved by cascading another network called linear vector
quantization. Therefore, in order to avoid application of moving
average preprocessing technique, an attempt is made here to
apply supervised LVQ architecture in conjunction with SOFM
in the next section of this letter.

IV. LVQ FOR SEAFLOOR CLASSIFICATION

For SOFM as a pattern classifier, the responses of the input
neurons are grouped into subsets corresponding to discrete class
patterns. The SOFM algorithm is first implemented so as to
compute the codebook vectors in an unsupervised manner. LVQ
is a supervised classifier and performs according to the target
classes generated by the SOFM network [11]. The weights gen-
erated by virtue of the SOFM network training represent re-
construction “codebook” vectors, which directly define nearly
optimal decision boundaries between the classes. LVQ delin-
eates the class boundaries by a supervised feedback mecha-
nism so that the average probability of misclassification is min-
imized. There are three types of the LVQ algorithm, known as
LVQ1, LVQ2, and LVQ3 [7]. For this study, LVQ1 and LVQ2
are employed, which significantly improved classification over
SOFM without any signal preprocessing such as moving av-
erage of the echo waveforms. The weight updating rule used in
the LVQ1 algorithm is such that if the class labels of the input
and closest matching reconstruction vectors are the same, the
weights are moved even closer to the input vector. Conversely,
mismatch between the two causes the weights to move away
from the input vector (reward–punishment concept). The final
trained SOFM weights are used as initial weight distribution
for LVQ1. The weight updating equations are implemented on
the winning neuron for each input vector presented, with al-
ternate testing and training throughout the dataset. Weight up-
dating equations in LVQ1 are given as follows [4]:

(1)

1 or

is a sign factor, which takes on the value

Here,
1 and
is explicitly decided by the algorithm. A value of
1 is taken
for right classification to strengthen the representative weight,
1 for wrong classification to move the weights away from
and
for LVQ1 uses small
the input vector. The learning function
values and was optimized to
for right classification
for wrong classification. The final weight clus-
and
ters generated by the SOFM network corresponding to the dif-
ferent classes are fine-tuned by LVQ1 during the testing phase.
The network learns all the variant patterns of the input space
with 60 iterations. We arrived at this stopping criterion by ap-
plying an optimization technique to echo waveform data from
three seafloor sediments. In order to optimize the required iter-
ation number, we have continuously varied the number of iter-
ations steps from a small number to few hundred, and the per-
centage classification is monitored. By adopting this method,

optimum percentage classification is found to be 60 iterations.
Each variant pattern for one seafloor roughness type constitutes
one codebook vector. The LVQ1 is considered as the second
block of the hybrid network and works on the coarse classifi-
cation results provided by SOFM functioning as a precursor.
Therefore, the SOFM trained weights are utilized as the initial
prototype for LVQ1 training. We decided to use 20 snapshots
for training based on the optimization that was carried out using
present dataset. Such an optimization technique was employed
to determine required number of LVQ1 training snapshots. The
20 snapshots for training were selected from three previously
mentioned echo waveform datasets (i.e., from 1–20, 61–80, and
121–140). The LVQ1 testing was carried out on the entire data
except that used for training. Then, performance of the LVQ1
network was deduced as the overall average of the results of
three datasets, obtained from the prototypes generated by the
10th, 70th, and 130th snapshot of each sediment type. The clas-
sification efficiencies improved drastically from those of SOFM
alone. A critical observation of the results of the LVQ1 net-
work reveals significantly improved classification performance.
1, 91.5%, 84.3%, and
For an output neuron grid size of 100
88.4% average classification results are obtained for sand, silty
sand, and clayey silt sediments, respectively (Table I). Similarly,
92.8%, 87.9%, and 91.6% classification results are obtained for
the sand, silty sand, and clayey silt sediments, respectively, for
1 output neurons. Further decrease in the output neuron
50
1 neurons, provides 93.3%, 70.7%, and
grid size, i.e., 25
90.5% average classification results for sand, silty sand, and
clayey silt sediment type, respectively (Table I). Table I gives the
maximum and the minimum percentage classifications values
(in parentheses). Fig. 2(d)–(f) presents a performance compar-
ison (neurons excitation frequency and their neighborhoods) for
1 output neurons utilizing only
the LVQ1 architectures of 25
the prototype generated by the 130th snapshot during SOFM
training. In order to show improvement in neuron clustering,
we have only presented LVQ1 training results using 20 snap-
shots (1–20) form echo waveform dataset and presented in the
above figures. The percentage classification results are obtained
to be 97.2%, 46.4%, and 100% for sand, silty sand, and clayey
silt, respectively. These classification percentage values are ob-
tained by single LVQ1 training (instead of using three training
echo waveform sets and subsequent averaging) and may not lie
within the given maximum and minimum values in Table I. It
is observed that there is no overlapping between neuron neigh-
borhoods for the three different seafloor sediment types for 100
1 output neuron grid size architectures, and the
percentage classification results are significantly good. How-
1
ever, neuron neighborhood overlapping is seen in case of 25
output neuron grid size for sand and silty sand seafloor sediment
types. As we have seen, LVQ1 performs supervised fine tuning
on the SOFM results to improve the efficiencies, and LVQ2 does
a superior job in minimizing misclassification in overlapping
cluster boundaries [7]. Since overlapping of the firing neuron
neighborhood is seen between the sand and silty sand sediment
1 architecture, we have applied LVQ2 algo-
seafloor for the 25
rithm for further classification performance improvement. This
performance enhancement using LVQ2 is done by symmetri-
cally introducing a “window” between the overlapping regions

1 and 50

200

IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 1, NO. 3, JULY 2004

of the two-codebook vectors, which are weights of the adja-
cent clusters generated by the trained SOFM network. Equa-
tion (1) for the classification algorithm using LVQ1 is identical
to LVQ2. For LVQ2, when the neurons fire within the window
region between the two codebook vectors (sand and silty sand
), and
sediment seafloor), there is misclassification (i.e.,
weights are updated such that the neuron fires within the spec-
, the
ified codebook vector. For correct classification
neuron fires within the codebook vectors; otherwise weights re-
main unchanged. The detail discussion on application aspects
of the LVQ2 is given in [11]. The performance of the LVQ2 is
quite stable, as the numbers of training steps involved are re-
stricted to only ten, and the maximum value of learning rate is
only 0.1, which then monotonically decreases. Implementation
of LVQ2 enhances the classification performance of all three
prototypes of SOFM for sand and silt sand seafloor sediment
types. The overall (the testing result utilizing the three training
sets such as 1–20, 61–80, and 121–140 for each prototype gen-
erated by SOFM training) average percentage classification im-
provement of LVQ2 over LVQ1 obtained for sand seafloor is
from 93.3% to 96.9%, whereas significant improvement is seen
for silty sand seafloor is from 70.7% to 94.1%. The maximum
and minimum classification percentages for LVQ2 application
for sand and silty sand seafloor are given in parenthesis (Table I).
However, for Fig. 2(g) and (h), the classification results obtained
by LVQ2 training used the training data (1–20 snapshots of the
sand and silt sand seafloor sediment), which utilized the pro-
totype generated by the 130th snapshot in SOFM training. The
classification percentage results obtained by LVQ2 (as shown in
Fig. 2) are 99.5% and 99.4% for sand and silty sand sediment
type, respectively.

It was also noticed in general that the classification per-
centage improved with a decrease in output grid size. This is
due to the fact that with the decrease in output grid size, the
resolution of the network decreases as the input snapshot is
mapped to a smaller output space. Also, lower output neuron
grid sizes are related with the lesser computational
time,
signifying an appropriate condition for real-time classifier
1 output neuron grid size architecture,
application. For a 100
the average data processing times (including SOFM and LVQ1
training and testing of the echo waveform data) are computed
to be equal to 107.6, 105.8, and 106.2 s, respectively, for sand,
silty sand, and clayey silt seafloor sediment. This is to mention
that, for the present computations, MATLAB version 6.1
software is used, which is installed in a Pentium III processor
having a processing clock of 866 MHz and 127.0 MB RAM.
1 output neuron grid size, the required
Similarly, for a 50
SOFM and LVQ1 processing times are 62.1, 61.4, and 60.7 s.
1 output neurons, the combined use of
In the case of 25
SOFM, LVQ1, and LVQ2 algorithms are applied for sand and
silty sand sediment seafloor, and the computed processing
times are equivalent to the 34.0 and 38.7 s, respectively—i.e.,
significantly less processing time. However, for a clayey silt
sediment seafloor, 38.8 s is computed for the combined SOFM
and LVQ1 application. We have seen that the optimum classifi-
1 output neuron grid size,
cation results are obtained for 25
along with the significantly less processing time, indicating the

suitability of the presently used LVQ architecture for real-time
application.

V. CONCLUSION

The aim of this work was to emphasize the development
of a suitable real-time seafloor classification employing
echo-waveform data of the high-frequency acoustic system.
During the previous occasions, we have attempted the Rice
PDF-based model and were unable to demarcate between
the seafloor of the mixed and fine sediment such as silty
sand and clayey silt utilizing current datasets [2]. However,
it is still not known whether such quantitative models (Rice
PDF or other parametric models) can be used (effectively)
during the real-time seafloor classification application in
the absence of proper ground truth support. Therefore, the
development of a soft computational technique such as ANNs
is recently envisaged for seafloor classification, even using
angular backscatter data from multibeam echo sounder [11].
It has also been observed in this letter that SOFM is generally
unsuccessful for seafloor echo waveform-based classifications
without employing any data preprocessing. However, the use of
moving average type of preprocessing before employing SOFM
is not appreciable: 1) lack of knowledge about the optimum
datasets number; 2) about possible classification problem due
to the oversmoothing of the data, and 3) unsuitability of this
averaging techniques for real-time application. These possible
constraints enable us to work on the hybrid LVQ architecture
(LVQ1 and LVQ2) for real-time seafloor classifications. The
presently optimized 25 output neurons through use of the
hybrid LVQ architecture indicate fairly good classification
success. The presently proposed neural network architecture
clearly identifies three continental seafloors from the Arabian
Sea.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Medwin and C. S. Clay, Fundamentals of Acoustical Oceanog-

raphy. Boston, MA: Academic, 1997, ch. 14, pp. 640–661.

[2] B. Chakraborty and D. Pathak, “Sea bottom backscatter studies in the
western continental shelf of India,” J. Sound Vibr., vol. 219, no. 1, pp.
51–62, Jan. 1999.

[3] D. Alexandrou and D. Pantzartis, “A methodology for acoustic seafloor

classification,” IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., vol. 18, pp. 81–86, Apr. 1993.

[4] T. Kohonen, “The self-organizing map,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 78, pp.

1464–1480, Sept. 1990.

[5] Z. Michalopoulou, D. Alexandrou, and C. de Moustier, “Application of
neural and statistical classifiers to the problem of seafloor characteriza-
tions,” IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., vol. 20, pp. 190–197, July 1994.

[6] B. Chakraborty, R. Kaustubha, A. Hegde, and A. Pereira, “Acoustic
seafloor sediment classification using self-organizing feature maps,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing, vol. 39, pp. 2722–2725, Dec.
2001.

[7] T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps. Berlin, Germany: Springer-

Verlag, 2001, ch. 6, pp. 245–261.

[8] R. R. Nair, N. H. Hashimi, and V. P. Rao, “Distribution and dispersal
of clay minerals on the western shelf of India,” Mar. Geol., vol. 50, pp.
1–9, 1982.

[9] B. D. Ripley, Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996, ch. 2, pp. 17–89.

[10] J. Davis, Statistics and Data Analysis in Geology. New York: Wiley,

1973, ch. 5, pp. 170–297.

[11] B. Chakraborty, V. Kodagali, and J. Baracho, “Sea-floor classification
using multi-beam echo sounding angular backscatter data: A real time
approach employing hybrid neural network architecture,” IEEE J.
Oceanic Eng., vol. 28, pp. 121–128, Jan. 2003.

