© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
13
Restoring the Generic Rank of Hebanthe Martins (Amaranthaceae)
Th. Borsch & T.M. Pedersen
Abstract:
BORSCH, TH. & PEDERSEN, T.M.: Restoring the Generic Rank of Hebanthe
Martius (Amaranthaceae).- Sendtnera 4: 13-31. 1997. ISSN 0944-0178.
It is proposed to re-establish the genus Hebanthe (Amaranthaceae, subfam. Gom-
phrenoideae), described by Martius in 1825, and since then by most authors classi-
fied within Gomphrena or Pfaffia as a section. It is shown that in floral structures, inflorescence architecture, pollen morphology, and vegetative morphology Heb-
Aanthe is sufficiently distinct to merit segregation at generic level. synopsis of the
7 species, all lianas, that are recognized by the authors is presented, including H.
&occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen comb, nov., H. occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) & &Borsch Pedersen var. bangii (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen comb, et stat. nov., H. & &grandiflora (Hook.) Borsch Pedersen comb, nov., H. reticulata (Seub.) Borsch &Pedersen comb, nov., and H. paniculata Mart. f. ovatifolia (Heimerl) Borsch APedersen comb. nov. key to facilitate their identification is provided.
Resumen: Los autores restablecen el genero Hebanthe (Amaranthaceae, subfam. Gomphrenoideae), descrito por Martius en 1 825, y referido a Gomphrena o a Pfaffia por la mayoria de los autores posteriores. Consideran que tanto la morfologia floral como el porte son en Hebanthe suficientemente distintos, por lo que merece ser reconocido a nivel generico. Dan una sinopsis de las 7 especies aceptadas y una clave para
diferenciarlas. Proponen las siguientes nuevas combinaciones: Hebanthe occiden-
& &talis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen comb, nov., H. occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch
Pedersen var. bangii (R.E.Fr.) Borsch «fe Pedersen comb, et stat. nov., H. grandi-
& &flora (Hook.) Borsch Pedersen comb, nov., H. reticulata (Seub.) Borsch &Pedersen comb, nov., H. paniculata Mart. f. ovatifolia (Heimerl) Borsch Peder-
sen comb. nov.
Introduction
The genus Hebanthe was originally described by Martius in 1825, based on several morphological characters of the flower: Calyx [i.e. bracteoles] faintly coloured, 2-merous,
sepals concave. Corolla 5-merous, inner petals swathed in wool. Staminal tube 5-parted, segments 3-fid, middle lobe bearing an elliptical, 1 -celled anther, lateral lobes entire. Style scarcely present. Stigma capitate, notched. Utricle indehiscent, 1 -seeded (translation by the authors).
However, Martius' generic concept has never been used again by later authors, who usually merged Hebanthe with other genera, due to single superficial similarities in habit or floral
morphology.
On behalf of king Max Joseph I. of Bavaria, Martius went to Brazil from 1817 to 1820 (see

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
14
FÖRTHER 1994). During this journey, he discovered a variety of new plants, among them many new Amaranthaceae. His findings were published in "Nova genera et species plantarum", the three volumes of which appeared in Munich between 1823 and 1832. This monu-
mental work offered Martius the opportunity of a more detailed study of the Amaranthaceae, a family in which Martius had already shown some interest in his eariier work "Plantarum horti academici eriangensis" (1814). In this publication he described the new genus Pithyr-
anthus (now referred to Alternantherd). Martius can be considered the first "family specialist" of the Amaranthaceae: In his "Bei-
trag zur Kenntnis der natürlichen Familie der Amarantaceen" Martius monographically treated
all the 28 genera known to science at this time, and also showed their woridwide distribution on a map. This monograph was published in "Nova Acta Leopoldina" in 1826, Vol. 13(1), but
according to Stafleu and CowAN (1981) a preprint already had appeared in 1825. Martius
included a lot of plant names into this monograph that he cited as published in "Nova genera et species plantarum" in 1826. Among the generic names also Hebanthe is cited.
Until today the best morphological analysis of Hebanthe is that of MARTIUS (1825, 1826). Hebanthe was covered in detail by the monograph of Pfafßa by STÜTZER (1935). However, her study relied largely on the same set of morphological characters that were already used by Martius. Pollen grains of Pfaffia grandiflora (= Hebanthe grandißora) were studied by NoWICKE (1975) and those of Pfaffia laurifolia, P. paniculata and P. paraguayensis (all three are synonyms of Hebanthe paniculata) by CUADRADO (1988).
New information on morphological, micromorphological and palynological characters of
Hebanthe, which is presented and discussed in the present paper, suggests that the generic concept of Martius is correct. In comparison with the other taxa in the Gomphrenoideae Hebanthe is considered a genus that is clearly defined by a syndrome of characters and that is
well distinguished from other genera. The present paper is the result of a chance encounter between the authors. While working
independently, we both arrived at the conclusion that the genus Hebanthe was misplaced as a
section of Pfaffia Mart, and that, in view of its peculiarities in floral structure and biological t\pe. it is better to establish it as an independent genus. As there would be no point in
publishing our results separately, we agreed that by pooling our arguments and experience, we
would only strengthen our case.

Material and Methods

The present study is mainly based on the analysis of herbarium specimens that were

studied during visits of both authors at (abbreviations according to HOLMGREN et al. 1990)

WUBM. C. K, M. P; of T.B. at BR, F, MO, MA, US, VEN,

and of T.M.P. at G, LIL, S, SI,

UPS and Z. The results of extensive field observations in Argentina and Paraguay of the

second author have been included.
Pollen grains were treated by acetolysis for 2 minutes as described by Erdtman (1960).

For scanning electron microscopy acetolyzed pollen grains suspended in water were brought

to aluminium stubs previously covered with a thin film of Tempfix. The preparation was then

continued after the water had evaporated completely. Pieces of leaves, floral parts, and seeds

were mounted on aluminium stubs using doublesided adhesive tape (Tesafix). All specimens
were coated with gold (ca. 25 nm) with a Sputter Coater (Balzers Union SCD 040, Balzers GmbH, Wiesbaden) and analyzed in a Cambridge S 200 scarming electron microscope

equipped with a LaBe-cathode for high resolution. The SEM-work has been undertaken in the

Botanical Institute of the University of Borm.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
15
Historical overview of the classification
Apparently, the only reference in literature concerning the genus Hebanthe before the time of Martius is the description of Iresine erianthos by POIRET (1813). This name is based on an unpublished description by Vahl of a specimen in Jussieu's herbarium of Hebanthe paniculata with deformed flowers. Vahl had placed the species in Celosia, but it can be seen from his
notes, now in C, that he never dissected a flower and therefore was not aware of the total abscence of the reproductive organs. Apparently, Martius did not associate Poiret's name and description with his new genus.
Martius described Hebanthe in "Nova genera et species plantarum" in 1826, comprising four species. Martius defined the genus on the basis of differences to other genera in floral morphology (important characters mentioned are "petalis inferioribus lana stricta cinctis;
tubus stamineus quinquepartitus, laciniis trifidis, lacinulis mediis; stigma capitatum aut bilobum"). In the same opus Martius established the genera Pfajfia, Sertuernera and Trommsdorjfia. In the "Beitrag zur Kenntnis der natürlichen Familie der Amarantaceen", Martius cites
these new taxa as published in "Nova genera et species plantarum", and again gives more or less detailed morphological descriptions. Unfortunately, the "Beitrag" must have appeared earlier (see above). So the date of valid publication is 1825.
Hebanthe was classified within Gomphrena as a section by ENDLICHER (1837); judging from his text, he only knew the genus from the description by Martius. The opinion of Endlicher was accepted by Moquin-Tandon (1849), who clearly based his opinion on a thorough examination of the available material, and his treatment was in accordance with his generally very wide generic concept. In this concept Gomphrena also comprises the genera Pfaffia and Sertuernera. Seubert (1875) built upon the treatment, while a new taxon was added to the genus under this name by HEIMERL (1908).
KUNTZE (1891) transferred Hebanthe to Pfaffia as a section. Although his change was
practically based on no sound argimients or further investigations, probably all later authors of floras and other general works built upon the concept deviced by him. Kuntze also merged the genus Sertuernera into Pfaffia. SCHINZ (1893, 1934) in his widely known classification of the Amaranthaceae uses the same generic concept of Pfaffia, that includes Sertuernera and
Hebanthe. This is accepted by Standley (1917, 1937), FRIES (1920), Chodat & Rehfous
(1927), SUESSENGUTH (1934), STÜTZER (1935), ELIASSON (1988) and TOWNSEND (1993). New species were added to the genus Hebanthe under the generic name Pfaffia by FRIES (1920) and CHODAT (1927).
Hooker (1880) recognized the genus Hebanthe, but in a broader sense than in the original
circumscription by Martius. Hooker included Trommsdorffia together with a group of species
at present classified within Gomphrena. Hemsley (1882) and Baillon (1887) also recognized Hebanthe, again with the inclusion of Trommsdorffia. Hemsley added several new species to Hebanthe. Many of them are clearly members of the genus Iresine and were
probably put into Hebanthe due to superficial similarities in habit. Dietrich (1839) used the concept of Martius without any comment and simply treated
Hebanthe with the same four species that were described within the genus by MARTIUS
(1825, 1826).
Besides, several authors have used the name, describing new taxa. but without reflecting the
generic taxonomy of Hebanthe (BENTHAM 1844, WATSON 1883, Wawra v. Fernsee 1888).
The genus Hebanthe Morphology and palynology
Habit : All species are perennial, woody lianas, mostly leaning or twining, often to a con-

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
16
msiderable height. Hebanthe occidentalis reaches at least to some 15 with a trunk 5-10 cm in
diameter, as observed by the second author, its mass of inflorescences far away in the tops of trees. Leaves : Opposite; generally with a more or less dense indumentum; hairs multicellular, simple or branched, always roughened by small spinelike excrescences of the cell wall (see Fig. 4). Inflorescence : Flowers basically arranged in racemes, flowers clearly separated from each
Aother and racemes not conspicuously elongating at maturity. Svnflorescence (see Fig. 2):
complex branching system with dominating central axis and opposite branches, sometimes with 1-2 accessory branches arising from the same axil. Flowers : Hermaphroditic; tepals 5, unequal, the outer two 3 -veined, broadly ovate, rounded, sparsely to richly pubescent with short, simple trichomes, inner narrowly ovate, lateral veins often obsolete , densely wooly on abaxial side, not indurating at maturity (Fig. 3). Androeceum : With 5 stamens, filaments connate for 25-30%, forming a usually shallow cup, with or without 2 lateral appendages, margin always entire, pseudostaminodia 0. Gynoeceum : Ovary sessile, obovoid, stigma sessile or at the end of a very short style, stigma with 2 extremely broad lobes, being in a more or less vertical orientation in the young, and becoming orientated horizontally in mature flowers. Seed : Ovoid, notched at apex, where the funicle is attached, embryo large, cotyledons more or less the length of the radicle, about four times as long as broad, concave; bracteoles falling together with flowers at maturity. Pollen (Fig. 5): Sphaeroidal, pantoporate, 15-22 |im in diameter; pori 34--48, 1.9-2.7 |Lim in diameter, deeply sunken and mesoporia extremely narrow; parts of the tectum proximal to the apertures interrupted by distinct, elongated perforations, distal part of tectum somewhat undulate or with cylindrical, about 0.4 |im long
spinulae.
Generic concept and relations o{ Hebanthe
Table 1 provides a summary of important characters of Hebanthe in comparison to morphologically similar and probably more closely related American genera of the Gomphrenoideae. The genus Iresine P.Browne has not been included. Its similarities in habit (slender shrubs or lianas) to Hebanthe and Trommsdorffla sensu Martius are due to convergent or parallel evolution, whereas obvious differences exist in floral structure and pollen morphology (Borsch 1995). Hebanthe is a genus showing a syndrome of characters that is uniformly developed in all species. The character syndrome sets it well apart from other genera of the Gomphrenoideae: The perianth bears conspicuous long and stiff trichomes, arranged in a very specialized way: dorsally only on the iimer two tepals and the covered half of the middle tepal (Fig. 3 B); the androeceum consists of entirely glabrous filaments, gradually widening to the base and united into a shallow cup, and with or without two acute lateral appendages varying in size (Fig. 3 D, E); the pollen grains have extremely narrow mesoporia with the tectum
laterally reduced, resulting in large perforations close to the aperture (Fig. 5); the stigma consists of two broadly emarginate lobes (Fig. 3 C); the flowers are arranged in a complex, several times branched racemose synflorescence, with the flowers well separated from the beginning of their development, and racemes not elongating at maturity (Fig. 2); the habit is a tall,
woody liana. The specialized arrangement of the long and stiff perianth trichomes, most probably
serving dispersal, is a derived character only known from Hebanthe in the Gomphrenoideae. It might be interpreted as an adaptation to more humid habitats where the outermost tepals protect the trichomes as long as possible. Most remarkably, a similar arrangement of the indumentum, obviously serving the same purpose, is present in the non related genus Sericostachys (Subfam. Amaranthoideae) from tropical Africa. The only species, Sericostachys scandens, is also a liana growing in rainforests. The morphology of the androeceum is
Aspecialized. structure that occurs in several species of Hebanthe, in which stamen

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
17
appendages and pseudostaminodes are completely lacking, is not known from any other members of the Gomprenoideae; in comparison to species of Hehanthe with the appendages present, the filaments with appendages in other genera are generally fused to a much higher degree. The morphology of the pollen grains is distinctly specialized and unique in the Gomphrenoideae. The extremely narrow and distally acute mesoporia are similar to those found in pollen of many of the species oiGomphrena (see Eliasson 1988). In Gomphrena
the proximal parts of the tectum are completely lacking, with the columellae freely visible,
whereas in Hehanthe the tectum extends down to the apertures, but it is regularly interrupted by large perforations. The stigma is similar to that of certain species of Pfaffia, but the lobes
Aare usually broader in Hehanthe. similar inflorescence morphology (a synflorescence com-
posed of loose racemes with the main axis dominating) occurs in Froelichia, a genus very well set apart through a variety of other characters; small lianas occur in Trommsdorffia sensu Martius, but this group is also distinguished through a variety of other characters.
This character syndrome clearly defines Hehanthe as a distinct evolutionary line within Gomphrenoideae. The genus shows several advanced features, and in the circumscription presented here, it most likely is monophyletic.
A sound hypothesis on the systematic position of Hehanthe within the Gomphrenoideae
can hardly be given at the moment, as not yet enough is known about the relations between the already established genera. In the Gomphrenoideae a lot of problems arise due to the repeated evolution of similar features, usually based on a rather reduced basic pattern of floral structures. Looking at previous classifications, the idea of Trommsdorffia as the closest group (Hooker 1880) is rather improbable. The superficially similar climbing habit would be the
only shared character, a feature easily evolving through parallel evolution and occurring several times in the Gomphrenoideae (also in species of Alternanthera, Iresine and in Pseudo-
gomphrena). Contrary to the treatment of KUNTZE (1891) and subsequent authors, Hehanthe is distinct from Pfaffia, most strikingly by the indumentum of the perianth, the pollen
morphology, the inflorescence architecture, differences of the androeceum, and the habit.
Major differences to Gomphrena, contrary to the treatment of ENDLICHER (1837) and
subsequent authors, are in the indumentum of the perianth, in pollen morphology, in stigma morphology, in inflorescence morphology and, in habit.

Phytogeography
The geographical distribution of the genus Hehanthe is not very satisfactorily known, but apparently it reflects the subdivision of the genus proposed by SUESSENGUTH (1934) in subsections Odontella and Anodontella, the former found in eastern tropical South America, the latter occurring from Mexico and continental Central America along the eastern slopes and foothills of the Andes as far south as the Yungas region of Bolivia and north-western Argentine, reaching into the lowlands of eastern Bolivia and Paraguay, with a single outpost in southern Brazil. Hehanthe is apparently absent from the West Indies.

Ecology

The ecology of the genus is unsufficiently known. Most of the species are woodland

Weplants, as is to be expected from their climbing habit.

have generally found them in the

outskirts of the tall forest or in secondary woodland and scrub; H. reticulata was recorded

from the dry Caatinga woodland in north-eastern Brazil.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
18

Synopsis of the genus Hebanthe

Attempts to subdivide the genus Hebanthe (or the section Hebanthe, respectively, ac-

cording to most authors) were mostly based on characters of the androeceum, as suggested by
Fries (1920), Chodat (1927) and formally validated by Suessenguth (1935) as sub-

sections Odontella and Anodontella. The species with filaments devoid of lateral appendages

appear to form a well defined group, probably more closely related to each other than to any

species with appendages. However, the relations of these groups need to be further studied.

According to our generic concept Hebanthe currently comprises 7 species. In the following

synopsis necessary new names are established and a provisional key is presented to provide a

Wepossibility to identify the species.

decided to include this key as the critical revision

currently underway that will be covering species relationships, species distributions etc., will

take some more time to be completed.

Description of the genus:
&Hebanthe Mart., Beitr. Amarantac: 96 (1825) Nov. Gen. sp. pi. 2: 43, Tab. 140, 142
(1826). Type species: Hebanthe paniculata Mart.

The name Hebanthe is derived from the greek T]ßj] (= Behaarung) and avdoq (= flower),
according to the wooly flowers.
&Hebanthe paniculata Mart., Beitr. Amarantac: 96. 1825 Nov. Gen. sp. pi. 2: 43. 1826 =
Iresine paniculata (Mart.) Spreng., Syst. veg., ed. 16(4), Curae post.: 103. 1827 = Gomphrena paniculata (Mart.) Moq. in DC, Prodr. 13(2): 385. 1849 = Pfaffia paniculata
(Mart.) Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 2: 543. 1891. Holotype: Brasil, Prov. Rio de Janeiro, Martius s.n. (M!) = Iresine erianthos Poir., Encycl., suppl. 3: 180. 1813 = Gomphrena eriantha (Poir.) Moq. in
DC, Prodr. 13(2): 386. \%49 = Pfaffia paniculata (Mart. Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 2: 543.
1891. Type: Vahl s.n., sub Celosia eriantha Vahl (P-Juss, not seen). For a consideration on priority and validity of the names see text below.
&= Hebanthe virgata Mart., Beitr. Amarantac: 97. 1825 Nov. Gen. sp. pi. 2: 45. 1826 =
Iresine virgata (Mart.) Spreng., Syst. veg., ed. 16(4), Curae post.: 103. 1827. Holotype: Brasil, crescit in umbrosis ad fluvium Ypanema, in Provincia S. Pauli, Martius (M!) = Gomphrena paniculata (Mart.) Moq. var. glabrata Seub. in Mart., Fl. bras. 5(1): 192. 1875 = Pfqffia paniculata (Mart.) Kuntze var. glabrata (Seub.) Stützer, Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. Beih. 88: 15. 1935. Lectotype (designated here): Brasil, Rio de Janeiro, 1867, Glaziou
27 (BR!). As no specimen was designated as holotype a lectotypification is necessary; the
specimen chosen as lectotype bears a handwritten label by Seubert. = Pfaffia paniculata (Mart.) Kuntze f lanceolata R.E.Fr., Ark. Bot. 16(12): 6. 1920. Syn-
types: [Brasil], Minas Geraes, Caldas, Regnell I: 452; [Brasil], Minas Geraes, Lagoa Santa, 12.9.1863, Warming (C!); Lagoa Santa, 18.8.1864, Warming (C!); Lagoa Santa 24.7.1865, Warming (C!); [Brasil], Sao Paulo: Campinas, Severin 13; Sao Paulo: Campinas, Hainer s.n. Lectotype (designated here): Brasil, ad Lagoa Santa, 18.8.1864, Warming 324 (C!). = Pfaffia paraguayensis Chodat, Bull. Soc. Bot. Geneve 18: 286. 1927. Holotype: Paraguay, Reg. fluminis Yhu, Caaguazu, Hassler 9459 (G!). = Pfaffia laurifolia Chodat, Bull. Soc. Bot. Geneve 18: 287. 1927. Holotype: Paraguay, Amambay, in alta planitie, jul., Hassler 11280 (G!).
As shown by FRIES (1920), Iresine erianthos Poir. and Hebanthe virgata Mart, are based on specimens with deformed and sterile flowers. Such specimens are frequently seen in

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
19
herbaria and must also be fairly common in the field. Similar deformities occur in Hehanthe pulverulenta Mart. (FRIES 1920, SUESSENGUTH 1934). FRIES (1920) suggested that /. eri-
antha Poir. [= Pfajfia eriantha (Poir.) Kuntze] should be withdrawn as a species and better attributed to Pfaffia paniculata f lanceolata as a monstrosity. This was accepted by later
authors and /. erianthos as well as combinations based there upon by MOQUIN-Tandon (1849) and KUNTZE (1891) came out of use. The fact that the deformities occur within
different species, that they seem to be invariably sterile, and that it is hard to imagine any form for vegetative reproduction in nature, makes it almost certain that this deformation is due to some external cause, and that as a mere pathological phenomenon it should not be referred to under any name. Some deformed specimens even do not possess any complete flowers, and therefore, their affiliation with a particular species of Hebanthe is hardly possible. To accept /. erianthos Poir. would cause a disadvantageous disruption of nomenclature, and consequently we have submitted a proposal to formally reject the name for publication in Taxon, as encouraged by the Tokyo Code. In the present paper the existing usage of nomenclature is followed as governed by the Code.
Pfaffia paniculata f lanceolata R.E.Fries comes well within the variability of Pfaffia paniculata f paniculata and therefore we consider it worthless. FRIES (1920) argues that the species consists of two forms (f lanceolata and f ovatifolia) varying in their leaf characters. But as Fries does not cite the type Martius used in his description of the species, the concept of his P. paniculata f lanceolata does not include the type of P. paniculata f. paniculata. Consequently, P. paniculata f. lanceolata has to be treated as a synonym of P. paniculata f pani-
culata.
Pfaffia paraguayemis Chodat and P. laurifolia Chodat are based on supposed differences in the texture and indument of the bracteoles, the relative length of the undivided part of the
filaments and their appendages, characters which we have found to a large extent depend on
the age of the flower; as to the differences in the shape of the leaves, the second author's experience in the field has shown that this is too variable and intergrades to such an extent as to render this character worthless. The same applies to most - if not all - of the infra-specific
taxa proposed by STÜTZER (1935), for which reason we disregard them here. The var. ß pilosiuscula Moq. in DC. (1849: 382) may have some value, but to appreciate this, a critical
revision of the genus will be needed.
Seubert (1875) synonymized Iresine grandiflora Hook, with his new variety Gomphrena paniculata (Mart.) Moq. var. hooker iana Seub. (in Mart., Fl. bras. 5(1): 192. 1875).
&Iresine grandiflora Hook. (= Hebanthe grandiflora (Hook.) Borsch Pedersen) is a well
defined species that is clearly distinct from Gomphrena paniculata (Mart.) Moq. (= Hebanthe paniculata Mart.). According to the latin discription by SEUBERT (1875) ,,filamentorum lobis
Hlateralivbus minutissimis v. deficientibus" the var. hookeriana Seubert could be affiliated to
paniculata Mart, as a variety with small or reduced stamen appendages. However, the identity remains doubtful, since no type could be located so far. Iresine grandiflora (published by
Hooker in 1837) was probably considered to be a synonym as its stamens completely lack
appendages. The later described Hebanthe hookeriana Hemsl. is not identical.
&Hebanthe paniculata Mart. f. ovatifolia (Heimerl) Borsch Pedersen comb. nov.
Basionym: Gomphrena paniculata (Mart.) Moq. f ovatifolia Heimerl. Denkschr. Kaiser!. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Naturwiss. Kl. 79: 230. 1908 = Pfaffia paniculata (Mart.) Kuntze f
ovatifolia (Heimeri) R.E.Fr., Ark. Bot. 16(12): 6. 1920. Type: [BrasilJ. prope S. Bernardo
in circuitu urbis Sao Paulo, Wachsmund s.n. (W lost). Neotype (designated here): Brasil,
Glaziou 1 1433 iC\)

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
20
&Hebanthe grandiflora (Hook.) Borsch Pedersen comb. nov.
Basionym: Iresine grandiflora Hook., Icon. pi. 2: tab. 102. 1837 =Pfaffia grandiflora
&(Hook.) R.E.Fr., Ark. Bot. 16(12): 10. 1920 = Hebanthe decipiens Hook.f. in Benth.
Hook., Gen. pi. 3: 41. 1880. Nom. illeg. = Gossypianthus decipiens (Hook.f.) O.Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 2: 542. 1891. Nom. illeg. Holotype: Peru, Cordillera of Casapi, Mathews 1419 (K\).
&Hebanthe spicata Mart., Beitr. Amarantac: 97. 1825 Nov. Gen. sp. pi. 2: 44. 1826 = Ire-
sine spicata (Mart.) Spreng., Syst. veg., ed. 16(4), Curae post.: 104. 1827 s Gomphrena spicata (Mart.) Moq. in DC, Prodr. 13(2): 387. IS49 = Pfaffia spicata (Mart.) Kuntze,
Revis. gen. pi. 2: 542. 1891. Holotype: Brasil, in mediterraneis deserti versus luvium S. Francisci in Provincia Minarum, Martius (M!).
The variety Pfaffia spicata (Mart.) Kuntze var. pretensis Suess. was proposed by SUES-
SENGUTH (1934: 33). It differs only slightly in the morphology of the trichomes and the
androeceum. It is doubtful whether these varieties can be separated, but to appreciate this, a critical revision will be needed.
&Hebanthe pulverulenta Mart., Beitr. Amarantac: 97. 1825 Nov. Gen. sp. pi. 2: 46, Tab.
144, 145. 1826 = Gomphrena pulverulenta (Mart.) Moq. in DC, Prodr. 13(2): 386. 1849 =
Pfafßa pulverulenta (Mart.) Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 2: 542. 1891. Holotype: Brasil, in mar-
ginibus sylvarum ad Ypanema, Provincia S. Pauli, Sellow s.n. (M!; Iso: fragm. ex B in F!) = Gomphrena pulverulenta (Mart.) Moq. var. rufescens Moq. in DC, Prodr. 13(29): 386.
1849 = Pfaffia pulverulenta (Mart.) Moq. var rufescens (Moq.) O. Stützer, Repert Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. Beih. 88: 17. 1935. Holotype: In Brasilia Serra dos Orgaos, Khotsky 108 (G-DC; Iso: MO!). = Pfaffia pulverulenta (Mart.) Kuntze f. eriantha Suess., Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 35: 333. 1934. Type: Brasil, Theresopolis, Sierra dos Orgaos, 11.1887, Schenk 2582 (not seen).
Within the species SUESSENGUTH (1934) decribed the three formes P. pulverulenta f.
densepilosa Suess., P. pulverulenta f. glabriuscula Suess., and P. pulverulenta f. monstr.
eriantha Suess. The first two may turn out to be synonymous with H. pulverulenta; the latter is already listed as a synonym because it is a monstrosity that differs only through deformed flowers. Stützer (1935) distinguished two varieties {P. pulverulenta var. microdonta Stützer, P. pulverulenta var. macrodonta Sützer) on the basis of size differences of the stamen
appendages. Their taxonomic value can only be evaluated in the course of a critical revision including a statistical analysis of quantitative data.
&Hebanthe reticulata (Seub.) Borsch Pedersen comb. nov.
Basionym: Gomphrena reticulata Seub. in Mart.. Fl. bras. 5(1): 194. 1875 = Pfaffia reticulata (Seub.) Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 2: 543. 1891. Type: ad Chapada et Rio Jequitinhonka prov. Minarum, Pohl 3255 (W, lost). Lectotype (designated here): Brasil, prov. Minarum, Pohl 3255 (M\).
Hebanthe hookerina Hemsl, Biol, cent.-amer., Bot. 3: 19. 1882 = Pfaffia hookeriana (Hemsl.) Greenm., Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot., Ser.2: 130. \9\2 ^ Pfaffia grandiflora (Hook.) R.E.Fr. var. hookeriana (Hemsl.) O.Stützer, Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. Beih.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
21
88: 17. 1935. Type: Bourgeau 1898 (not seen).
Stützer (1935) considers this ta.xon a variety of Pfaffia {Hehanthe) grandißora (Hook.) R.E.Fr. To form an opinion to this point, a critical revision of the genus will be necessary, which lies beyond the aim of this paper. In order to avoid encumbering the nomenclature of Hebanthe with a possibly new combination, we prefer provisionally to retain Hemsley's taxon at specific level. Gomphrena paniculata (Mart.) Moq. var. hookeriana Seub., described from Brazilian material, most likely is not identical to Hebanthe hookeriana Hemsl. (see also under Hebanthe paniculata Mart.).
Hebanthe occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch «fe Pedersen comb. nov. Basionym: Pfaffia occidentalis R.E.Fr., Ark. Bot. 16(12): 8. 1920. Holotype: Argentina, prov. Jujuy, Quinta pr. Laguna de la Brea, ad. Sierre Sta Barbara, in fruticetis marginis silvae, florifera 8.8.1901, Fr/e^ 448 (S!; Iso: UPS!, US!).
= Pfqffia occidentalis R.E.Fr. var. densiflora R.E.Fr., Ark. Bot. 16(12): 9. 1920. Holotype: Argentina, prov. Jujuy, Quinta pr. Laguna de la Brea, ad. Sierra Sta Barbara, 8.8.1901, Fries
¥7i(S!;Iso:US!).
= Pfaffia brachiata Chodat, Bull. Soc. Bot. Geneve 18: 285. 1927. Type: not seen. = Pfqffia brachiata Chodat var. grandiflora O. Stützer, Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. Beih.
88: 8. 1935. Syntypes: Brasil, Civit. Matto Grosso, Santa Anna du Chapada, floribus instructa 28.7.1902, Malme II 21 33; Bolivia, Villamontes 1924/25, Pflanz 4076 (W); Argentina, Prov. Jujuy, Quinta pr. Laguna de la Brea ad Sierra Sta. Barbara florifera VII. 1901, Fries 386 (S!); dito. Fries 386 a (S!). Lectotype (designated here): Argentina, Prov. Jujuy, Quinta pr. Laguna de la Brea ad Sierra Sta. Barbara, florifera VII. 1901, Fries 386 (S!).
Fries (1920) formally validated the combination Pfaffia grandiflora (Hook.) R.E.Fr., based
on Mathews 1419 (holotype o{ Iresine grandiflora Hook.), but misapplied the name to speci-
&mens belonging to Hebanthe occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen var. occidentalis. STÜT-
ZER (1935) adopted the name of Fries and refers to it as basionym but explicitly excludes the type. Consequently, a new name is considered to have been published, and the correct citation has to be P. brachiata Chodat var. grandiflora O. Stützer and not P. brachiata Chodat var.
Agrandiflora (R.E.Fr., non Hook.) O. Stützer as published by STÜTZER (1935). latin descrip-
tion is already present, and a lectotype is designated here from the syntypes.
&Hebanthe occidentalis var. bangii (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen comb, et stat nov.
Basionym: Pfaffia bangii R.E.Fr., Ark. Bot. 16(12): 11. 1920. Holotype: Bolivia, Mapiri, VIIA'III.1892, Bang I52I (F!; Iso: C!, K!, MO!, S!, UPS!, US!, WU!).
As already observed by SUESSENGUTH (1934) and STÜTZER (1935). the three species
Pfaffia occidentalis, P. bangii and P. brachiata intergrade imperceptibly, to which can be
added that P. bangii itself varies considerably, so much that, as also observed by STÜTZER
(1935), even parts of the type collection cannot be referred to that taxon as described by Fries. Granted that the collector, Miguel Bang, was not a trained botanist, there is no reason to attribute these differences merely to gross carelesness on his part. The specimens are most
likely from the same population, and may even be different branches of the same plant. P.
brachiata, according to Stützer, should be intermediate between P. occidentalis and P. bangii, and her var. grandiflora should be intermediate between P. brachiata and P. occidentalis.
When identifying material, the second author has had the greatest difficulties deciding to which
of these taxa refer a specimen, and very likely as often as not his determination was a guess at

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
22
hazard. In view of this, we find it impossible to keep P. occidentalis and P. bangii apart at specific level, but as the extremes are so unlike, they can be considered more or less well defined varieties. With this treatment we can not see any necessity for maintaining P. brachi-
ata. P. brachiata var. grandiflora, based on a misidentification of a specimen by FRIES (1920) has been considered distinct, probably because of its larger, broadly lanceolate, acuminate leaves, as opposed to the supposedly ovate, obtuse or short-acuminate leaves of H. occidentalis. However, size and shape of leaves vary within the species to such an extent, that they are quite useless for defining infraspecific taxa.

The following species, described under Hebanthe, do not belong here: - Hebanthe holosericea Mart., Flora 21(2): 65. 1838 = Gomphrena vaga Mart. (SlQUEIRA
1992).
- Hebanthe mollis Hemsl., Biol, cent.-amer.. Bot. 3: 20. 1882 = Iresine calea (Ibanez) Standi.
&= Iresine latifolia (M.Martens Galeotti) Hook.f (STANDLEY 1917).
- Hebanthe palmeri S.Wats., Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 18: 144. 1883 = Iresine palmeri
(S.Wats.) Standi.
- Hebanthe parviflora Benth., Bot. voy. Sulphur.: 156. 1844 = Iresine benthamiana Kuntze,
from the description a Trommsdorffia sensu Martius.
- Hebanthe philippo-coburgii Zahlbr., in Wawra, H.: Itin. princ. S. Coburgi 2: 57, Tab. 10, A. \%%% = Alternanthera philippo-coburgii (Zahlbr.) Suess.
- Hebanthe subnuda Hemsl., I.e. = Iresine interrupa Benth. (STANDLEY 1917).

Though as stated above, we do not aim to present a critical revision of the genus Hebanthe with this paper, we believe that we have accounted for all the species and a number of infraspecific taxa as yet validly published and known to be referable here. The following artificial
key may prove a help to identifying the species treated:

1 Indumentum of stem, leaves and inflorescence axes consisting of branched hairs - Hairs not branched

2 4

2 Filaments with ± distinct appendages (sometimes not all in one flower); eastern Brazil

H. pulverulenta

- Filaments never with appendages; western South America

3

3 Underside of leaves with a ± persistent tomentum of branched hairs

H. occidentalis var. bangii

- Underside of leaves soon glabrous, except for the principal veins

H. occidentalis var. occidentalis

4 Filaments entire; mainly Andean north-western South America, Equatorial and Central

Americas

- Filaments with 2 appendages; Brasil to Argentina and Paraguay

mm5 Leaves and stem glabrescent; tepals 2-2.5

long

mm- Leaves and stem persistently hirsute; tepals 2.5-3

long

5 6
H. grandiflora H. hookeriana

6 Axis and branches of inflorescences hairy, mostly densely so; leaves thin, not glossy

above

7

- Axis and branches of inflorescences glabrous or almost so; leaves ± leathery, secondary

veins often prominent, upper surface often glossy

H. reticulata

7 Leaves ± persistently hairy on both sides; appendages of filament overtopping apex of

filament; north-eastern Brazil

H. spicata

- Leaves glabrescent, at least above; appendages of filament shorter than apex of filament;

eastern Brazil and Paraguay to extreme north-eastern Argentina

8

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
23

Leaves lanceolate, often narrowly so, acute or acuminate; range of the species
H paniculata f. paniculata

Leaves ovate, mostly obtuse or short-acuminate; apparently restricted to the states of

Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo in Brazil.

H. paniculata f ovatifolia

Acknowledgements

We would like to express our sincere thanks to the directors and curators of BM, BR, F, G,

WUK, LIL, M, MA, MO, P, S, SI, UPS, US, VEN,

and Z for their kind support in

Kpermitting to work in their collections and/or loaning specimens, and particularly of and

MO SEMfor allowing the removal of plant parts for

Wework.

are grateful to Prof. Dr. J.

Grau, Institut für Systematische Botanik der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, for
the permission to reproduce plate CXL of "Nova genera et species plantarum" by Martius and H. Förther, Munich, for information on C.F.P. v. Martius. We thank Mr. G. Hatschbach,

Brazil, for providing duplicates to T.M. Pedersen, Dr. R.K. Brummitt, Kew, for critical

comments on nomenclatural questions. Dr. E. Fischer, Bonn, for critical discussions on the

structure of the inflorescences, Mrs. C. Salz for doing the photographic work, and Professors

Dr. W. Barthlott, Bonn and Dr. G. Zizka, Frankfurt, for various kinds of help, and, last, not

least. Dr. C. Cristobal, Corrientes, for reading and correcting the manuscript.

Literature
Baillon, H. 1887: Chenopodiaceae. - In: Baillon, H.: Histoire des Plantes 9. - Paris. Bentham, J. 1844: The botany of the voyage of H.M.S. Sulphur. - London.
Borsch, Th. 1995: Three New combinations in Pfaffia (Amaranthaceae) from the New World
Tropics. - Novon 5: 230-233.
&Chodat, R. Rehfous, L. 1927: La vegetation du Paraguay 14. Amarantacees. - Bull. Soc.
Bot. Geneve 18:246-294.
CUADRADO, G.A. 1988: Granos de polen de Amaranthaceae del nordeste Argentino: 2.
Genero Pfaffia. - Bol. Soc. Argent. Bot. 25(3^): 385-394. Dietrich, D. 1839: Synopsis Plantarum. Vol. 1. - Weimar.
Eliasson, U.H. 1987: Amaranthaceae. - In: Harling, G. & ANDERSSON, L.: Flora of Ecua-
dor, Vol. 28. - Göteborg. - 1988: Floral morphology and taxonomic relations among the genera of Amaranthaceae in
the New Worid and the Hawaiian Islands. - J. Linn. Soc, Bot. 96: 235-283.
Endlicher, S. 1837: Amaranthaceae. - Genera Plantarum 4. - Wien. Erdtman, G. 1952: Pollen Morphology and Plant Taxonomy. Angiosperms. - Stockholm. FÖRTHER, H. 1994: Die Geschichte des Martius-Herbariums: seine Brasilienkollektion und
Empfehlungen zur Typenwahl. - Sendmera 2: 5-24. Fries, R.E. 1920: Zur Kenntnis der Süd- und Zentralamerikanischen Amaranthaceenflora. -
Ark. Bot. 16(12): 1^3.
Heimerl, A. 1908: Amaranthaceae. - In: WETTSTEIN, R. v. & SCHIFFNER, V.: Ergebnisse der
Botanischen Expedition der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften nach Südbrasilien 1901. Vol. 1: Pteridophyta und Anthophyta. - Denkschr. Kaised. Akad. Wiss., Math.Naturwiss. Kl. - Wien.
&Hemsley, W.B. 1882: Amaranthaceae. - In: GODMAN, F.D. Salvin, O.: Biologia Centrali-
Americana, Botany, Vol. 3. - London. Hooker, J.D. 1880: Amaranthaceae. - In: BENTHAM, G. &. HOOKER. J.D.: Genera Plantarum
3. - London.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
24
KUNTZE, O. 1891 : Revisio generum plantarum. Pars II. - Leipzig. Martius, C.F.P. v. 1814: Plantarum horti academici erlangensis. - Erlangen. - 1 825 : Beitrag zur Kenntnis der natürlichen Familie der Amarantaceen. - Bonn. - 1 823-1 832: Nova genera et species plantarum. 3 Vols. - München. MOQUIN-Tandon, A. 1849: Amaranthaceae. - In: Candolle, A.P. de: Prodromus syste-
matis naturalis regni vegetabilis 13(2). - Paris. NOWICKE, J.W. 1975: Pollen morphology in the order Centrospermae. - Grana 15: 51-77.
POIRET, J.L.M. 1813: Amaranthaceae. - In: LAMARCK, J.B.M. de: Encyclopedic metho-
dique. Botanique. Suppl. 3. - Paris.
&SCHINZ, H. 1893: Amaranthaceae. - In: ENGLER, A. Prantl, K. (eds.): Die natüriichen
Pflanzenfamilien 3(1 a). - Leipzig.
&- 1934: Amaranthaceae. - In: ENGLER, A. Prantl, K. (eds.): Die natürlichen Pflanzen-
familien, ed. 2(16 c). - Leipzig. Seubert, M. 1875: Amaranthaceae. - In: MARTIUS, C.F.P. v.: Flora brasiliensis 5(1). -
München.
OSlQUEIRA, J.C. 1992: genero Gomphrena (Amaranthaceae) no Brasil. - Pesquisas, Botanica
43: 5-197.
&Stafleu, F.A. COWAN, R.S. 1976-1988: Taxonomic literature, 7 Vols. - Utrecht. Standley, P.c. 1917: Amaranthaceae. North American Flora 21(2). -New York.
- 1937: Amaranthaceae. - In: Macbride, J.F.: Flora of Peru 2(2). - Field Mus. Nat. Hist.
Publ. 13 (379): 479-518.
Stützer, O. 1935: Die Gattung Pfaffia. - Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. Beih. 88: 1^6. SUESSENGUTH, K. 1934: Neue und kritische Amarantaceen aus Süd- und Mittelamerika. -
Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 35: 298-337. - 1935: Neue und kritische Pflanzen aus Südamerika, insbesondere Amaranthaceen, sowie
eine neue Gattung der Podostemonaceae. - Repert. Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 39: 1-20. TOWNSEND, C.C. 1993: Amaranthaceae. - In: KUBITZKI, K. et al.: Families and Genera of
Flowering Plants, Vol. 2. - Berlin. Watson, S. 1883: Contributions to American Botany. - Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts. 18: 96-196.
Wawra v. Fernsee, H. (bearbeitetet und herausgegeben von G. v. BECK) 1888: Itinera
principum S. Coburgi. Vol. 2. - Wien.
Thomas Borsch, Botanisches Institut und Botanischer Garten, Universität Borm, Meckenheimer Allee 170, 53115 Bonn und Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg, Senckenberganlage 25, 60325 Frankfurt a.M., Deutschland. Troels Myndel Pedersen, Estancia Santa Teresa, Casilla de Correo no. 1, RA-3427 Mburucuyä, Provincia de Corrientes, Argentina.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
25
Fig. 1. H. paniculata Mart. Reprint of the illustration of the t\'pe species of the genus, from
Martius, Nova Genera et Species Plantarum (1826).

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
26

Fig. 2. Inflorescence architecture of H. paniculata Mart. Polytelic synflorescence with

MFdominating central axis.

= main florescence; Pc = paracladium of first order; Pc' =

paracladium of second order.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
27

I.

J

Fig. 3. Floral morphology of Hebanthe. A-D: H. paniculata Mart. (Gentry & da Silva
58725, MO); part of raceme with two flowers at anthesis and one starting to bloom (A);
tepals (B); ovary with bilobate stigma (C); part of androeceum with each filament having
&two appendages, abaxial view (D). E: H. occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen var.
occidentalis {Pedersen 13937, C); part of androeceum, filaments without appendages.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
28
Fig. 4. Scanning electron (SEM) micrographs of hairs from the lower surface of cauline
&leaves. Unbranched, multicellular hairs in H. grandißora (Hook). Borsch Pedersen (A,B; &Nee Taylor 28769, MO) and branched, multicellular hairs in H. occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) &Borsch Pedersen var. bangii (R.E.Fr.) Borsch &. Pedersen (C, D; Woytkowski 7464,
MO). Note the occurrence of spinelike excrescences on the outer cell walls.

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
29
Fig. 5. Scanning electron (SEM) micrographs of acetolyzed pollen grains and apertures of
Hebanthe grandißora (Hook.) Borsch & Pedersen (A, B; Nee & Taylor 28769, MO); H. &occidentalis (R.E.Fr.) Borsch Pedersen var. occidentalis (C, D; Gentry et al. 51 786, MO);
and H. pulverulenta Martius (E, F; Dusen 519a, MO).

.
© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
30
Tab. 1 : Summary of morphological and palynological characters of Hebanthe in comparison to morphologically similar and probably more closely related American genera of the Gomphrenoideae
Character

Character

© Biodiversity Heritage Library, http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/; www.biologiezentrum.at
31

