How ‚Secular‘ and ‚Modern‘ are our 
Technological Practices and Culture?            
Techno-Religious Forms of Life and 
Hierophanies in the Information Age 

Mark Coeckelbergh 
Philosophy of Technologies, University of Twente / 3TU.Centre for Ethics 
and Technology, Enschede (The Netherlands) & Centre for Computing and 
Social Responsibility, De Montfort University, Leicester (United Kingdom)  

Usually contemporary technology is understood to belong to secular mo-
dernity. But how ‚secular‘ and ‚modern‘ are our technological practices 
and culture? In this essay I argue  that if we want to better understand 
technology, thinking in terms of a rupture between modernity and pre-
modernity is inadequate. I show that Judeo-Christian forms of thinking 
still pervade modern technological visions and could help us think about 
what I call the ‚delegated spirituality‘ of the artefact, but that our encoun-
ters with particular technological artefacts make possible other kinds of 
spiritual experiences which we can make sense of by referring to non-
modern religion such as animism. I also argue that ‚transfigurations‘ are 
only possible if we assume the radical instability of meaning. I conclude 
that  all  cultures,  including  ours,  can  be  described  as  ‚techno-religious‘ 
forms of life which have a spiritual-material history. The rather excep-
tional idea of secularization is itself part of such a particular history, and 
does not exclude breakthroughs of the sacred into technological worlds. 

Introduction 

Many of us believe that modernity is entirely secular, that our current 
technology is by definition modern, and that technology is secular. Reli-
gion  is  seen  as  something  that  essentially  belongs  to  the  pre-modern 
world, something that must necessarily conflict with our technological 
culture.  It  belongs  to  the  people  of  the  ‚wilderness‘,  the  people  of  the 
village perhaps, but not modern people living in high tech modern cities. 
If people in the Western world today are still religious at all, then their 
beliefs and practices are seen as islands in a sea of secularity. Moreover, 
religious people are understood as living in two different worlds. To use 
Augustine´s terms: They are either in the city of God or they are in the 
city of Man (Augustine 2003). They are either in the church or on  the 
street. It seems that there is no ‚between‘, there seems to be an unbridge-
able gap. To many it even appears that there is only one, earthly city left. 

313 

This seems especially true for the internet and other electronic tech-
nologies and related technological practices. People who use electronic 
technologies – at work, at home, anywhere – seem to be immersed in the 
cares and pleasures of the passing world. More generally, they appear to 
live  in  an  entirely  secular  on-line  and  off-line  environment.  High  tech 
also seems to imply high secularity. Technology has been cast out of the 
temple and the gods, if not already murdered, have been driven out of 
the city streets. The world of computers is seen as a  material world par 
excellence. In the ‚silicon‘ world, there is no longer room for the spiritual, 
if existent or relevant at all. In its shadowy valleys, there is no shepherd 
who walks with us. 

However, this view of modernity and technology is inadequate if we 
want to better understand the meaning of our technological culture and 
practices – and indeed if we want to better understand ourselves and our 
age. In this essay I argue that there are at least two ways in which religion 
and spirituality are still highly relevant in our current technological cul-
ture. First I show that earlier ‚religious‘ ways of thinking are still shaping 
our modern technological culture. This reveals modernity not as the end 
of, or emancipation from, religion but as its  continuation in a different 
form.  But  there  are  also  other  forms  of  spirituality,  which  might  still 
shape what we may call our ‚form of life‘ (German: Lebensform) (Witt-
genstein 1953/2009). This leads me to the second part of my essay where 
I explore the possibility that our current technological practices them-
selves – including contemporary information and communication tech-
nologies  –  could  reveal  the  sacred  and  make  possible  spiritual  experi-
ence, albeit not necessarily a Christian one. I conclude that our current, 
Western form of life is a hybrid of various techno-religious ways of think-
ing and doing. The term ‚form of life‘ then refers to the totality of patterns 
of meaning, of practices, of ways of doing and thinking, which make pos-
sible, and are at the same time constituted by, our present information-
technological experiences and practices. 

My approach in this essay is inspired by Heideggerian1 and Wittgen-
steinian thinking and can be called a ‚hermeneutics‘ and ‚phenomenol-
ogy‘ of technology in the sense Bernhard Irrgang, Don Ihde, and other 
contemporary philosophers of technology use the term (see for example 
Irrgang  2009).2  I  understand  my  project  not  as  being  concerned  with 

                                                           
1  Related  to  Martin  Heidegger,  phenomenology,  sciences  and  technologies  see 
also Armando A. Chiappe „Pragmatische Phänomenologie und Grundfragen der 
Technikphilosophie“, Néstor A. Corona „Wissenschaften, Philosophie und Sinn des 
Lebens. Eine Besinnung“ and Balasundaram Subramanian „Die Verwandlung der 
Dinge. Zur Technikkritik Rilkes“ in this book. 
2  For  hermeneutical  approaches  in  the  philosophy  of  technology  see  also  Don 
Ihde „Euro-American Philosophy of Technology Today“, László Ropolyi „On the 

314 

facts  and  explanation  but  with  understanding  and  interpretation.  It  is 
about the meaning that is created by the way we relate to the world and 
handle things, and about the general framework of meaning in cultures 
that forms a background, a horizon, for interpreting and shaping how we 
deal  with  technology  and  with  artefacts.  Furthermore,  it  can  be  called 
‚transcendentalist‘ in the sense that it analyses ‚conditions of possibility‘. 
However,  my  approach  is  different  than  that  of  classic  philosophy  of 
technology, which  used the transcendentalist approach to think about 
the ‚essence‘ and origin of technology (Heidegger 1977). This has indeed 
resulted in one-sided views of technology (Verbeek 2005). Yet I believe 
there are different ways of using the approach. Here I use the term ‚con-
ditions of possibility‘ in two ways. I consider religious ways of thinking 
as conditions that make possible, and constrain, particular contemporary 
cultural-technological  forms.  But  I  also  understand  technologies  and 
technological practices themselves as part of the conditions of possibility 
of our culture:  They shape  our ways of seeing and acting, and as such 
they make possible and co-constitute our form of life.  

This  approach  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  a  focus  on  ‚culture‘  or 
‚modernity‘ alone if this means that concrete technologies and what they 
‚do‘ (Verbeek 2005) remain out  of sight. Rather, it enables us  to study 
technology at various levels and as various phenomena: The form of life, 
the culture, and the society, but also the concrete practice and the con-
crete artefact and its use. ‚Transcendentalist‘ means here: To analyze and 
interpret  what  kind  of  ways  of  experiencing,  thinking,  and  doing  are 
made possible by a particular form of life, practice, or artefact and its use, 
and to explore to what extent do particular technologies and technolog-
ical practices constitute and change our form of life. What ways of seeing 
are promoted? What kind of experiences are excluded? What actions are 
encouraged? And how do current technological practices contribute to 
the ongoing but slow metamorphosis of our form of life? 

Furthermore, the approach also creates room for historicizing tech-
nological culture and for being sensitive to cultural differences. Our form 
of life is always a historical form, it changes, has change, and will change 
again. It helps us to understand what we are doing if we also understand 
these changes, in particular if we reveal historical patterns in thinking 
and practice that are still relevant for how we think and how we do things 
today. This is especially important for thinking about religion and tech-

                                                           
Nature  of  Technology.  An  Essay  with  some  Undisclosed  Hermeneutical  Views“, 
Gerd Grübler „‚Dispositiv‘ als Konzept der hermeneutischen Technikphilosophie“ 
and  Bernhard  Irrgang:  „Skeptisch-kritische  Epistemologie,  kontextbezogene 
Selbstorganisation des Verstehens und positional-perspektivische Metahermeneu-
tik in this book. 

315 

nology. A cultural-philosophical, more historical approach to the discus-
sion about secularization and secularized modernity  gives us more in-
sight into the dynamic and complex relation between religion and tech-
nology. 

‚Religious‘ Ways of Thinking versus ‚Technological‘ 
Ways of Thinking? 

Modernity is usually associated with secularization. It is understood to 
involve emancipation from religion. In the West this means: Emancipa-
tion  from  Christianity.  Enlightenment  thinking  was  meant  to  liberate 
humanity  from  ignorance  and  from  irrationality.  Science  and  technol-
ogy, then, are part of this emancipatory, secularizing project. 

At first sight, it seems that the project of secularization succeeded. 
Max Weber coined the term ‚disenchantment‘ (German: Entzauberung) 
to describe the shift from a religious understanding of the world to a sci-
entific understanding (Weber 1919/1946). He argued that in modern ex-
perience, science and technology have expelled the religious experience 
of mystery and magic. There is only room left for clarity, calculation, ra-
tionalization, and control. 

But how modern are we, and how secular are we? There is a sense in 
which  we  have  never  been  modern  (Latour  1993)  but  also  a  sense  in 
which we have never been secular. There are good reasons to say that we 
have today  a  post-Christian and  post-Judaist form of life, which is not 
radically different from the previous one. Modernity is a continuation of 
pre-modernity, albeit in a different form. There is no radical rupture; in-
stead as I will argue the very idea of a rupture is part of both forms of life. 
Let me explain this. 

Consider  how  in  cultural  history  religion  and  science  have  much 
more to do with one another than the secularization view assumes. There 
was  no  decisive  break  with  the  religious  past  but  a  history  of  science-
and-religion, a ‚fusion‘ between religion and science. Bronislaw Szerszyn-
ski has therefore argued that „the modern secular“ is „a distinctive prod-
uct of the West´s religious history“ (Szerszynski 2005, p. 814). He shows 
that  people  such  as  René  Descartes,  Isaac  Newton,  and  Gottfried  Wil-
helm  Leibniz  did  not  abandon  but  transformed  theological  discourse. 
There is also a close link between religious practices in medieval monas-
teries and the way we think and deal with time in modernity. And science 
is so ‚mythological‘ that Bruno Latour has called for a secularization of 
Science (Latour 2004). 

Consider also and especially how ‚religious‘ ways of thinking from 
‚the past‘ are still shaping our thinking in a ‚modern‘ technological cul-

316 

ture, and how these religious patterns make possible – that is, act as con-
ditions of possibility of – the technological and scientific project of mo-
dernity.  

Creational Thinking and Spiritual Aura of the Work of 
Art 

First,  modern  thinking  and  Christian  thinking  are  both  creational  and 
dualistic. The main metaphysical relation is one between the (one) crea-
tor and the creation and its (many) creatures. On one side of the great 
ontological divide there is God, on the other side there is the creation. 
The secularized, modern version of this dualistic view denies the exist-
ence of a divine side, but confirms the a-spiritual, radically un-sacred na-
ture  of  the  universe.  There  are  facts,  there  are  objects,  there  are  data, 
there is information, but all that is ‚cold‘ matter. The world has no mean-
ing – religious or otherwise. At most, meaning is something that is as-
cribed by humans; they have to give meaning to otherwise meaning, spir-
itually empty ‚matter‘. Since the death of God they even have to create, 
since there is no One left to do it. In modernity, humans take the place 
of God and become creators.3  

This replacement of God by humans has set up not only an ontolog-
ical but also a spiritual gap between humans and technological artefacts. 
Spirituality is mainly on the side of the creator. Objects are non-spiritual 
or, at best, have only a kind of ‚derived‘ or ‚delegated‘ spiritual quality: 
Objects are only spiritual if and in so far they are artefacts, that is, in so 
far they are created by humans. Humans were the children of God; in a 
technological culture artefacts become the children of their creators. But 
even this derived form of spirituality is often denied to artefacts; usually 
they are seen as ‚mere things‘, which have no spiritual value whatsoever 
and not spiritual relation to their creators. In that case, even the very idea 
of creation is lost. Humans are not seen as creators but as designers and 
producers. Not the craftsman or the artist are models, but the heroes of 
the industrial age: The entrepreneur, the designer, and the engineer. The 
purpose  of  creating  an  artefact  has  no  longer  anything  to  do  with  the 
creator as such, but with solving a practical problem, with transforming 
meaningless matter into something we can use, something which derives 
its only meaning from this use. 

Note  that  within  this  thinking  we  can  still  make  a  difference  be-
tween the derived spiritual value of the art object and the derived spir-

                                                           
3  Like  Nietzsche,  Sartre  still  sensed  the  moral  significance  of  this  shift  (Sartre 
1946) – today we tend to take it for granted. 

317 

itual value of industrial products. Walter Benjamin has point to this dif-
ference when he discussed the ‚aura‘ of the work of art (Benjamin 1936). 
He attributed this ‚aura‘ to the ‚uniqueness‘ of the artefact, but I believe 
in creational thinking the spiritual difference lies in the nature of the re-
lation between the one who makes the artefact (creator) and the artefact 
(created). Because in the case of the artist or craftsman there is a more 
direct relation between creator and creature than in the case of designed 
artefacts, one could say that the spiritual value of the work of art is also 
higher. It has an ‚aura‘ or a ‚soul‘, not because its ‚matter‘ had any spir-
itual or other value, but because the hand of the creator has touched it. 
Consider  the  difference  between  cooking  understood  as  ‚producing  a 
meal‘ versus cooking as a craft and a gift from the cook, who blends his 
or her ‚spirit‘ and the ‚matter‘ of the ingredients by very concrete ways of 
practical handling – this too is a kind of ‚delegated spirituality‘: Spirit is 
transferred from the cook to the food. 

In the information age, the secularization of technology means that 
when the natural (let us call it universe 1) and physical-artificial universe 
(universe 2) is extended with, or mixed with, a universe of non-physical, 
virtual artificial things (information, data, code, etc. – universe 3) these 
new entities are usually seen as part of the a-spiritual world of ‚matter‘ 
or are even denied reality. But in principle one could also consider the 
possibility that ‚virtual‘ entities have creational spirituality in its derived 
form: In so far as the World Wide Web and all its entities are created by 
humans, they  could also be seen as  creatures, in which case they have 
derived spiritual value. This would be especially possible if programmers 
would see themselves as craftsmen or artists, and render their (chunks 
of) code more child-like than they are supposed to be according to the 
secularization thesis. In that respect, it is telling that Hans Moravec, a 
transhumanist who works in the field of robotics and artificially intelli-
gence, wrote a book called „Mind Children“ (1988). Robots and artificially 
intelligent entities are then seen as our ‚children‘, which implies that they 
might have some ‚derived spirituality‘. 

Let me conclude that these interpretations show already at least two 
ways in which the thesis about secular modernity is problematic: There 
is a continuity in the creational and dualistic metaphysics they share and 
creational  thinking  creates  also  a  condition  of  possibility  of  creational 
spirituality in the information age: We might conceive of the new world 
we are shaping as our ‚creation‘ and this lends some form of derived spir-
itual value to the new ‚things‘, if any value at all.  

However,  there  is  another  sense  in  which  the  spiritual  value  of 
‚products‘ can change from ‚death matter‘ or ‚object‘ to something more 
spiritual: They can get an ‚aura‘ not only by instantiating the ‚concept‘ of 

318 

the designer-creator, but also by being used in a particular way. To un-
derstand this we need to turn to non-creational, non-Christian, and non-
modern thinking (see the second part of this essay). 

Transcendent Thinking and the Desire to become 
Immortal 

Second, there are also other but related ‚religious‘ ways of thinking that 
still shape our modern culture. If one assumes a creational and dualistic 
metaphysics, then seen from the perspective of the self-conscious crea-
ture one´s spiritual predicament is rather uncomfortable and undesira-
ble, if not appalling. Either you find yourself in an entirely ‚cold‘ universe 
devoid  of  meaning  (the  modern  scientific/Romantic  view)  or  even  an 
‚evil‘ universe (the Manicheic/Gnostic and ‚Lord of the Rings‘ view) far 
removed from any moral or spiritual value. Or you find yourself  in the 
situation that you have  some  derived spiritual  value  – in the best case 
half  of  you  is  spiritual,  the  other  part  material.  In  both  cases,  you  are 
unhappy with your poor spiritual state: You want to escape from the spir-
itual desert and drink from the sacred well, you long to be re-united with 
your creator and to be fully spiritual. In other words, you wish to trans-
cend your (too) material condition. You want to be resurrected (vertical-
ity), to awaken and stand up rather than sleep with (other) dead matter 
(horizontality).  

At first sight, our current technological culture seems to have noth-
ing to do with these religious aspirations. But this is only so if we hold 
on to the assumption that technological practices are purely material and 
are entirely external to the main patterns of thinking that make possible 
and shape modern  practices, including Judeo-Christian thinking. If we 
shed this assumption, a very different picture emerges.  

Consider people who endorse the transhumanist vision of the tech-
nological future. It is not difficult to show that they are far from ‚secular‘. 
They stand firmly within the Western tradition. In particular, they think 
within the transcendent pattern. Influenced by (Platonic) Greek think-
ing, Cartesian dualism, and the transcendent aspirations of Judeo-Chris-
tianity and different but related spiritual forms of life (Gnosticism), they 
wish to leave the earth and their body, they want to free their (rational) 
soul. If these people want who desire to re-engineer their body and, ulti-
mately, to ‚upload‘ their mind into cyberspace, this is not a ‚weird‘ idea 
but  an  idea  that  is  made  possible  by  Western  transcendent  thinking. 
They think of the earth as plagued by death and disease, and they want 
to shed their body, their earthly vulnerability. In cyberspace or any other 
future technological world, they hope to be free from the misery and ig-
norance  they  find  in  the  earthly  city.  They  wish  to  be resurrected  and 

319 

join a realm of freedom, a realm of minds without bodies. They wish to 
roam in an invulnerable eternity. ‚Enhancement‘ is meant to overcome 
the human condition, either by becoming entirely material (machines, 
cyborgs)  or  by  uploading  –  that  is,  by  becoming  entirely  spiritual.  For 
example, Moravec has envisioned a future when humans are replaced by 
superintelligent devices: The idea is that once released from the limita-
tions  of  the  human  body,  our  intelligence  can  evolve  freely  (Moravec 
1988).  

Again technology and religion are shown to be deeply intertwined 
rather than entirely distinct. In some technological visions, technologies 
become what we may call ‚immortality engines‘. We might even want to 
speculate, as David Noble does, that the reason why our culture devel-
oped such an obsession with technology is that technology promises the 
transcendence of mortality (Noble 1997). Modern technology is then re-
vealed as a means to reach the aim popular Christianity has always prom-
ised: Eternal life. And to the extent that this transcendent technophile 
thinking  is  highly  dualistic  it  bears  resemblance  to  Gnosticism,  which 
holds that we have falling into a dark, material world and that we should 
try to overcome this. The cyberworld then becomes a means to achieve 
Gnostic  liberation.  Stef  Aupers  and  Dick  Houtman,  for  example,  have 
concluded from an empirical study that „digital technology seems to be 
increasingly considered the means par excellence to liberate the self from 
worldly  suffering  and  imperfection  and  to  overcome  the  alienation  of 
modern life“ (Aupers & Houtman 2005, p. 38). 

The End of History and the Idea of a Singularity 

Third, in our current technological culture, including transhumanist vi-
sions of the future, we also find a particular view of history. Most of us 
have a linear view of human history, which is very modern but also at the 
same time very much Judeo-Christian. Both forms of life share the idea 
that there is a linear progression in time. Today we moderns and post-
Christians think of humanity as moving through time. This concept has 
its roots in the creational idea that history has a beginning (creation) and 
then moves on to an end. This way of thinking made  possible modern 
science (for example the concept of cause-effect, the linear idea of time) 
and modern history. But this is not the only possible way of conceiving 
time. Before and next to Judeo-Christian thinking, there were (and are) 
other views of history, in particular cyclical views.  

Moreover,  both  in  modernity  and  in  Judeo-Christian  thinking  the 
idea of linear progression is also combined with the idea that there are, 
or can be, radical ruptures in time. There are different ages (for example 
the information age, the New Age, etc.), and there is a radical difference 

320 

between ‚before Christ‘ and ‚after Christ‘. Again this idea has its origin in 
creational thinking: The creator brings the new into the world. There is 
a new birth, a radical kind of natality4. The god comes into the world, 
incarnates, spirit enters flesh.5 Similarly, the desire to bring the new into 
being is a key to understanding modernity6, and current visions of the 
technological future often suggest that there is, or will be, a radical rup-
ture in history.  

Consider the idea of the (technological) ‚Singularity‘: The hypothesis 
that a greater-than-human superintelligence will emerge and that there 
will be an intelligence explosion. After this event, it is stated, events can 
no longer be predicted.  Stanislaw Ulam has attributed this idea to the 
famous  mathematician  and  physicist  John  von  Neumann  (he  was  in-
volved  in  the  Manhatten  Project,  which  produced  the  atomic  bomb): 
There will be a „Singularity in the history of the race beyond which hu-
man affairs, as we know them, could not continue“ (Ulam 1958). Later 
the concept has been further developed by Vernor Vinge (1993), Ray Kur-
zweil (2005), and others. 

This concept of a  ‚Singularity‘ is also an example of  eschatological 
and apocalyptic thinking: The former says that there is a final event in 
history,  an  ultimate  destiny,  an  end  time,  the  end  of  the  world  as  we 
know it, the latter adds that this will happen soon: Our civilization will 
soon come to an end because of a catastrophic event. This is very similar 
to  Singularity  thinking:  The  idea  is  that  the  rupture  is  so  radical,  that 
there is no longer linear progression to an end; rather, the end is already 
there. The final event ‚in‘ history also at the same time terminates his-
tory: The end time means the end of history. Technology is then seen as 
the final terminator and liberator. Again the aim is immortality. Robert 
M. Garaci has shown that texts by Moravec and Kurzweil offer a course 
of the future that „profoundly parallels that of ancient Jewish and Chris-
tian apocalypticism“ since it is promised that technological progress will 
overcome our bodily limitations, liberate us from alienation in our moral 
bodies, and produce a new paradise in which we will live immortal lives 
                                                           
4 Here the term ‚natality‘ does not refer to ‚birth rate‘ but to the philosophical 
concept of natality as for example described by Hannah Arendt.  For her, each 
birth represents a new beginning, the introduction of novelty in the world.  In 
„The Human Condition“, she writes: „It is in the nature of beginning that some-
thing  new  is  started  which  cannot  be  expected  from  whatever  may  have  hap-
pened before. This character of startling unexpectedness is inherent in all begin-
nings“ (Arendt 1958, pp. 177f.). She links that idea to the capacity and freedom to 
act, given to us by God. 
5 See also the Christian view on the meaning of Christmas and the practice of 
communion. 
6 It may also be interesting to know that originally, in the 5th century, the term 
‚modern‘ was used to distinguish the Christian era from the pagan era. 

321 

since our minds will exist in robotic bodies or even virtual bodies (Garaci 
2010, pp. 1005f.). 

These  similarities  between  ‚religious‘  and  ‚technological  thinking‘ 
reveal modernity not as the end of, or emancipation from, religion but as 
its continuation in a different form. In this sense, Szerszynski was right 
to place modernity inside rather than outside the history of the sacred – 
although his historicizing of religion and modernity remains modern. 

However, so far I may have given the impression that Western tech-
nological thinking and practices are only made possible by Judeo-Chris-
tian thinking. But how Christian are we when it comes to contemporary 
technological experience and technological practice? And are these prac-
tices only ‚applications‘ or ‚instantiations‘ of modern and Christian think-
ing, or do these technologies and the way we use them have a more ‚ac-
tive‘ role in shaping our experience and guiding our actions? We should 
not only study how religious thinking makes possible technological cul-
ture, but also how technological practices shape our religious thinking, 
how they make possible and promote particular forms of spirituality ra-
ther than others. Taking this approach also enables us to reveal other, 
non-modern but also non-Christian and non-Platonic sources of spiritu-
ality. Attending to these sources of spirituality helps us to make sense of 
phenomena which we cannot understand if we only use Judeo-Christian 
and modern-scientific hermeneutic frameworks. 

Uncanny Presences in the Lab and Hierophanies in 
Cyberspace 

If it is true, as Latour said, that we have never been modern, we could 
also say with some exaggeration that we have never been Christian. Our 
current  Western  life-form  is  not  only  made  possible  by  modern  and 
Judeo-Christian thinking but is also indebted to  other spiritual experi-
ences and cultures – cultures which preceded Christianity but have also 
partly merged with it and have persisted in spite of it. We can consider 
here the ‚pagan‘ nature spirituality that was absorbed by Christianity (es-
pecially by what is now referred to as Roman-Catholicism) and the ‚pa-
gan‘  spirituality  that  continued  and  continues  in  Western  practices  in 
spite of rejection and condemnation by religious and (later) by modern-
scientific authorities. The qualifications ‚continue‘ and ‚scientific‘ are im-
portant. Many of us might consider themselves ‚secularized‘ and ‚mod-
ern‘, and openly and explicitly reject any religious ‚beliefs‘, but this does 
not mean that experience and practice in the current technological cul-
ture  are  entirely  devoid  of  spirituality  and  religion.  There  have  been 
works  of  what  Latour  calls  ‚purification‘,  for  sure,  attempts  have  been 

322 

made at further secularization, but these efforts have never been entirely 
successful when it comes to concrete experience and practice.  

When it comes to design and engineering  practice, for example,  I 
already suggested that creational thinking may still exert some influence. 
Our current designers and engineers are supposed to experience as ‚ob-
jects‘ and dead ‚products‘, but in practice at least some of them consider 
their products as their  children. They may feel that they  created rather 
than engineered the thing, which then becomes a  creature. This makes 
possible a very different cloud of meanings and experiences. Think of a 
robot that is given a name by scientists, that is treated as if it is a child. 
If a team of robot designers considers their robot as their ‚child‘, not only 
as a ‚machine‘, ‚project‘, or ‚research platform‘, then this is spiritually rel-
evant. This experience contrasts with the modern-scientific ideology of 
‚objectivity‘,  ‚neutrality‘,  and,  more  generally,  with  the  entire  scientific 
world view as sketched in the first section. Of course it is more likely that 
this transfiguration from ‚object‘ to ‚creature‘ happens in a lab/workshop 
setting than in an industrial setting. In this sense, Walter Benjamin was 
right about the ‚aura‘ of the thing. We think of our children as unique; 
an industrial product is not a ‚child‘ in that sense. And how much ‚aura‘ 
an ‚engineered thing‘ gets depends on how much of an artist and crafts-
man (rather than an ‚engineer‘) the scientist is and on the corresponding 
relation she has to the ‚thing‘ (or indeed her ‚child‘).  

Note that we can only pay attention to these transfigurations if we 
assume that ‚reality‘ is always mediated by our personal and cultural way 
of seeing, if we acknowledge human subjectivity and interpretation. Here 
the value of a hermeneutic-phenomenological approach is clear: It ena-
bles us to reveal different ways of seeing, different perspectives. It shows 
that ‚that what is‘ is never stable in meaning. Note also that these expe-
riences can only be called ‚irrational‘ from a particular perspective: A sci-
entific world view that assumes that one way of seeing, one perspective 
has ontological priority. In addition, in contrast to the modern view it 
turns out that people have much less control over how they see some-
thing:  This  depends  in  a  range  of  conditions  mediated  by  culture,  the 
social,  by  technology.  For  example,  in  this  case  creational  thinking 
frames what we see. 

However, there is also a significant and large domain of  ‚spiritual-
technological‘ or ‚techno-religious‘ experience that cannot be revealed by 
employing Judeo-Christian hermeneutic patterns, and that cannot only 
be found among designers and engineers but also among users. Thus, let 
us consider  user experience and some of  the religious-spiritual experi-
ences it makes possible. 

323 

The Spirit and Presence of Things 

First,  user  experience  of  contemporary  electronic  technologies  makes 
possible the phenomenon we give considerably more spiritual value to 
‚objects‘ and ‚things‘ than would be ‚allowed‘ by modern science and by 
Christianity. We are supposed to regard artefacts as tools. But sometimes 
they become more than tools. Consider the experience that an object has 
a ‚soul‘, a ‚spirit‘, or a ‚presence‘.1 This may happen, for instance, when 
one sees an anthropomorphic or zoomorphic robot and interacts with it 
as if it is a human being or an animal, or if one treats an electronic device 
as  if  it  were  a  living  thing.  Such  experience  can  be  ‚special‘  and  even 
creepy2, especially if we are not used to think of ‚objects‘ or ‚machines‘ in 
this way due to our scientific education, but it can also be very mundane, 
such as when one shouts at one´s computer or robot.  

In order to better understand what is happening here, especially in 
the case of ‚artefacts‘ or ‚things‘ that seem to have a spirit or soul, we need 
to  know  more  about  animism  and  its  corresponding  form  of  life.  Ani-
mism, and more generally nature religion, does not see the world as a 
collection of a-spiritual objects but as an already meaningful world full 
of spirits. In this world  view, spirit is not  transcendent but  immanent. 
The  world  is  suffused  with  spirit.  Plants  and  animals,  but  also  objects 
possess spirit. There is no matter without spirit. Technological objects 
are no exception. Animist cultures make no sharp distinction between 
‚technological‘ culture and ‚religious‘ culture. Of course in the West we 
acknowledge  that  in  the  earlier  stages  of  child  development,  one  can 
have animistic experience. But adults can also think and experience in 
animistic ways. In fact, we have done so for a long time before Christian-
ity and modernity. Perhaps it is true that, as Charlton writes,  „we were 
all animistic children once, and for most of human evolutionary history 
would have grown into animistic adults. Animism is therefore spontane-
ous, the  ‚natural‘ way of thinking for humans“ (Charlton 2007, p. 727). 
Whether or not it is ‚natural‘, it would be unwise to exclude it from our 
interpretations of technological culture. 

Indeed, the possibility of animistic experience also implies that tech-
nological artefacts can be experienced in animistic ways. Again, not only 

                                                           
1 Hiroshi Ishiguro, a famous Japanese robotics researcher who creates androids, 
has been explicitly interested in investigating the phenomenon of ‚presence‘ (in 
Japanese the meaning is close to ‚ghost‘) by means of tele-operated robots. We 
may ask if ‚the ghost‘ gets ‚in the machine‘, if the ‚spirit‘ of the operator ‚incar-
nates‘  in  the  machine.  (See  Ishiguro´s  research  on  the  Geminoids  and  on  the 
Telenoid R1.) 
2 See the so-called ‚Uncanny Valley hypothesis‘. 

324 

children but also adults often talk to computers, robots, or other elec-
tronic devices. They give names to artefacts, get angry at machines, and 
hug robots. They might also experience that the ‚thing‘ is ‚more-than-a-
thing‘, that it has a ‚soul‘ or a ‚spirit‘. Their relation with the artefact may 
change into what Don Ihde calls an ‚alterity relation‘. For example, a ro-
bot can appear as a ‚quasi-other‘ (Ihde 1990). This also shows again that 
the  meaning  of  things  is  unstable  –  Ihde  uses  the  term  ‚multistable‘. 
Technological artefacts have multiple meanings. 

Hierophanies in Cyberspace and Spirits in the 
Network 

Second, once we take an immanent rather than a transcendent view of 
spirituality, and acknowledge that the sacred can be everywhere, there is 
no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  revealed  in  ‚cyberspace‘  or,  more  pre-
cisely, in our internet-mediated experience and action. (We should not 
consider ‚cyberspace‘ as a separate sphere – this would be dualistic think-
ing again.) Consider the hunter-gatherer form of life and its associated 
immanent,  animistic  spirituality.  According  to  the  anthropologist  Tim 
Ingold, hunter-gatherers do not see their environment as an alien, „ex-
ternal  world  of  nature“;  they  are  „immersed  from  the  start,  like  other 
creatures, in an active, practical and perceptual engagement with con-
stituents of the dwelt-in world“ (Ingold 2000, p. 42). These constituents 
are often experienced as sacred. For example, hunter-gatherers felt that 
there was something sacred about animals, that they are spiritual beings, 
and that it was up to the animal to reveal itself. The animal would show 
up. The animal shows itself to the hunter (or not) and ‚gives‘ itself to the 
hunter (or not). Similarly, tools are „instruments of revelation“ (Ibid., p. 
320): They are not necessarily instruments of control but are part of the 
relational world (see also Coeckelbergh 2012b, p. 151). There is no abso-
lute  dichotomy  between  human  and  non-human,  or  between  spiritual 
and non-spiritual. 

Similarly, in internet-mediated practices we can have the experience 
that  information  ‚appears‘.  We  have  search  algorithms,  of  course,  but 
these are not only instruments of control; they can also be instruments 
of ‚revelation‘. To the extent that we do not control them, they make at 
least possible the appearance of the sacred. More generally, the internet 
might be experienced as similar to the world of the hunter-gatherer. We 
are immersed in a hybrid on-line/off-line world (not a separate  space) 
and engage with the constituents of this ‚mixed‘, ‚hybrid‘ world. Hunting 
for  information  and  gathering  information,  the  information  we  need 
‚shows up‘ (or not), ‚gives‘ itself to us (or not). We rely on high tech, yet 

325 

we do not control its use; we are dependent and are grateful when some-
thing happens. In this sense, information can have a sacred dimension. 
More  generally,  ‚cyberspace‘  (which  is  never  a  separate  sphere  but  is 
combined  with  the  so-called  ‚off-line‘  world)  makes  possible  what  is 
sometimes called ‚hierophanies‘: Manifestations or revelations of the sa-
cred.  

In addition, internet-mediated practices can also reveal the world as 
an interconnected whole. To connect and to re-connect is an important 
part, if not the most important part, of what religious is supposed to do 
(see also the meaning of  re-ligare).  There is no reason why  global and 
local communities of internet users would have less possibilities for the 
spiritual experience of ‚communion‘ than other communities. And per-
haps ‚network thinking‘ can make possible a kind of ‚network spiritual-
ity‘:  We  might  feel  part  of  a  network  of  spirits  or  even  experience  the 
network itself as spiritual (Coeckelbergh 2010). Of course this is not nec-
essarily so. Like with the other relations between technology and spir-
itual experiences, there is no determinism. Technological practices make 
these forms of spirituality possible, but there is no guarantee that it hap-
pens.  

Thus, in so far that it is true that we have never been modern and that 
we have never been Christian, technology is a condition of possibility for 
animistic  and  other  non-Christian  and  non-modern  experiences.  This 
turned out to be yet another way spirit and the sacred can be revealed in 
our ‚technological‘ world.  

Conclusion 

This was just a brief exploration of some relations between contemporary 
technology and religion, and more conceptual and empirical research is 
needed in order to further develop these reflections. But I hope to have 
shown that our current ‚modern‘, ‚secular‘, and ‚technological‘ life form 
depends on, and makes possible, various kinds of religious and spiritual 
experiences. Some of these experiences can be interpreted as being part 
of  mainstream  history:  They  can  be  incorporated  into  the  dominant 
grand  narrative  of  Western  thinking,  that  is,  the  history  that  of  Greek 
thinking and Christian thinking. However, I have also shown that if we 
want a more comprehensive understanding of contemporary technolog-
ical culture, including ‚electronic culture‘ and ‚internet culture‘, we need 
to  revise  that  dominant  story  and  also  tell  different,  non-modern  and 
non-Christian stories.3 I have shown that thinking in terms of a rupture 

                                                           
3  Related  to  technologies,  Christian  and  non-Christian  values  see  also  Carl 
Mitcham „Rethinking Cultural Transfer“ in this book. 

326 

between modernity and pre-modernity is inadequate. It turns out that 
Judeo-Christian forms of thinking still pervade modern technological vi-
sions, but I have also argued that our encounters with, and handlings of, 
particular technological artefacts make possible spiritual experiences we 
can  only  make  sense  of  by  referring  to  non-modern  religious  cultures 
such as animism. Furthermore, I have also suggested that making sense 
of these ‚transfigurations‘ and indeed ‚hierophanies‘ is only possible if we 
assume the radical instability of the meaning of technological artefacts 
and their environments. I conclude that all cultures, including ours, can 
be  described  as  ‚techno-religious‘  forms  of  life  which  have  a  spiritual-
material  history.  The  rather  exceptional  idea  of  secularization  is  itself 
part of such a particular history, and does not exclude breakthroughs of 
the sacred into technological worlds. 

These reflections are relevant for the discussion about modernity in 
philosophy  of  technology.  Whether  we  reflect  on  technology  transfer4 
and ‚embedding‘ modernization in developing countries (Irrgang 2011), 
seek  to  ‚overcome‘  modernity,  or  hope  for  an  ‚alternative  modernity‘ 
(Feenberg 1995), we need to develop an adequate understanding of mo-
dernity and of its relation to technology and religion. For this purpose, it 
is unhelpful to understand science and technology only in terms of its 
own  ideologies  and  visions.  In  particular,  this  essay  supports  the  idea 
that modernity´s self-understanding in terms of ‚secularity‘ is problem-
atic and unfruitful, that we should not understand modernity in contrast 
to religion. Moreover, I have also suggested here that we should not un-
derstand ‚religion‘ and Western religion as being only about Christianity, 
although  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  articulate  non-modern  and  non-
Christian views because the mainstream ‚modern‘ currents in our culture 
and in philosophy deny this ‚outside‘ – or at least its relevance for con-
temporary technological culture. In a sense, we in the West also have a 
problem with ‚embedding‘ modernity, if this is desirable at all. This does 
not render us that different from the alternative modernities in the East 
and  elsewhere.  If  there  are  indeed  what  Shmuel  Noah  Eisenstadt  has 
called ‚multiple modernities‘ (Eisenstadt 2000), the problem of moder-
nity and its relation to religion and technology is a global problem. More-
over, we should not assume that cultures are fixed. The multiple moder-
nities are themselves dynamic (see also Coeckelbergh 2012a) and this im-
plies that the techno-religious forms of life involved will also change. In 
order to guide that change, we must try to learn from these ‚other‘ cul-
tures and how they cope with ‚modernity‘. Again this requires reflecting 
on religious and spiritual matters. Thinking about religion and technol-
ogy is not just a hobby of people interested in these topics: We all have 
                                                           
4  See  also  Reena  Patra:  „Technology  Transfer  and  Cultural  Apparatus.  A  Philo-
sophical Appraisal“ in this book. 

327 

an interest to better understand our age, and without systematic ques-
tioning of our deepest modern/Western assumptions such efforts are fu-
tile or at best superficial. 

References 

Arendt, Hannah 1958: The Human Condition. Chicago & London. 
Augustine 2003: The City of God (De civitate Dei). (trans. by H. Bettenson). Lon-

don. 

Aupers, Stef & Dick Houtman 2005: „‚Reality Sucks‘ On Alienation and Cybergno-

sis.“ In: Concilium. International Journal of Theology (1), pp. 81–89. 

Benjamin, Walter 1936: „The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduc-
tion.“  In:  Benjamin,  Walter  1936/1999:  Illuminations.  (trans.  by  H.  Zorn). 
London. 

Charlton,  Bruce  2007:  „Alienation,  Recovered  Animism  and  Altered  States  of 

Consciousness.“ In: Medical Hypotheses 68, pp. 727–731. 

Coeckelbergh, Mark 2010: „The Spirit in the Network. Models for Spirituality in 

a Technological Culture.“ In: Zygon 45(4), pp. 957-978. 

Coeckelbergh,  Mark  2012a:  „Pervasion  of  what?  Techno-human  Ecologies  and 

their Ubiquitous Spirits.“ In: AI & Society (on-line first)   

Coeckelbergh,  Mark  2012b:  Growing  Moral  Relations.  Critique  of  Moral  Status 

Ascription. Basingstoke & New York. 

Eisenstadt, Shmuel Noah 2000: „Multiple Modernities.“ In: Daedalus 129 (1), pp. 

1–29. 

Feenberg, Andrew 1995: Alternative Modernity. The Technical Turn in Philoso-

phy and Social Theory. Berkeley a.o. 

Garaci, Robert M. 2010: „The Popular Appeal of Apocalyptic AI.“ In: Zygon 45(4), 

pp. 1003-1020. 

Heidegger, Martin 1977: „The Question Concerning Technology.“ In: Heidegger, 
Martin  1977:  The  Question  Concerning  Technology  and  Other  Essays. 
(trans. by W. Lovitt). New York, pp. 3-35. 

Ihde, Don 1990: Technology and the Lifeworld. From Garden to Earth. Bloom-

ington a.o. 

Ingold, Tim 2000: The Perception of the Environment. London & New York. 
Irrgang,  Bernhard  2009:  Grundriss  der  Technikphilosophie.  Hermeneutisch-

phänomenologische Perspektiven. Würzburg. 

Irrgang, Bernhard 2011: Critics of Technological Lifeworld. Frankfurt a.M. 
Kurzweil, Ray 2005: The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. 

New York. 

Latour, Bruno 1993:  We Have Never Been Modern. (trans. by C. Porter). Cam-

bridge. 

Latour, Bruno 2004: Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democ-

racy. (trans. by C. Porter). Cambridge. 

Moravec,  Hans  1988:  Mind  Children.  The  Future of  Robot  and  Human  Intelli-

gence. Cambridge. 

Noble,  David  1997:  The  Religion  of  Technology.  The  Divinity  of  Man  and  the 

Spirit of Invention. New York. 

328 

Sartre, Jean-Paul 1946: L´existentialisme est un humanisme. Paris. 
Szerszynski, Bronislaw 2005: „Rethinking the Secular. Science, Technology, and 
Religion Today.“ In: Zygon. Journal of Religion and Science 40, pp. 813–822. 
Ulam, Stanislaw 1958: „Tribute to John von Neumann.“ In: Bulletin of the Amer-

ican Mathematical Society 64 (3). Part 2, pp 1-49.  

Vinge, Vernor 1993: „The Coming Technological Singularity.“ (Original version 
presented at the VISION-21 Symposium, NASA Lewis Research Center and 
Ohio  Aerospace  Institute,  March  30-31,  1993.)  [online:  http://de.feed-
books.com/book/2011/the-coming-technological-singularity  (last  visited 
August 25th 2013)] 

Verbeek, Peter-Paul 2005: What Things Do. University Park. 
Weber, Max 1919/1946:  „Science as Vocation.“ In: Weber, Max 1919/1946:  From 
Max Weber. Essays in Sociology. (ed. and trans. by H. H. Gerth & C. Wright 
Mills). New York, pp. 129–56. 

Wittgenstein, Ludwig 1953/2009: Philosophical Investigations. 4th ed. (trans. by 

G.E.M. Anscombe, P. M. S. Hacker & J. Schulte). Oxford. 

329 

330 

