REAL TIME LOCALIZATION, TRACKING AND RECOGNITION 

OF VEHICLE LICENSE PLATE 

 

                        A. Shahzad, M. Fraz, M.A. Elahi, M.S. Sarfraz 

Computer Vision Research Group (COMVis) 

Department of Electrical Engineering, COMSATS Institute of  

Information Technology, M.A. Jinnah Campus, Defense Road off  

Raiwind Road, Lahore, Pakistan 

{ashahzad,mfraz,aelahi,ssarfraz}@ciitlahore.edu.pk   

Keywords: 

License plate localization, License plate recognition 

Abstract: 

Real  time  license  plate  localization,  tracking  and  recognition  are reasonably  tackled  problems  with  many 
successful solutions. Though most of these solutions are plausibly fast and efficient, however, almost all of 
the  existing  real  time  systems  either  deal  with  only  a  single  problem  at  a  time;  detection,  tracking, 
recognition or they are not efficient enough to work well for low quality surveillance videos. The aim of this 
paper  is  to  address  all  three  tasks  for  low  quality  videos  in  real  time.  A  novel  approach  is  proposed  for 
efficient localization of license plate in video sequence and slightly adapted existing techniques have been 
applied for tracking and recognition. The implemented system is intelligent enough to automatically adjust 
for varying camera distances and diverse lighting conditions. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

in  real 

license  plates 

Many  different  systems  and  techniques  have 
already  been  devised  that  can  detect,  track  or 
recognize  vehicle 
time. 
However,  most  or  all  of  them  are  not  capable  of 
performing  all  three  operations  in  real  time  with 
adequate  efficiency.  Also,  most  of  previously 
proposed  methods  are  specific 
to  conditional 
constraints  like  camera  angle,  height,  distance  and 
lighting  conditions  or  they  are  unable  to  detect  and 
track multiple plates at a time. 

This paper presents an efficient and robust frame 
work  that  can  perform  localization,  tracking  and 
recognition of multiple vehicle license plates in real 
time scenario (i.e. incoming  video stream from low 
resolution  surveillance  cameras).  The  major  aim  of 
carrying  out  this  work  is  to  make  significant 
contribution  for  the  efficacy  improvement  of  video 
indexing  applications.  The  system  is  robust  enough 
to  learn  any  scenario  and  adjust  itself  according  to 
any camera angle, height and distance from the road. 
The  main  contribution  of  this  paper  is  a  novel 
technique  of  detecting  license  plates  in  real  time 
from  low  quality  surveillance  video.  The  method 

detection 

in 
procedure 

tracking  a  vehicle’s 

its  contours  present 

detects the license plate of moving vehicle based on 
the 
the  geometry  of 
foreground. 
The 
is 
supplemented by nearest mean classifier to eliminate 
false candidate regions. The algorithm automatically 
learns and adjusts itself to the plate size in the initial 
few  frames.  The  detected  plate  is  tracked  by  using 
dynamic  displacement  method  and  finally 
the 
characters of license plate are recognized by using a 
simple  nearest  neighbour  classifier.  The  main 
intention  of 
license  plate 
throughout  the  video  stream  is  to  enhance  the 
efficiency  of  license  plate  character  recognition  by 
using majority voting on a set of detected samples of 
same license plate, and to eliminate the fallaciously 
detected license plates by continuous assessment of 
tracked plates. The rest of this paper is organized as 
follows.  After  a  review  of  related  works,  the  main 
frame  work  is  described  in  three  sections,  license 
plate  localization,  tracking  and  recognition.  The 
experimental  results  are  provided  in  section  4 
followed by the discussion and conclusion in section 
5. 

 

2  RELATED WORK 

(Donoser  et  al.,  2007)  addressed  the  issues  of 
detection, tracking and recognition altogether. They 
introduced  a  real-time  framework 
that  enables 
detection, tracking and recognition of license plates 
from video sequences.(Chang et al., 2004) proposed 
a license plate detection algorithm using colour edge 
and fuzzy logic. However, their algorithm  can only 
be  used  to  detect  the  license  plates  with  specific 
colours.  Techniques  based  on  learning  such  as 
Adaboost  (Zhang  et  al.,  2006)  are  also  used  for 
license plate detection. Simplicity and speed are the 
attractive  features  for  Adaboost 
learning  with 
respect to other classifiers. However, in comparison 
to edge based methods Adaboost is slow. Adaboost 
method  fails  to  detect  license  plate  when  the  range 
of variations for distance or viewing angle increases.  
One of the earlier prominent works has been done by 
(Koller  et  al.,  1994)  who  proposed  a  deformable 
contour based vehicle tracking algorithm.  

3  PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 

incoming 

requires 

frame  by 

learning 

and 

frames.  This 

The  section  describes  the  proposed  framework 
comprising  of  detection/localization,  tracking  and 
recognition  of  license  plates  in  CCTV  surveillance 
videos.  As  a  first  step,  license  plate  is  localized  in 
some 
the 
background 
to 
differentiate  between  license  plates  and  other  plate 
like  regions.  The  located  plate  is  further  tracked  in 
each 
continuous  up-gradation  of 
background and finding the new location of license 
plate.  The  detected  plate(s)  is/are  enhanced  and 
character 
to 
recognize the characters of the license plate in each 
frame. 

recognition  procedure 

pre-processing 

is  applied 

3.1  Background Learning 

Background  learning  is  performed  by  using 
exponential  forgetting  algorithm  (Tan.  X.  et  al., 
2007).  The 
its  background 
computation  by  considering  the  very  first  frame  as 
background and updates it by impending frames.  

system  begins 

Every updated background is a weighted sum of 
previous  background  and  new  frame.  In  this  way, 
the  background  dynamically  adapts  the  changes  in 
the movement of objects or luminance conditions in 
the  frame.  The  background  learning  procedure  is 
mathematically described as: 

B

+ =
n 1

 

(
  1  
−

)
µ B
n

 

+

 
µF
n

       

  

(1) 

Where,  ‘Fn’  is  the  current  frame,  ‘B’  is  the 
background  and  ‘µ’  is  the  background  learning 
coefficient.  

3.2  License Plate Localization 

After  pre-processing,  candidate  regions  (for 
license  plate)  are  detected  by  finding  the  contours 
and  boundaries  of  connected  components  in  the 
frame.  These  connected  components  are  filtered  on 
the  bases  of  geometry  of  the  component.  Since, 
geometry  of  the  license  plate  follows  criteria  of 
being  rectangle  with  certain  ‘width  to  height’  ratio, 
so  it  is  very  helpful  to  minimize  the  regions  of 
interest. ROI selection is done in two steps.  

First, the identified candidate regions are judged 
on the basis of their size and aspect ratio. The final 
selection  of  license  plate/plates  is  achieved  by 
extracting relevant features and classification. Since 
we target the application of our approach to existing 
CCTV  infrastructure,  it  is  imperative  that  the 
method must cope the varying camera distances and 
the angle. In order to achieve this we propose a new 
initial learning mechanism that learn the size of the 
license  plate  in  the  subject  video  and  adjust  the 
selection window to minimize the false candidates. 

3.3.1  Initial Learning 

The  initial  learning  is  performed  on  few  initial 
frames of the video. Starting with a wider geometric 
window  where  size  of  window  means  the  ‘width’ 
and the ‘width to height’ ratio. The upper limit is set 
to  20%  of  frame  size  considering  the  application 
requirements that the camera view should be at least 
as wide as the width of a single lane on road and if 
the detected plate is less than 5% of frame size, it is 
almost  impossible  to  extract  the  characters  with 
acceptable  accuracy.  However,  this  threshold  is 
automatically updated to narrow down the range on 
the  basis  of  learning  performed  by  the  system.  The 
implemented  technique  is  robust  enough  that  it 
automatically  decides  the  threshold  for  size  of 
license  plate  in  a  video  with  respect  to  the  overall 
frame  size  on  the  basis  of  initial  learning.  Figure  2 
illustrates the effect of learning procedure. 

3.3.2  Feature Extraction and Classification 

We used histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) 
as  feature  descriptor.  The  HOG  is  extracted  for 
selected  candidates  from  first  stage  of  detection. 

 

Each  candidate  region  is  divided  into  16  non-
overlapping  blocks  and  for  each  block  9  bin 
histogram  of  gradient  magnitudes  over  gradient 
orientation  is  computed.  Finally  a  144  dimension 
feature vector for each candidate region is generated. 
A  simple  and  computation  efficient  nearest  mean 
classifier  is  used  to  classify  the  region  as  true  or 
false license plate. Figure 3 illustrates the two steps 
of detection process. 

 

Figure 2: Threshold learning in various videos. In video 1, 
camera  was  mounted  quite  closer  to  the  passing  vehicles 
on  the  road.  In  video  2,  camera  was  mounted  far  away 
from on road vehicles. 

 

 

 

 

              (a)                           (b)                         (c) 
Figure  3:  False  Candidate  Regions  Rejection.    (a)  shows 
that a number of false candidate regions are indicated. (b) 
are obtained by applying the criteria of window sizes. (c) 
are  finalized 
true  candidate  regions  after  applying 
correlation criteria. 

amount  of  motion  d  =  (ξ 
the 
displacement of the point at X = (x, y) between time 
instants t and t + τ. 

is  called 

,η) 

3.5  License Plate Recognition 

The final step of the frame work is to recognize 
the characters of detected plates. The localized plate 
is pre-processed  for noise removal, de-skewing and 
enhancement  of  edge  information. 
  After  pre-
processing,  connected  regions  are  identified  in  the 
enhanced  image  and  characters  are  segmented  by 
using MBR (Minimum Boundary Rectangle).  

is 

in 

illustrated 

figure  4.To 

This  way,  each  character  is  separately  enclosed 
by a bounding box. Each separated character is then 
classified  using  a 
simple  nearest  neighbour 
classifier. Note that the classifier requires the binary 
maps  of  the  segmented  characters.  The  recognition 
process 
reduce 
probability of error, each license plate is recognized 
in  every  frame  and  result  is  finalized  by  majority 
voting of results from all the instances of the license 
plate  images.  Figure  4  shows  majority  voting  for  a 
detected license plate. As stated earlier, license plate 
recognition 
indexing 
applications.  Even  if  only  few  characters  of  the 
license  plate  are  recognized  due  to  poor  conditions 
or  quality  of  video,  it  can  be  really  helpful  for 
indexing of video sequences. 

helpful 

is 

for 

video 

3.4  License Plate Tracking 

The real idea of applying a tracker is to provide 
supplement  resource  for  localization  and  number 
extraction  process.  When  a  new  car  appears  in  the 
frame, its license plate is detected and passed on to 
modified  Lucas  Kanade’s  tracker  (Baker.  S.  et  al., 
2004) that predicts the position of respective license 
plate 
the 
displacement using a constant acceleration dynamic 
model as follows: 

frame  by  computing 

the  next 

in 

I (x , y , t + τ) = I( x – ξ  , y - η , t)                       
(2) 
where, ‘I’ is a window of pixels, ‘x’ and ‘y’ are 
new x and y coordinates of the object (license plate), 
‘ξ’ and ‘η’ are the displacement values for previous 
x, y coordinates respectively. 

The  later  image  taken  at  time  t  +  τ  can  be 
obtained  by  moving  every  point  in  the  current 
image,  taken  at  time  t,  by  a  suitable  amount.  The 

 
Figure 4: Effect of majority voting. Various characters are 
recognized in 30 consecutive frames, the recognition result 
is  finalized  depending  upon  the  occurrence  of  each 
character. 

4  EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

The proposed frame work is evaluated on a set of 
road  surveillance  videos  from  different  CCTV 
camera.  The  resolution  varies  from  maximum 
(1024x768) to minimum (360x288). The framework 
processes 
three 
operations  (detection,  tracking  and  recognition  of 
license  plates)  in  maximum  of  35  milliseconds  per 
frame  which  means  approximately  28  frames  per 
second on Intel 2.1GHz Core2 Duo.  

the  specified  videos 

for  all 

 

The  results  achieved  are  significantly  better  when 
compared  with 
the  results  presented  by  other 
authors.  For  instance,  if  we  compare  our  frame 
work’s  execution  times  with  (Donoser  et  al.,  2007) 
who 
tracking  and 
recognition  time;  it  can  be  seen  that  the  execution 
time  for 
tracking  and  recognition  are  almost 
identical  but  the  localization  performed  by  our 
proposed framework is significantly faster.  

reports  minimal  detection, 

contemporary methods is presented in Table 1. 

The  comparison  of  execution 

time  with 

Table 1: Comparison of proposed frame work with various 
methods. 

Method 

Localization 

Tracking   Recognition 

(Donoser et al., 
2007) 
(Zhang et al., 
2007) 
( Rastegar et 
al., 2009) 
(Zheng et al., 
2005) 
(C. Arth et al., 
2006) 
Our  proposed 
method 

 

0.070 s 

0.005 s 

0.006 s 

 

0.05 s 

2.3 s 

5.03 s 

- 

0.025 s 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0.4 s 

- 

0.039 s 

0.0198 s 

0.006 s 

0.0045 s 

Figure 5: License plate detection from different CCTV  

 

4.1  Detection Results 

Figure 5 shows the some of the detection results 
taken from different CCTV videos. The results show 
the  detection  accuracy  for  different  camera  angles, 
height  and  distances.  The  detection  results  without 
tracking  are  noted  as  92%  and  while  supplemented 
with tracking the proposed framework proved 100% 
detection accuracy. 

4.1  Recognition Results 

In  order  to  evaluate  the  performance  of  our 
framework, we executed it for more than 20 good to 
worst  quality  videos  with  more  than  400  vehicles 

passed  through  them.  For  good  quality  videos,  the 
license  plate  recognition  results  are  98%  which  is 
really  promising.  For  extremely  low  quality  videos 
with high blur factor, the recognition procedure has 
showed 91% efficiency.  

5  CONCLUSIONS 

An intelligent license plate localization, tracking 
and recognition method is implemented for real time 
video  streams  from  road  surveillance  cameras  by 
keeping  applications  of 
traffic  monitoring  and 
efficient  video  indexing  under  consideration.  We 
have  addressed  these  issues  for  a  range  of  low  to 
high 
streams  with  variant 
conditions  and  motion  blur.  The  realized  system 
intelligently  performs  all  three  operations  in  35 
milliseconds  per  frame  with  exceptional  accuracy. 
This is due to its capability to learn and adjust itself 
with different camera positions and distances.  

resolution  video 

REFERENCES 

Arth,  C.,  Limberger,  F.,  Bishof,  H.  (2006).  Real-Time 
License  Plate  Recognition  on  an  Embedded  DSP-
Platform. Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, 
Graz University, Austria 

Baker,  S.,  Matthews,  I.  (2004).  Lucas-Kanade  20  years 
On: A unifying framework. In International Journal of 
Computer Vision, volume 3, pages 221–255. 

Chang,  S.  L.  et  al.  (2004).  Automatic  License  Plate 
Recognition.  In  IEEE  Transactions  on  Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, Volume 5, pages 42-53 

Zheng,  D.,  Zhao,  Y.,  Wang,  J.  (2005).    An  efficient 
In  Pattern 

method  of 
Recognition Letters  Volume 26, pages 2431–2438 

license  plate 

location. 

Donoser,  M.,  Arth,  C.,  Bischof,  H.  (2007).  Detecting, 
Tracking  and  Recognizing  License  Plates.  In  ACCV 
2007, Part II, LNCS 4844 447–456 

Zhang,  H.  et  al.  (2006).  Real-Time  License  Plate 
Detection under Various Conditions. In LNCS Volume 
4159/2006, pages 192-199, Springer Verlag  

Koller,  D.,  Weber,  J.,  Malik,  J.  (1994).  Robust  multiple 
car  tracking  with  occlusion  reasoning.  In  Europeon 
Conference on Computer Vision. Proceedings  

Tan, X.,  Li, J., and  Liu, C. (2007). A video-based real-
classified 
learning.In  World  Transactions  on 

time 
background 
Engineering and Technology Education.  

vehicle  detection  method  by 

Rastegar,  S.,  Ghaderi,  R.,  Ardeshir,  J.,  Asadi,  N.  (2009). 
An intelligent control system using an efficient license 
plate 
approach.In 
International  Journal  of  Image  Processing  (IJIP), 
Volume 3, Issue 5, pages 252-264 

recognition 

location 

and 

