Personalized Cache Management Considering Spatial Properties of Data for Mobile Computing

Ho-Sook Kim, Hwan-Seung Yong Ewha womans university, Seoul, Korea

Abstract This paper proposes a personalized cache management method that supports user mobility and the spatial properties of data in order to support wireless mobile internet service on the mobile host such as PDA.

host - where it is queried. That is, the value and the weight of geographic data in a cell vary as the mobile host changes its location. We propose new cache replacement methods that support user mobility and spatial properties (location and region) of data.

1. Introduction The requirement of local information service related to user's location has been rapidly increasing due to the enlargement of the wireless mobile internet service using PDA or cellular phone. So it has been needed the research to cope with the restrictions of characteristic of the mobile computing environment. The previous research of cache replacement method has been carried out considering data access time[1,2], and maintained in server[3], and focused on constructing geometrically distributed database considering local dependent nature of data and using the database for query[4]. But these methods passed over the spatial property of each datum in a cell. In this paper, we define the spatial location of geographic data and the spatial range-region which geographic data affect as spatial properties, and propose new mobile host oriented cache replacement methods which efficiently support user mobility and the spatial properties of data. We also analyze variable factors which affect the cache hit-ratio of a mobile host in mobile computing environment evaluated the performance of cache replacement algorithm based on them. Finally we propose the method for the best cache replacement.
2. Cache replacement methods using spatial properties of data
Each datum has a spatial location and a logical range in which the datum has importance. We define the spatial range as the region of a datum. For example, the weather information is meaningful in one area and the traffic information is worthy in smaller area[5]. Variable geographical data in a cell also have their own region of influence. For example, the region of a telephone booth located at every 1 km is 1 km2 and that of a gas station located at every 10 km is 100 km2. The mobile host changes its location according to time and the result of a query such as "where is the nearest subway station?" is different according to the geographic location - the location of a mobile

[Definiton1] CR_LOC (Cache Replacement by LOCation of data) is a cache replacement algorithm based on the distance between the location of a mobile host and the location of a datum. When a mobile host replaces the cache, the datum in the farthest location from the mobile host is deleted from the cache. [Definiton2] CR_REG (Cache Replacement by REGion of data) is a cache replacement algorithm based on the distance between the location of mobile host and the region of a datum. When a mobile host replaces the cache, the datum in the farthest region from the mobile host is deleted from the cache.
[Fig.1] H1: Mobile Host, ® ~Á® :ÎData : Cache Region, : Data Region
Fig.1 shows the changes of the cache state to which CR_REG is applied when the size of a cache is 4. When a mobile host (H1) is located in (3,7), data 1,2,5 are stored in the first state of the cache. After H1 moves to (5,5), the cache stores data 1,2,4,5. And when H1 is located in (7,3), data 2,3,4,5 are stored in the last state of the cache. When compared based on the location of data, datum 1 is nearer than datum 2 from the location of the mobile host (7,3), but datum 2 which has larger region is remained in the cache for long time. And the datum 5 is remained valuable when it is on the path of the movement of the mobile host even though the region is small
3. Performance evaluation To prove the efficiency of the proposed cache replacement methods, we construct a database using the Informix Spatial Datablade Module and evaluated performance between CR_LOC, CR_REG proposed in this paper and CR_LRU

which uses the typical cache replacement method, LRU.

3.1 The result of performance evaluation The result of performance evaluation shows that the cache hit-ratio is getting higher as the cache size is getting larger (Fig.2) and DTO (Distribution degree of query Target Objects) smaller [Fig.3]. The application program used in this test mainly serves local information or map information to a mobile host and the queries related to the region of data are often asked. The CR_LOC has higher hit-ratio than the CR_REG when the density of a region is high. When the density of a region is low, CR_REG has better performance. Moreover, Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show that the hit-ratio is also affected by the Query pattern. As the result of tests, we know that all of the cache size, DTO, and the density of a region influence the cache hit-ratio. Hence, we need a new parameter that simultaneously reflects these elements in order to generate a more efficient cache replacement method.
[Definition 3] CRR (Cache Requirement Rate) is the percent value of the number of data in the range of DTO divided by the cache size. For example, if the number of data in DTO is 4 and the size of a cache is 2, then CRR is 200 and it means that the double of the current cache size is required to meet the 100 % hit-ratio.
When a CRR value is small, CR_REG is better than CR_LOC and when the CRR value is large, CR_LOC has better performance (Fig.6). We define the CRR value at which more efficient cache replacement algorithm is changed as Cross Point (CP). In Fig.6, the CP is 40. The CP is affected by the query patterns of users. When queries are mainly about data location, the CP is low and the more the query patterns are about data region, the higher the CP value is (Fig.7).
3.2 Personalized cache replacement selection algorithm

The cache hit-ratio is changed by a cache size, DTO, density of region and query patterns. So, for the best cache replacement, we need to select the optimum cache replacement method for each mobile host considering these elements. When the mobile host enters a specific server area, it determines the personalized CP value that should be adapted by its own query pattern among broadcasted standard CP values. When mobile host answers the query while it moves around in the server area, the mobile host calculates CRR value at that position using the cache size, DTO and density of region. If the CRR value is smaller than personalized CP value, it should select CR_REG for cache replacement and if the CRR value is larger than personalized CP value, it needs to select the CR_LOC as the best cache replacement.
4. Conclusion This paper proposes the personalized best cache replacement selection algorithm to each mobile host moving through the region of a variable density, which has a different performance and query patterns. This algorithm henceforward should be applied to a local information service for a wireless mobile host.
References
[1] J. Jing, A. Helal, A. Elmagarmid, "Client-Server Computing in Mobile Environments", ACM Computing Survey, Vol.31, No.2, pages 117-157, 1999. [2]Daniel Babara, Tomasz Imielinski, "Sleepers and Workaholics: Caching Strategies in Mobile Environments," Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD, pages 1-12, 1994. [3] George Y. Liu, General Q. Maguire, JR., "A MobileAware Dynamic Database Cashing Scheme for Wireless Mobile Computing and Communications," Distributed and Parallel Database 4, pages 271-288, 1996. [4] Margaret H. Dunham, Vijay Kumar, "Location Dependent Data and its Management in Mobile

Databases," Mobility in Database and Distributed System, 1998. [5] Tomasz Imielinski, Henry F. Korth, "Introduction to Mobile Computing," Mobile Computing, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pages 1-43, 1996.

