 
IJCAI-01 Format Instructions
Bernhard Nebel Albert-Ludwigs-Universita¨t Freiburg
D-79110 Freiburg, Germany nebel@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
The IJCAI-01 Proceedings will be printed from electronic manuscripts submitted by the authors. The electronic manuscript will also be included in a CD-ROM version of the proceedings if the manuscript satisfies some simple restrictions. This paper gives the style instructions.

1 Introduction
The IJCAI-01 Proceedings will be printed from electronic manuscripts submitted by the authors. These must be PDF (Portable Document Format) or postscript files formatted for 8-1/2" x 11" paper. If the electronic manuscript uses Adobe' s Times Roman font, then the manuscript will also be included in the CD-ROM version of the proceedings.
1.1 Length of Papers
Each accepted paper is allowed six pages in the proceedings; up to two additional pages may be purchased at a price of $250 per page.
1.2 Word Processing Software
As detailed below, IJCAI has prepared and made available a set of LATEX macros for use in formatting your paper. If you are using some other word processing software (such as Word, WordPerfect, etc.), please follow the format instructions given below and ensure that your final paper looks as much like this sample as possible.

2 Style and Format
LATEX and BibTEX style files that implement these instructions can be retrieved electronically. (See Appendix A for instructions on how to obtain these files.)

2.1 Layout

Print manuscripts two columns to a page, in the manner in

which these instructions are printed. The exact dimensions

for pages are:

¡ left and right margins: ¢ ¥£ §¤ ¦ ¦

¡

§£ ¤ ¦ ¦ column width: ¨©¢ ¨



The support by IJCAI Inc. is acknowledged.

¡ gap between columns: ¢  ¤¥¦ ¦

¡ top margin--first page: §¢ ¨ £§¥¤ ¦ ¦ ¦

¡ top margin--other pages: ¢ §£ ¥¤ ¦ ¦

¡ bottom margin: § ¢ ¤§¦ ¦

¡ column height--first page:  ¢   §¤ ¦ ¦

¡ column height--other pages:  ¦ ¦

A4Ahllarmdceoaspuieresmasesnutsmaessthueme-a$ n¥ % -!& ¥§ " ¦ #! ¦ p§a p¦ e¦ rpasigzee,siiz.ee..,

For use

the given top and left margins, column width, height, and gap

and modify the bottom and right margins as necessary.

2.2 Format of Electronic Manuscript

For the production of the electronic manuscript you must use Adobe' s Portable Document Format (PDF) or postscript. PDF can be generated, for instance, on Unix systems using ps2pdf. Under Windows, Adobe' s Distiller can be used. There is also a web site with free software and conversion services: www.ps2pdf.com. For reasons of uniformity, Adobe' s Times Roman font should be used (note that only manuscripts using this font can be included in the proceedings). In LATEX2e this is accomplished by putting
' usepackage( times)

in the preamble.1

Additionally, American letter

fiot rmis aot f(cuotrmreospstonimdipnogrttoan c-e$¥t0o !1sp2 e c¦ ¦ i)fywhtehne

formatting the paper. Otherwise the paper is not printable.

When working with dvips, for instance, one should specify

-t letter.

2.3 Title and Author Information
Center the title on the entire width of the page in a 14-point bold font. Below it, center the author name(s) in a 12-point bold font. Then the address(es) should be centered using a 12-point font. Credit to a sponsoring agency can appear on the first page as a footnote.

1You may want also to use the package latexsym, which defines all symbols known from the old LATEX version.

2.4 Abstract Place the abstract at the beginning of the first column ¨¢ 3 ¦ ¦ from the top of the page, unless that does not leave enough room for the title and author information. Use a slightly smaller width than in the body of the paper. Head the abstract with "Abstract" centered above the body of the abstract in a 12-point bold font. The body of the abstract should be in the same font as the body of the paper.
The abstract should be a concise, one-paragraph summary describing the general thesis and conclusion of your paper. A reader should be able to learn the purpose of the paper and the reason for its importance from the abstract. The abstract should be no more than 200 words long.
2.5 Text
The main body of the text immediately follows the abstract. Use 10-point type in a clear, readable font with 1-point leading (10 on 11).
Indent when starting a new paragraph, except after major headings.
2.6 Headings and Sections
When necessary, headings should be used to separate major sections of your paper. (These instructions use many headings to demonstrate their appearance--your paper should have fewer headings.)
Section Headings
Print section headings in 12-point bold type in the style shown in these instructions. Leave a blank space of approximately 10 points above and 4 points below section headings. Number sections with arabic numerals.
Subsection Headings
Print subsection headings in 11-point bold type. Leave a blank space of approximately 8 points above and 3 points below subsection headings. Number subsections with the section number and the subsection number (in arabic numerals) separated by a period.
Subsubsection Headings
Print subsubsection headings in 10-point bold type. Leave a blank space of approximately 6 points above subsubsection headings. Do not number subsubsections.
Special Sections
You may include an unnumbered acknowledgments section, including acknowledgments of help from colleagues, financial support, and permission to publish.
Any appendices directly follow the text and look like sections, except that they are numbered with capital letters instead of arabic numerals.
The references section is headed "References," printed in the same style as a section heading, but without a number. A sample list of references is given at the end of these instructions. Use a consistent format for references, such as provided by BibTEX. The reference list should not include unpublished work.

2.7 Citations
Citations within the text should include the author' s last name and the year of publication, for example [Cheeseman, 1985]. Append lowercase letters to the year in cases of ambiguity. Treat multiple authors as in the following examples: [Abelson et al., 1985] (for more than two authors) and [Brachman and Schmolze, 1985] (for two authors). If the author portion of a citation is obvious, omit it, e.g., Nebel [2000]. Collapse multiple citations as follows: [Levesque, 1984a; Haugeland, 1981]..
2.8 Footnotes
Place footnotes at the bottom of the page in a 9-point font. Refer to them with superscript numbers.2 Separate them from the text by a short line.3 Avoid footnotes as much as possible; they interrupt the flow of the text.
3 Illustrations
Place illustrations (figures, drawings, tables, and photographs) throughout the paper at the places where they are first discussed, rather than at the end of the paper. If placed at the bottom or top of a page, illustrations may run across both columns.
Illustrations should be rendered electronically or scanned and placed directly in your document pages. All illustrations should be in black and white since color illustrations may cause problems.
Number illustrations sequentially. Use references of the following form: Figure 1, Table 2, etc. Place illustration numbers and captions under illustrations. Leave a margin of 1/4-inch around the area covered by the illustration and caption. Use 9-point type for captions, labels, and other text in illustrations.
Acknowledgments
The preparation of these instructions and the LATEX and BibTEX files that implement them was supported by Schlumberger Palo Alto Research, AT&T Bell Laboratories, and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
A Using LATEX
A LATEX style file for version 2e of LATEX that implements these instructions has been prepared, as has a BibTEX style file for version 0.99c of BibTEX (not version 0.98i) that implements the citation and reference styles here.
The relevant files are available from the IJCAI server via the World-Wide Web, anonymous ftp, and email. As these files may be changed to fix bugs, you should ensure that you are using the most recent versions.
To retrieve the files use one of the following methods:
World-Wide Web Using a WWW client program, retrieve the files
http://ijcai.org/data/ijcai01.sty http://ijcai.org/data/named.bst
2This is how your footnotes should appear. 3Note the line separating these footnotes from the text.

Ftp For ftp access proceed as indicated here. Ftp syntax varies from host to host so your interaction may be different.
ftp ijcai.org Name: anonymous Password: <your email address> ftp> cd pub/ijcai ftp> get ijcai01.sty ftp> get named.bst
Electronic mail Send the following message with the file name given as the subject (You can only retrieve one file per mail message):
To: info@ijcai.org Subject: file name
Further information on using these styles for the preparation of papers for IJCAI-01 can be obtained by contacting:
Bernhard Nebel Institut fu¨r Informatik Albert-Ludwigs-Universita¨t Freiburg Georges-Ko¨hler Allee, Geb. 52 D-79110 Freiburg Germany
ijcai-pc@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
References
[Abelson et al., 1985] Harold Abelson, Gerald Jay Sussman, and Julie Sussman. Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1985.
[Brachman and Schmolze, 1985] Ronald J. Brachman and James G. Schmolze. An overview of the KL-ONE knowledge representation system. Cognitive Science, 9(2):171­ 216, April­June 1985.
[Cheeseman, 1985] Peter Cheeseman. In defense of probability. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1002­1009, Los Angeles, California, August 1985. International Joint Committee on Artificial Intelligence.
[Haugeland, 1981] John Haugeland, editor. Mind Design. Bradford Books, Montgomery, Vermont, 1981.
[Lenat, 1981] Douglas B. Lenat. The nature of heuristics. Technical Report CIS-12 (SSL-81-1), Xerox Palo Alto Research Centers, April 1981.
[Levesque, 1984a] Hector J. Levesque. Foundations of a functional approach to knowledge representation. Artificial Intelligence, 23(2):155­212, July 1984.
[Levesque, 1984b] Hector J. Levesque. A logic of implicit and explicit belief. In Proceedings of the Fourth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 198­ 202, Austin, Texas, August 1984. American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
[Nebel, 2000] Bernhard Nebel. On the compilability and expressive power of propositional planning formalisms. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:271­315, 2000.

