International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 121-132 (2013)

121

IMPLEMENTING A REAL-TIME SHOP-FLOOR CONTROL SYSTEM USING ZIGBEE-BASED NETWORKING SYSTEMS

Kun-Yung Lu Department of Electronics Engineering
National United University Miaoli (360), Taiwan

ABSTRACT

This study presents a ZigBee-based wireless sensor network (WSN) system combined with an automatic data capturing system to establish a real-time shop-floor control system. The goal is aimed at enhancing the performance of shop-floor control (SFC) and providing a rapid response to customer requirements. The proposed system included a system simulator, job assignment module and network monitor module. System functions included network parameter settings, real-time system status sensing and data collection, intelligent event tracing and warning, and several responding mechanisms. The proposed system can simplify the implementation of an electronic production control systems and enables the shop-floor control more transparent and instant via a wireless networking infrastructure.

Keywords: Shop-floor Control, Wireless Sensor Network, ZigBee, JIT, Real-time

1. INTRODUCTION
1
Global competition has forced many companies to alter their business practices. To enhance the production performance and improve their positions in the global supply chains, many manufacturers have been driven to shift their production strategies from build-to-forecast to build-to-order (BTO) or configuration-to-order (CTO) [5]. Manufacturers strive to achieve quick response to customer requirements. The key control factors for achieving this goal are quickly capturing operational status and production data and making rapid production decisions such that factory resources can be efficient allocated and the production process can be smoothly arranged [12]. Typical SFC system normally applied a paper-based information exchanging media to convert and transfer the production information. However, quick response may be prevented by short lead times, numerous product types and small order lot sizes, which can cause severe control and logistics problems in production systems [16].
Wireless sensor networking is an emerging technology for inexpensive, unattended monitoring of many industrial environments [7]. Their importance has been recognized by the recent delivery of the IEEE 802.15.4 standard for the physical and MAC layers and the forthcoming ZigBee standard for network and application layers [10]. A remote user can assign relative commands to the sensor network
* Corresponding author: carlu@nuu.edu.tw

for collecting data or tracking the specified object [11]. Thereby, the production status can be handled instantly via a WSN system.
This study presents a ZigBee-based sensor networking system embedded with a tag-tracking mechanism for establishing a real-time shop floor control system. Several tags possessed the RF functions are used to denote the work-in-process (WIP) at the production line. Based on the captured tag information, the controller can instantly gather the corresponding WIPs message. The proposed system can simplify the implementation of an intelligent shop-floor control system and enable the shop floor control more transparent and instant via the wireless networking infrastructure.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes production control problems and ZigBee sensor network applications. Section 3 briefly describes the ZigBee communication protocol. The detailed specifications of the proposed model are then described in Section 4. Section 5 introduces the implementation of the proposed model. Conclusions are finally drawn in Section 6.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
The core elements of the shop-floor control problem have been addressed extensively in recent decades. Melnyk and Ragate focused on the information system required to maintain and exchange information between the work order (WO) and the work center [14]. According to their researches, an effective control mechanism must

122 International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2 (2013)

include order review and release, detailed scheduling, data collection and monitoring, emergency control and feedback and order disposition. Its main functions were to prioritize WO, transfer messages regarding WIP and WO to the material requirement planning (MRP) layer, and supply real-time information concerning the work center to the capacity-planning layer. The key control element was the order review and release function to adjust the schedules and routes of the work order. The system proposed by Bauer emphasized the function of factory coordination [2]. The system consisted of two parts - production environment and production control. The former is involved in program scheduling, dispatching and monitoring. The latter controls the flow of information regarding material movement and production. Distributed shop floor control is likely to become a key component of 21st century manufacturing technology.
Although successfully implemented in a practical pilot system, the above shop-floor control systems were usually designed for the BTF system and based on the logic of MRP, which was based on a pushing production strategy. Successfully applying this control strategy relied greatly on the assumption of actual production parameters, including fixed lead times, optimal lot sizes and others. However, in an actual job-shop environment, lead times and optimal lot sizes are neither known nor fixed [9]. Small changes in parameters at the final assembly level often may induce large changes in earlier production levels. Coping with the uncertainty of production and operations, especially in a manufacturing environment involving many product types and small lot sizes, is difficult. Therefore, the traditional MRP production control system is unsuitable for the BTO/CTO system. To adequately address customer demands, the control strategy should be a pull-type strategy such as a JIT system [4]. The main control tools used in a traditional JIT system normally applied paper-base medium to transfer and exchange production information. Paper-based information systems imply passive and non real-time characteristics. Therefore, exchanging and updating production data in real-time is difficult [4, 6].
Morel et al. addressed that enterprise control system between business system, manufacturing execution system and shop-floor process-control system is essential for facilitating the deployment of plant-wide information control systems [15]. Wireless sensor networks are an emerging low-cost technology for unattended monitoring of many industrial environments [1]. Their importance has been clearly demonstrated by the recent adoption of the IEEE 802.15.4 standard for the physical and MAC layers and the forthcoming ZigBee standard for the network and application layers [10]. When networked together over a wireless medium, these devices can combine

their sensing functionality. Therefore, the system status can be sensed in real-time.
Recently, creating smart factory is the main goal of many advanced manufacturers. Zuehlke addressed that the resulting requirements for design, setup, and operation of a smart factory become crucial for success [19]. To meet these challenges the manufacturer should also make use of the smart technologies in factory control. The advances in wireless communication, such as Bluetooth, ZigBee and RFID systems, will allow us to avoid cables and quickly set up a smart control information system. However, building the control and monitoring applications of factory automation over the WSN needs the solid theory background in terms of control, information processing and communications [17]. To make them market success, the standardization plays key roles for cost reduce and interoperability. The ZigBee specification and commercial devices are designed to meet these requirements [18].
According to the survey of ITRI, Bluetooth, UWB (ultra-wideband), ZigBee, and Wi-Fi are four popular protocol standards for short-range wireless communications with low power consumption [13]. From an application point of view, Bluetooth is intended for a cordless mouse, keyboard, and hands-free headset, UWB is oriented to high-bandwidth multimedia links, ZigBee is designed for reliable wirelessly networked monitoring and control networks, while Wi-Fi is directed at computer-to-computer connections as an extension or substitution of cabled networks. Although ZigBee is usually adopted to create a wireless sensor network based on its scaleable characteristics (could be extended over 65000 nodes), these very characteristics bring into question ZigBee's ability to perform reliably in harsh environments. To verify the reliability and effectiveness of the ZigBee performance, Casey et al. designed and implemented a testbed for Zigbee performance measurements. Several kinds of testing environments, including indoor, outdoor, mobile, machine shop, were experimented [3]. The testbed is capable of measuring the minimum, maximum, and average received signal strength indicator (RSSI), bit error rate (BER), packet error rate (PER), packet loss rate (PLR), and the bit error locations. Results show that ZigBee has the potential capabilities to be used in all four tested environments.
3. BRIEF DESCRIPTIONS OF ZIGBEE AND 802.15.4
The ZigBee Alliance is an association of companies working to develop standards for reliable, cost-effective, low-power wireless networking [18]. ZigBee technology can be embedded in many

K. Y. Lu: Implementing a Real-Time Shop-Floor Control System using ZigBee-based Networking Systems 123

products and in many consumer, commercial, industrial and government applications worldwide. ZigBee builds upon the IEEE 802.15.4 standard, which defines the physical and MAC layers for low cost, low rate personal area networks. ZigBee defines the network layer specifications for star, tree and peer-to-peer network topologies and provides a framework for application programming in the application layer.
The physical layer supports three frequency bands: a 2.4 GHz band (with 16 channels), a 915 MHz band (with 10 channels), and an 868 MHz band (1 channel), all of which use the Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum access mode. The 2.4 GHz band employs Offset Quadrature Phase Shift Keying for modulation while the 868/915 MHz bands rely on Binary Phase Shift Keying. Besides radio on/off operation, the physical layer supports functionalities for channel selection, link quality estimation, energy detection measurement and clear channel assessment.
ZigBee standardizes the higher layers of the protocol stack. The network layer controls the organization and routing over a multihop network (built on top of the IEEE 802.15.4 functionalities) while the application layer provides a framework for distributed application development and communication. The application layer is comprised of the application object, the ZigBee device objects and the application sub layer. ZigBee device object provides services that enable application objects to discover each other and to organize into a distributed application. The application sub layer enables the data and security services to interface with the application object (AO) and ZigBee device object (ZDO).
To quickly handle the production line status, this study employed the ZigBee-based sensor networking system embedded with a tag-tracking mechanism to establish a real-time shop floor control system. When implement an application system, one ZDO is assigned to act as a host and connect to the control PC, several ZDOs are set up as the client. Each ZDO is assigned a unique ID. Some client ZDO act as the reader used to transfer system information. Some ZDOs act as the tag used to be identified the tracing object. While the shop-floor control information system (AP) is initiated, the customer order is loaded from MPS server and classified to several task orders. Each task order is bundled with a tag-type ZDO and is recorded at the AP database. The AP can issue the relative commands to the Zigbee network system or gather the production information via the host ZDO. Thereby, the AP can easily interchange the related information within the ZigBee network between AO and ZDO.
4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

4.1 The Sensor Network Figure 1 depicts the tracking networks
established by a ZigBee network system. The tracking networks include a master node connected with a server PC and a series of client nodes, which are classified into readers, controllers and tags. The main functions of each element are described as follows.  Sever: issues tracking commands to the networks
and collects responding information from client nodes.  Database: logs the system configuration data and system tracking data.  Master Node: bridges the Server and the sensor network system; collects original location-tracking data and reports to management software. Master node connects with the Server by a USB or a RS232 port.  Tracking Node (Tag Reader) : composes the backbone of data collecting network and functions as a reference node for tag tracking. The mesh network structure enables readers to self-organize into a network to cover variable environments.  Checking Node (Controller) : acts as a checking reader when the WIP logs on to a workstation. A client PC can connect with a checking node used to display the real-time message of the system and issue control commands to the network when a specified event occurred.  Data Gathering Node (data reader) : transfers the production data captured from the attached instrument.  Tag: acts as the target WIP to be located and reports the original location-tracking data.  Alarm device: functions as an emergency reporter used to notify the production controller.
4.2 System Devices and Elements The network system in this study employed the
Helicomm IP-Link series wireless modules, including master node, tag readers and tags [8]. The IP-Link modules operate on 2.4GHz, which is an ISM band meeting the IEEE802.15.4/ZigBee standard. The modules have several attractive features, such as rich interfaces (DIO, RS232/485 and USB port etc.), reliability, excellent anti-interference, large network volume and route levels and certification by ZCP (ZigBee Compliant Platform) and FCC. Additionally, this study adopted the Helicomm tag (Model No. 1220), which is an active type ZigBee node. The user can press the button mounted on the tag panel to send tag information. When the tag button was pressed, the IO state of its information is marked by high voltage. Based on the changing voltage message, the controller can instantly handle the locations of the target tags (WIPs). To provide system parameters and record the working data, MySQL and Access Database were embedded in the proposed system.

124 International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2 (2013)

4.3 Location Concept and Working Principle Figure 2 depicts a ZigBee tracking system in
action. Each tag reader (including the master node and the controller) has at least one neighboring peer reader within its radio coverage. Each reader can have different neighbors; the layout guarantees at least one path from any source to any destination. This network

forms the backbone of the ZigBee network. The server normally polls each reader in sequence to retrieve the collected tag information. An arbitrary number of readers along the path can relay the poll request and response between the server and a particular reader.

Database

Server
RS232 / USB
Master Node

To MPS Server
ZigBee Tags

Client Node
WIP

Data Gathering
Node
T a g
Work Station

Digital Meter

Tracking Node

Checking Node

RS232
Checking DIO Node

Work Station

Work Station

ZigBee Sensor Device
Controller (Client PC)
Alarm Device
Production Line

Figure 1: The architecture of wireless sensor network systems

flushed to accommodate more tag broadcast entries. Location software on the server can eventually perform many computational tasks to deduce tag locations, track their movement and monitor nearby environment conditions reported by the tags. Therefore, the positions of the related WIPs can be dictated by the sensor network system via the tag location. The production controller can instantly handle the production message via a checking node at any place and any time.

Figure 2: Tag tracking system
When the system was activated, a tag device periodically broadcasts information about itself. Nearby reader hearing its broadcast can record its observed RSSI/LQI (received signal strength indicator/link quality index) value based on this broadcast. The readers register such information in the TagNeighbor table. Table 1 depicts the packet frame of TagNeighbor. Location tracking software running on the server can intermittently issue a request command to retrieve the reader tag table. Once the tag information was read, the tag table is

4.4 Location Algorithm This study adopted the RSSI value
broadcasting from tracking tag to estimate target tag location. The available RSSI value ranges from ­100 to ­1. The closer the reader is to the tag, the stronger the RSSI value received by the reader (theoretically, -1 represents the strongest possible RSSI value). To estimate the position of one tag, the RSSI value from different readers is compared to determine which reader is closest to the tag. However, the RSSI value may fluctuate rapidly in any environment. This study applied three algorithms to filter out extreme values, including simple averaging algorithm, precise averaging algorithm, and single tracking algorithm.

K. Y. Lu: Implementing a Real-Time Shop-Floor Control System using ZigBee-based Networking Systems 125

Field Length

Table 1: The packet frame of TagNeighbor

Machine Address

LQI

RSSI

ADC & IO Value

2 Bytes

1 Byte 1 Byte

2 Bytes

4.4.1 Simple Averaging Algorithm Simple averaging algorithm performs the
estimation of per one tracking cycle and adopts the RSSI value as a weight for determining the location. The detailed calculation is described as follows. Step 1. Find the minimum RSSI value from the tracking records. Step 2. Normalize each RSSI value by Eq. 1.

RIi



RSSI Minimum RSSIRe aderi

(1)

Step 3 Apply Eq. 2 to calculate the location for each

tag.

n

 RI  XRe ader i

Re ader i

X Tag  i 1

n

 RI Re aderi

i 1

,

n

 RI  YRe aderi

Re ader i

YTag  i 1 n

 RSSI Re aderi

i 1

(2)

Where XTag and YTag denote the location of tracking tag, XReader and YReader denote the referencing location of responding Reader. Owing to the RSSI values
gotten from the readers may fluctuate rapidly in any
environment, this algorithm can only roughly
estimate the tag location but provides an effective and
rapid response based on one round reading. This
study suggests applying this algorithm for
automatically tracking.

4.4.2 Precise Averaging Algorithm Precise averaging algorithm repeatedly
performs the estimation until the pre-set tracking cycles being met. Then, the system adopts the normalized RSSI value as a weight to calculate the location. The detailed processing steps are described as follows. Step 1. Repeatedly perform the tracking cycle until the pre-set cycles being met. Step 2. Find the average RSSI value for each reader. Step 3. Find the minimum average RSSI value. Step 4. Normalize each RSSI value by Eq. 3. Step 5. Apply Eq. 4 to calculate the location for each tag.

RSSI Minimum  Average RI i
RSSIReaderi  Average

(3)

n

 RI  N  XRe aderi

Re aderi

Re aderi

X  i1 Tag n

 RI  NRe aderi

Re aderi

i 1

n

 RI  N YRe aderi

Re aderi

Re aderi

Y  i1 Tag n

 RI  NRe aderi

Re aderi

i 1

,

(4)

Where NReader represent the tracked times for the specified tag in Reader i. Owing to the RSSI value

gotten from the reader may fluctuate rapidly in any

environment, applying the weighted and normalized

method combined with several rounds reading can

reduce the fluctuated characteristics. Thereby, this

algorithm can estimate the tag location more

precisely. When the production controller need

precisely search the specific tag locations, this

algorithm can offer precise solution.

4.4.3 Single Tracking Algorithm Single tracking algorithm performs the
estimation from only one checking node. In production line, the WIP controller can press the tag button to report the tag status to the server. When a tag button was pressed, the IO field of the tag information is marked by high voltage. If the tag is pressed at first time, the tag status is denoted as Check-In to the corresponding checking node; otherwise, the tag status is denoted as Check-Out. To ensure that only one checking node can read the IO information of the pressed tag, the RF send power of checking node must be lower. In this case, the controller should be closer to the checking node to press the tag button. According to the tag IO information, the production controller can determine the location of the corresponding WIP. The production controller can trace the route and schedule of the corresponding WIP from the data log. Based on this function, the wireless and mobile control environment can be realized on the shop floor control system.

5. IMPLEMENTATION

5.1 Information System Infrastructure Figure 3 depicts the infrastructure of the
proposed information system. The system was composed of three main modules: system configuration module, work order assignment module and system tracking module. Detailed functions of these modules are described as follows.

126 International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2 (2013)

Auto WIP Tracking Information System Infrastructure

System Configuration
Module

Working Order Assignment Module

System Tracking Module

Networking Properties Setting
ZigBee Node Layout
System Control Commands Setting
Specified Events Setting

WIP Routes and Schedules Assignment
Tag and WIP Coupling

Manual Tracking
Automatic Tracking
Event Monitoring
Emergencies Alarming
Production Data Reporting

Exceptional Messages Interchanging
Figure 3: The information system infrastructure

5.1.1 System Configuration Module The system configuration module configures
and sets networking system properties and working parameters such as the followings.  Networking properties setting: this function is
used to configure the PC communication properties and the ZigBee node communication parameters such as Baud rate, parity, data bits, stop bits, RF power, Network ID, Node ID and data mode. All configuration data are stored into the system database. When the tracking system was initiated, the specified data are automatically loaded to the memory from the database for reestablishing the network system.  ZigBee node layout: this module is adopted to set up the location of the ZigBee node. This study offered a friendly GUI interface for system designers to program the node layout. The designer should prepare a BMP-type plant layout diagram. The proposed system will load the selected plant diagram to the GUI interface. The designer need only click the left mouse button to set up the ZigBee node or click the right mouse button to remove the set node from the GUI interface. The system can automatically record the ZigBee node position into the database. These position data will be extracted to compare the node location when the assigned node was triggered during system tracking. In tracking stage, the layout diagram acts as a tracking window to display tags information and corresponding WIPs information.  System control commands setting: commands such as system running, data collecting and status

reporting can be specified by users themselves based on the scenarios of shop-floor control. This study presented a pull-down type interface for users quickly setting the required commands. When the system is running, the server can automatically send the relative commands to the specified node at a predefined interval to track the selected tags.  Specified events setting: this study adopted an intelligent Event-Condition-Action (ECA) engine for automatically monitoring the system operation. The system administrator can predefine the respective events of system operation. The defined events must work with the corresponding commands mentioned above. Once a predefined event was detected, the system can issue corresponding control commands or respond with reserved messages to the target nodes. For example, if the WIP controller presses the tag button to logon a workstation, the system can automatically inspects the predefined routes information of the triggered tag. If the workstation is not on the list of predefined routes, the system will send an alarm message to the target node. This alarm message can notify the controller to prevent the wrong processes of the relative WIP. Based on this function, a real time control system can be realized.
5.1.2 Working Order Assignment Module This module is used to arrange routes and
schedules of the working orders downloaded from the MPS (Master Production Schedule) Server. Normally, the arrangement is similar to the traditional

K. Y. Lu: Implementing a Real-Time Shop-Floor Control System using ZigBee-based Networking Systems 127

production plan. However, this study applied ZigBee tags instead of conventional paper bills to control the moving WIPs. This study provided a coupling module to assign the numbered tags to the scheduled WIPs. The planner can assign one group of tags to one batch of WIPs or to a specific object (for instance, a shelf or a carton), according to available quantities of tags.
5.1.3 System Tracking Module This module is the kernel of the proposed
system. The main functions of this module are to track the activated tags in the system and report the status of system tracking. Additionally, the proposed module can also automatically respond to predefined events based on the predefined ECA rules. These sub-modules are briefly described below.  Manual tracking module: the production
controller can applies a client PC connected with a checking node to issue the tracking command. Using this module the production controller can easily handle the routes and schedules of the corresponding WIPs moving at the production line. The production controller can issue tracking commands with the following conditions.  All Tags/All Nodes: checks the locations of all tags (WIPs). Figure 4 shows the tracking interface. If a tag was positioned, the tag diagram would be marked with yellow.  Specified Node: searches for nearby WIPs.  Specified Job: checks the status of relative tags belonging to a specific job.  Specified Tag: finds the location of a specific WIP.  Automatic tracking module: this function can automatically track all activated tags during

system operations. The tracking results are recorded in the server database. The production controller can check the tag information via the data reporting module. This function is equivalent using manual tracking with all tags/all nodes.  Event monitoring module: this study applied a multi-thread design approach to program the information system. When the system was initiated, one thread can be allocated to monitor the predefined events programmed in Section 5.1.1. If the predefined events are triggered, the system issues the corresponding commands based on the ECA rule. For example, if a tag logs onto a workstation never defined in the routing lists, the system immediately issues a warning message to the control PC and fires the alarm device.  Production data reporting module: the production controller can adopt this module to check the production status via the client PC connected with a client node. Figure 5 shows an example of a tag tracking logs. Figure 6 demonstrates a graphic report for representing the quality information of a workstation.  Exceptional message interchanging module: this module is used to interchange non-routine message to the relative control nodes. The message can be interchanged by any point such as server to client, client to server, or client to client. If a message interchanging command is transferred in the network system, the server will parse the command and transfers the attached message to the destination node. However, the destination node must connect with a client PC so that the received message can be displayed on the screen.

Click left mouse button to show the location of
the selected Tag
Figure 4: The interface of tracking all tags

Figure 5: A data reporting example via tag tracking log

128 International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2 (2013)

Figure 6: QC Chart

 Exceptional message interchanging module: this module is used to interchange non-routine message to the relative control nodes. The message can be interchanged by any point such as server to client, client to server, or client to client. If a message interchanging command is transferred in the network system, the server will parse the command and transfers the attached message to the destination node. However, the destination node must connect with a client PC so that the received message can be displayed on the screen.
5.2 System Application The proposed system can be installed in any
PC embedded a ZigBee network system. If the PC connects with a master node, then the PC acts as a server; otherwise, the PC is only a client. The proposed system will self-inspect its coupling node No in system initiating. If the node No. is zero (denotes master node), the PC is started in a server role. The server can run the tracking system in automatic mode or manual mode. The client only runs the system in manual mode. When a server was started in automatic mode, the predefined command sets and event sets are automatically loaded into the system. In this case, the system acts an intelligent agent for tag tracking. Figure 7 demonstrates the application interface of the proposed system.

5.3 System Establishment To embed a tag tracking system into a
shop-floor control system, this study suggested the following procedures to establish the networking system.  Prepare the job order and the corresponding
working routes.  Estimate the number of containers based on the
selected job orders.  Allocate tags for each WIP container or each
WIP lot.  Set up the tag reader based on the WIP routes.  Set up the checking node based on the control
station.  Prepare the relative command and event sets.  Start the tracking system.  Test the simulated effects.  Modify the location of tag reader to refine the
tracking effects.  Run the tracking system normally.

K. Y. Lu: Implementing a Real-Time Shop-Floor Control System using ZigBee-based Networking Systems 129

Figure 7: The application interface of the proposed system

5.4 Case Study and Pilot Test 5.4.1 Scenarios Analysis
The proposed system has been successfully installed to a synchronous motor manufacturer. The manufacturer products have ten kinds of major model and exceed fifty minor models. Most of orders are low-volume and multi-products. Average due day does not exceed fifteen days. The limitations of short lead times, numerous product types and small order lot sizes has led to severe control and logistics problems in production systems.
Originally, the Kanban-based cards were employed to control the WIPs and were adopt to transfer the production information. While the WIPs were removed within the production line, the handler must inform the respective messages orally to the production controller, and then, the production controller should re-input the relative messages to the PC. This method is interacted passively and the production messages are missed easily. The controller cannot handle the status of the WIPs in real-time. Therefore, the schedules are difficultly controlled.
To reduce the rates of the out-of-schedule, the proposed approach was introduced to the manufacturer of the study case. The Zigbee-based tags were used to transfer the WIPs' messages instead of the conventional cards media. Owing to the tag can actively respond its embedded information during the

server polling a position command and the network systems can easily position the tag location using the location algorithms, the production controller can quickly handle the WIPs' status. Thereby, the production controller can re-arrange the production resources more efficiently. If a customer needs to inquire the relative order status, the controller can quickly trace the corresponding WIPs via the proposed positioning system such as the API shown in Fig. 4 and instantly gives a complete answer to the customer. This function can meet partially requirements of quick response.
Following 6 months of observation, the production manager was satisfied with the control results of the proposed approach. Daily production reports and the author's observations of the pilot system established that the proposed approach was superior to the conventional control strategy. The average out of schedule rate was reduced from 8.5% to 3% monthly (delayed task orders/ total task orders
× 100%). The average stocks on production line were
lowed from 32 cartons/line-day to 21.2 cartons/line-day. In addition, the QC reports could be finished in one working day based on the direct data transmitting technique. Conventionally, they required three working days.

130 International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2 (2013)

5.4.2 Comparisons of Conventional Shop-floor Control and the Proposed Approach
Table 2 briefly compared the proposed approach with the conventional JIT approach. The comparisons demonstrated that the proposed approach could significantly improve the performance of shop-floor control.
5.4.3 Discussions and Suggestions Generally, the RF signal is unstable in an
interfered working environment. This may sometimes affect the location results, especially when two

observer nodes are relatively close to each other. When RSSI readings by these two readers fluctuate mildly but are still close, the location estimation results in a phenomenon called "Jumping Tag". To avoid such a problem, the RSSI reading tag must be accumulated over a period before making a location decision. Additionally, the experimental results of this study showed that following locating rules could increase the sensitivity of the location estimation.

Table 2: Comparison of conventional JIT approach and the proposed approach

Comparison items

Conventional JIT

The proposed model

Transmitting media

Card, abandoned type

ZigBee Tag, reusable type

Data transmitting Data capturing

Intermittently, by manual Manually

Instantly, by network system Automatically

Data transaction
Current status responding Information transparency Information communication

Duplicate, low accuracy
Intermittently and manually Low One way, paper type

Automatic transaction within system, high accuracy
Instantly and automatically
High Two ways, electronic type

 Enlarge the gap between neighbor tag readers and larger RF sending power.
 Lower the RF sending power for checking node. In this study, we accomplished a testing program to verify the proposed approach. Twenty testing points were random selected. Five Tags arbitrary moved along the testing points. One hundred tracking records were obtained and the average errors were calculated (based on the difference of the physical locations and tracking records). The average errors were lower then 5%. The testing results showed that the proposed approach can employed to track the moving WIPs.
Owing to the limitation of ZigBee node buffer, one tag reader can only sense seventeen tags (by Helicomm Reader) at one time. If more than seventeen tags are near a reader, some tag information is neglected. To overcome this problem, this study suggested shutting down tag power if the tag has been logged on to a checking node. The production controller can still obtain the tag information from the database.
Additionally, the user should also be aware that the position estimated by the proposed algorithm could not limit the error to meters. However, if the controller only needs to know in which department or workstation the tag is located, the proposed model can offer a valuable reference.

6. CONCLUSION
Enterprise control system integration between business systems, manufacturing systems and shop-floor control systems remains a key issue for facilitating the deployment of plant-wide control systems. Wireless sensor networking is an emerging technology for inexpensive, unattended monitoring of many possible environments. By applying a ZigBee-based wireless networking technology, this study established a plant-wide monitoring system for the shop-floor control. ZigBee network system has advantages of low power consumption, low cost and zero running cost, clearly demonstrating that ZigBee is the most competitive scheme for short-range wireless location-tracking applications, especially when GPS is unavailable, such as inside buildings or in underground tunnels. The proposed system can ensure easy implementation of an electronic-base and real-time shop-floor control system.
REFERENCES
1. Baronti, P., Pillai, P., Chook, V. W. C., Chessa, S., Gotta, A. and Hu, Y. F., 2007, "Wireless sensor networks: A survey on the state of the art and the 802.15.4 and ZigBee standards,"

K. Y. Lu: Implementing a Real-Time Shop-Floor Control System using ZigBee-based Networking Systems 131

Computer Communications, Vol. 30, pp. 1655-1695. 2. Bauer, A., 1991, Shop floor control: From design to implementation, Champan and Hall, NY. 3. Casey, P. R., Tepe, K. E. and Kar, K., 2010, "Design and Implementation of a Testbed for IEEE 802.15.4 (Zigbee) Performance Measurements," EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, Vol. 2010, doi:10.1155/2010/103406. 4. Chen, R. S., Lu, K. Y. and Chang, C. C., 2003, "Application of the multi-agent approach in just-in-time production control system," International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 90-100. 5. Chen, R. S., Lu, K. Y., Yu, S. C., Tzeng, H. W. and Chang, C. C., 2003, "A case study in the design of BTO/CTO shop floor control system," Information and Management, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 25-37. 6. Chow, H. K. H., Choy, K. L. and Lee, W. B., 2007, "A dynamic logistics process knowledge-based system ­ An RFID multi-agent approach," Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol. 20, pp. 357-372. 7. Hac, A., 2003, Wireless Sensor Network Designs, John Wiley, New York. 8. http:// www.helicom.com. 9. Huq, Z. and Huq, F., 1994, "Embedding JIT in MRP: The case of job shop," Journal of Manufacturing Systems, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 153-164. 10. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2003, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2003: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for Low Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs)," IEEE Press, New York. 11. Jedermann, R., Behrens, C., Westphal, D. and Langa, W., 2006, "Applying autonomous sensor systems in logistics - Combining sensor networks, RFIDs and software agents," Sensors and Actuators A, Vol. 132, pp. 370-375. 12. Kulak, O. and Kahraman, C., 2005, "Multi-attribute comparison of advanced manufacturing system using fuzzy vs. crisp axiomatic design approach," International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 95, pp. 415-424. 13. Lee, J. S., Su, Y. W. and Shen, C. C., 2007, "A

Comparative Study of Wireless Protocols: Bluetooth, UWB, ZigBee, and Wi-Fi," The 33rd Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON), pp.46-51. 14. Melnyk, S. A. and Ragate, G. L., 1989, "Order review/ release: Research issue and perspectives," International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 27, pp. 1081-1096. 15. Morel, G., Valckenaers, P., Faure, J. M., Pereira, C. E. and Diedrich, C., 2007, "Manufacturing plant control challenges and issues Control," Engineering Practice, Vol. 15, No. 11, pp. 1321-1331. 16. Panella, M., Bertocchi, A., Bozzolan, V., Buceti, G., Centioli, C., Imparato, A., Torelli, C. and Vitale, V., 1999, "A commercial real-time manufacturing integration platform for the new control system on FTU," Fusion Engineering and Design, Vol. 43, pp. 377-382. 17. Zhuang, L.Q., Goh, K.M. and Zhang, J.B., 2007, "The Wireless Sensor Network for Factory Automation: Issues and Challenges," IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies in Industrial Automation (ETFA '07), pp. 141-148. 18. ZigBee Alliance., 2005, ZigBee Specifications version 1.0, April. 19. Zuehlke, D., 2008, "SmartFactory ­ from Vision to Reality in Factory Technologies," Proceedings of the 17th World Congress The International Federation of Automatic Control, Vol.17, pp.14101-14108.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Kun-Yung Lu is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering at National United University (NUU), Taiwan R.O.C. He received his Ph.D. degree in Information Management at ChiaoTung University in 2003. His current research and teaching interests are in the general area of Artificial Intelligence and Information Management. In particular, he is interested in the application of Wireless Networking System and Database Management System.
(Received June 2010, revised September 2010, accepted November 2010)

132 International Journal of Electronic Business Management, Vol. 11, No. 2 (2013)
 ZIGBEE 
 


ZigBee     
ZigBeeJIT *carlu@nuu.edu.tw

