New applications in digital picture processing-notably in handling geographic data and in computer-aided design-have prompted development of a variety ofpictorial data-base systems.
Pictorial Data-Base
Systems
Shi-Kuo Chang University of Illinois at Chicago Circle
Tosiyasu L. Kunil University of Tokyo

A pictorial data base is a collection of sharable pictorial data encoded in various formats. A pictorial database system, or PDBS, provides an integrated collection of pictorial data for easy access by a large of number of users. The PDBS is the core of a pictorial information system.
Until recently, little attention has been paid to the management of nonalphanumeric information such a digitized images,' which require large amounts of storage-even for pictures of average complexity36 The list of new applications in digital picture processing has
grown to include interactive computer-aided design,'7
geographic data processing,8 remote sensing of earth
resources?,9 0 regional economic and health data process-
ing, and cartographic and mapping applications. Efficient and economical storage, flexible retrieval, and the manipulation of a vast amount of pictorial information have become problems that require careful consideration.
Formats
Two common formats are used in representing pictorial information. Computer cartography, topography, and spatial analysis in geographic information systems
have traditionally used a vectorformat."",2
More and more data, however, are becoming available via new image capture devices that generate data in raster format. Examples are Landsat imagery and drum scanner output. Advanced technologies in computer graphics, such as video frame-buffer memories and im-

proved CRT resolution, have made feasible the increasing use of raster-scan displays as interactive graphics terminals 3-15
Algorithms and data structures for manipulating raster-formatted spatial data have also been explored. Recursive description and processing hierarchically structured pictorial data in a raster format has been proposed, and its implementation reported! The logical basis of raster-format processing has also been established.'6 These recent advances have led to the development of pictorial data-base systems capable of managing
pictorial data encoded in various formats. Design challenges
Chang, Reuss, and McCormick2 have defined two basic tasks that face designers of pictorial information systems. The first is the storage, retrieval, and processing of a large number of pictures; the second is the storage, retrieval, and processing of a very large picture or pictures of great complexity. Another consideration is the intended use of the system. Is it mainly for retrieval of pictures, or mainly for processing and manipulation of pictures? These considerations can have a profound effect on the design of a system.
Two central issues are common to all these design problems: (I) How does one provide a unified approach to retrieve and manipulate pictorial information? and (2) How does one utilize data structures to improve and develop algorithms for pictorial information retrieval and manipulation?

November 1981

0018-9162/81/1100 0013500.75 C~1981 IEEE

13

In the following sections, we will survey a variety of responses to these problems and issues.
Relational and hierarchical pictorial data bases
The three main models for a traditional alphanumeric data base are the relational,'7'18 the network, and the hierarchical.'9 The varying requirements of the pictorial data base have led to modifications and extensions of these traditional models; the relational and hierarchical models have attracted the most attention.
The relational model. The relational approach to pictorial data-base systems was first proposed in a 1974 paper3 that presented a relational data-base schema for describing complex pictures that have color and texture. It discussed the application of structure independence, modularity, associativity, and machine independence to describing complex pictures.
As an example of the relational data-base approach to pictorial data management, let us consider a geographic information system. These systems typically involve the collection of a great deal of data for analysis according to regional or geographic units. For example: the US Census Bureau collects innumerable descriptive statistics about population and housing by various political units; marketing companies collect data by zip codes, to deter-

MAP D-MAP

REGION-15

|2 3

FRAME

45 6 *

8 2 93110 15CTE

213145

CITIES ROADS

RIVERS

REGION-15 POT
NAME CITIESi ROADS RIVERS
CITIES
NAME X1 VXTY|2

ROADS
NAME I2X IY IXj Y

RIVERS
NAME X, Y,

PLOTTER RELNAME

PROGRAM

Figure 1. A pictorial relational data base and its materialization.

mine target areas for advertising campaigns; land-use planners require information on soil type for each parcel of land.
Storage of this type of data-attributes for each geographic unit-lends itself to the development of a relational data base. It allows the user to algebraically manipulate the data to answer complex questions and generate new information, which can be converted to pictures. Several papers20'2' have suggested using the relational data base as the underlying structure for a geographic information system with cartographic output. The structural power of a relational data base requires data aggregated by and associated with geographic units. An image divided into frames is shown at the left of Figure 1; the corresponding pictorial relations are shown on the right. In Chang, Lin, and Walser 12 the image is called a map; the pictorial relational data base is called the d-map. The process of converting a map into a d-map is called abstraction. The inverse, converting a d-map into a map, is called materialization.
Extensive results for integrated relational data-base design led to the conclusion that the traditional relational algebra is insufficient to manipulate tabular, graphical, and image data?2'23 The traditional algebra could not, for example, analyze spatial relationships among various picture objects. A set of picture operations, called picture algebra, was designed for storage, retrieval, manipulation, and transformation of spatial data?24
An integrated pictorial data-base management system was developed in the late 1970'sO25 23 It combines a relational data-base management system, Rain, with an image manipulation system. This enables the user to perform various pictorial information retrieval functions by zooming, panning, and using spatial relation analysis operations to manipulate the pictorial data base. This data base contains pictorial data in two forms, relational table and raster image. The user can specify his picture query in Grain language, which is imbedded in the Dimap-distributed image management and projection -system. A hierarchical collection of picture objects is organized so as to allow logical zooming, which is used to navigate into the detailed description or to browse through picture objects that are similar to the picture of interest. This concept can be applied to the storage and manipulation of a large number of pictures, some of which can be very complex. A query language was developed for pictorial information retrieval. It uses a pictorial data-base skeleton as its knowledge model.
In another approach to pictorial query translation, Chang and Fu25'26 describe a relational data-base system that is interfaced with an image understanding system. They also describe an algorithm to convert a relational graph into a relational data base and the design of a flexible query language for pictorial information retrieval based upon Zloof's query-by-example approach?27 They emphasize the importance of spatial operations as the clue to retrieving images from a pictorial data base.
Pictorial data includes a typical case in which the number of different relations is almost equal to the number of data instances? Here the relational model originally proposed by Codd'7"'8 is not convenient,

14 COMPUTER

because it assumes that each relation has a reasonably large number of instances. Codd28 subsequently proposed extended relational schemas to handle this case, but it would be better to generalize the relational model. This would allow the relations themselves to be accommodated in a data base as data-base instances. The designers of the Elf system at the University of Tokyo seek to accomplish this by allowing certain attributes to be names of other relations?9
Hierarchical systems. Sties, Sanyal, and Leist30 describe an image information system in which an object is described in terms of shape, symbolic description, and relations with other objects. Objects in a picture can be retrieved in terms of symbolic description and/or object relationships.
Early in 1977, McKeown and Reddy3' presented Midas, a multisensor image data-base system capable of image understanding and knowledge acquisition. They chose a hierarchical data structure, primarily in order to store symbolic representation in the pictorial data-base system. Images are stored hierarchically with different resolutions, in what is called an iconic data structure.32 Partial image description is stored in a relational data base, which is used for performance evaluation.
Klinger et al.3335 have proposed a hierarchical data structure scheme for storing images by regular decomposition of pictures into adjacent quadrants with differing resolutions. Each quandrant corresponds to a node in a tree, called the Quad-tree. This structure is in keeping with the theories on data-base design.19'36 It facilitates accessibility to pictorial data in storage, flexibility in pictorial data storage, pictorial data independence, redundancy reduction in multilevel structured data, and efficient analysis of small portions of a picture. A further generalization of Quad-tree structure to iconic/symbolic tree structure has been proposed?32
The relational approach can be combined with the hierarchical approach ?2 Figure 2 illustrates such a combination. Each node in the hierarchical structure on the left corresponds to an image that can be materialized from a collection of pictorial relations of a corresponding node on the right. Logical zooming can be used to retrieve information from this hierarchical structure.
Data base supported computer graphics and image processing

concept of data-base systems is applicable to the design of graphics and image-processing software and data structures.
Computer graphics and spatial data structures. Graphics technology is obviously concerned with spatial data structures?"3'339 40 A general spatial data structure that can be used to represent spatial objects has been proposed by several authors.4 6,41
Shapiro and Haralick4' offer a structure consisting of a set of N-ary relations, often including an attribute-value table. The entries in the table and the objects on which the relations are defined can also be spatial data structures. This approach emphasizes the description of spatial structure. Retrieval processing is through the attributes of spatial data. A semantic table set up for spatial relation analysis speeds the retrieval process. Data-base updating is somewhat complicated.
Infads. Graphics software packages often pay little or no attention to data-base management facilities.42-46 Recently, the rapid development in data-base technology has been a major factor in the development of graphic
systems! Most papers in this area describe the techniques
used to build pictures.4 42,47-49 Kunii and his group,4 working at the University of
Tokyo and at the Fujitsu Corporation, designed Infads, an interactive design system with hierarchical picturebuilding tools and a relational data base as integral parts. It can handle both lines (including vectors and free curves) and areas with color and texture; texture can be nested. In Infads, an attribute of a relation can have a graphical interpretation. Thus, an attribute can contain a
D-MAP SET
REGION115 POTr
EEl EBCITIES ROADS RIVERS PLOTTER I

There are differences and similarities between computer graphics and image processing.7 While computer graphics generally involves synthesis techniques, image processing is mostly analysis. Still, the hardware for computer graphics, and even for alphanumeric displays, more and more frequently employs raster-scan techniques; such displays are suitable for image processing. Likewise, image processing equipment can be used to draw vectors and write texts, as well as output images. This has spurred considerable interest in combining interactive graphics and image processing techniques on the same display screen. This, in turn, has prompted an
examination of their software and data structuresO8 The

CITY A DISTRICTS
L 1.J.--F-..1 PCLIOTTYT-EAR
E /FLCITY A POPULATION

CITY-B DISTTRICTS

P1

CITY-B LOTTER

I

CITY-B POPUS ILATION

Figure 2. A hierarchical structure of pictorial relational data bases.

November 1981

15

Figure 3. Examples of weaving textures created by Infads.

call to another relation. The called relationi can be another- standaird tahulation relationi in the data base or a procedural relation (i.e., a noriital progralm).'
T-his abstracting of- pictorial data is verv cottsettienit in implement ing the pictorial data base. For examilple, it makcs storage and update of the free curvcs and teLturCs utcil simpler than directly storing the values of all thc pictLure points in terms ot' all their coordiniates and colors. Each t'ree cur- c C is implemilenited as a pair of points P that charactcrizes the cursc and a call to an interpolatiott procedure / I hu,s C' (Pf). Likewise, each texture Tis impeticierited as a pair of texture clements L' and a set ot
call> to thicir distribution procedures D. lhus, T (L,D). Updating the representation of the f'ree cur\e f'rom polygon approximilation to B-spline is just a matter ot replacitig the call to an interpolation proccdure. Direct storage of' the data values without the data abstraction

Ic cl ohvioulsk cauLe> a major- data-basc update of all data valie> of t he curve. The same benel'it is gained fromil texture storaLc at tlte abstract level. When changing the sseatillg textuLre otf cloth), fol example, from satill to tsill, the abstraction cani save thtc spatial value update, requiring only the ssitch of' the procedure call f'rom the satin distribution procedure 10 tthe twill distributioni procedure. Computer graphics-displayed wNeaving textures created atid abstractly stored in thc pictorial data base by I n'ads arc shos intll Figure 3.
Relational data base interface to graphics has also becn considered by Joycc and OlicrF' and by lorie, Casa-
juania, and Becerril.9' PBS'. William and Gridding4" at IBM designed a
picture-building systemn, or PBS, based ott ideas similar to those ot' KuInii et al. '4 They found that tuples in a rela-

1 6 COMPUTER

tion must sometimes be ordered if pictorial data is to be Ibis. Ibis, the image-based information system devel-

stored in relations or tables. They suggest that duplicate oped at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was built upon

tuples be allowed. Such features are in violation of the an existing image-processing system called Vicar, for

classical relational data-base concept, but are needed for video image communication and retrieval system.'5'57 It

PBS. can handle both raster-formatted Landsat images and

vector-formatted census data, which it stores in two

Ocean data base and Divisrs. McCleary'4 of the US separate data bases.

Naval Ocean System Center has described an interactive

computer program developed to display data for large IMDS. Lien and Schroff58 have designed IQ, an in-

ocean areas in color on a raster-driven CRT.Typical user teractive query language, as a user interface for an image

commands allow the user to select geographic areas and data-base management system. Through this query

types of annotation.

language, the user can define a false color function, a

Myers52 has described a general-purpose system that pixel value transformation, an overlay function, a simple

generates, stores, retrieves, processes, and displays physical zoom function, and a window. The user

raster-formatted images. It is called the digital video in- manipulates the images (in raster format) through

formation storage and retrieval system, or Divisrs. generic functions. He can direct images to display devices

Developed by the Computer Graphics Research Group for visual and qualitative analysis. Image histograms and

of Ohio State University, this system is designed to han- pixel value distributions can be computed to obtain

dle static and dynamic images from multiple sources, as quantitative analysis of images.

well as system-synthesized images. Run-length encoding

is used to improve storage efficiency. The emphasis of this design is on hardware capability; no data-base con-

Pictorial data-base applications

cept is built in.

Geographic data processing has traditionally required

Dids. The domestic information display system, or Dids,53 is an interactive, menu-driven software system. It produces single and bivariate chloropeth maps of

pictorial data-base support. Both vector-formatted and (to a lesser extent) raster-formatted geographic data-base systems have been developed.

socioeconomic data by county at the national and state Nagy and Wagle,8 in their comprehensive review of

level and by census tract for standard metropolitan geographic data processing, discuss geographic

statistical areas. Selected subareas of national and input/output mechanisms, range of applications, coor-

metropolitan maps can be dynamically enlarged to show dinate systems and base maps, data organizations, and

greater detail. Histogram displays are available to show processing. They identify cellular and linked data

statistical as well as geographic structures. This mini- organizations as the most important.

computer-based system utilizes the image manipulation Cellular organization (matrix representation) is more

capabilities of a raster-scan color graphics terminal suitable to software developments such as geographic

designed at NASA/Goddard as part of the Atmospheric operations related to location and distance measure. Its

and Oceanographic Information Processing System.54 disadvantage is its waste of computer storage for spatial-

ly spare data.

A-Idas. Uno and Matsuka55 proposed a system called Linked organization (line-segment representation) has

A-Idas-advanced integrated designer's activity support the advantage of storage efficiency. Its drawbacks are the

system. It provides a relational data base to store complexity of its software for editing and updating

geographic, geometric, and engineering data.This system geographic data and the increased difficulty of applying

also provides a graphic management facility that set algebraic and distance-related operations.

manipulates not only pictures drawn with lines, but those

drawn as areas. Areas are represented by colors, cross- Vector-formatted geographic data base. Vector format

hatching, or texture and scenery.

is only one of the formats of spatial data. It represents

The system controls both vector and raster graphic dis- areas by their boundaries and has the advantage of a very play devices. When pictures are drawn with lines, these compact representation.

devices are supported through a device-independent user Many cartographic data systems8""159 use the topo-

interface. The graphic management facility is extended logical data structure for computer handling of spatial

to include image manipulation functions. Functions for data. In this approach, a polygon or region is encoded by

image-data manipulation include background process- boundary chains or line segments. Each chain consists of

ing, image deformation, domain extraction, and image beginning and ending nodes, which are indicated by their

composition.

coordinates60'6' The Canadian geographic information

system of the Canadian Ministry of Environment, the

Image processing. Researchers have begun to investi-

dual independent map encoding of the US Census Bureau, Polyvrt of the Harvard Laboratory for Com-

gate various problems in data management for image
processing and picture description>556 The query-by-
pictorial-example approach is discussed by Chang and

puter Graphics and Spatial Analysis, and the Polygon Information Overlay System of San Diego county all use the topological data structure. The disadvantage of this

Fu in the second paper of this issue, pp. 23-33. Other im- structure is that it requires time-consuming algorithms to

portant results are summarized below.

handle polygon overlay and polygon merge.5",62

November 1981

17

CGIS. The Canadian geographic information system59 63 is one of the earlier successful geographic information systems. It includes a command language, an assessment language, overlaying of maps, interactive graphics, and input from a drum scanner or an x-y digitizer. It represents regions as polygons. Two types of files are used: the image data set, which contains the line segments that define the polygons; and the descriptive data set, which contains the user-assigned identifiers, centroids, and area. Each polygon in the image data set points to its representation in the descriptive data set, and vice versa.
Dime. In the dual independent map encoding files64 the basic element is a line segment. Each segment is defined by two end nodes plus pointers to the polygons on the right and left of the segment. In this system, the data structure has been kept simple, at the expense of extra processing time for certain operations that require searching the data base. These operations include determining which line segments share a node and finding the whole outline of a polygon. The structure can adequately represent topological spatial relations between regions.
Gads. The geodata analysis and display system, under development at IBM since 1973, is an ambitious attempt to design a geographic information system that provides flexible and interactive problem-solving capabilities. This system has data-base management facilities and supports data-base integrity, as well as various user views of the pictorial data base.

the transition from grid-formatted to vector-formatted representation is merely the last step in a process of successive refinements defined by the nesting of squares of different sizes. Weber states that his locational data structure is well suited to automated cartography. He does not, however, provide defined operations to go through this data structure, and he does not explain how to store those vector-formatted and grid-formatted representations.
Other relational geographic information systems. The Geo-Quel system developed at the University of California-Berkeley uses a relational data-base approach to manipulate geographic data I67 A basic entity in GeoQuel is a map, which is a collection of points, lines, line groups, and zones (collections of polygons). A map is stored in the Ingres data-base system as a relation. A
query language, Quel, which is similar to Sequel,'9 is used
to interrogate the data base. The system can handle simple queries about a map and can display information from a map. Except for Codd's conventional relational calculus, picture operators are defined to handle retrieval and manipulation of different picture entities: regional
features, linear features, and point features. Modeleski68
has proposed additional relational attributes to permit topological manipulation of geographic files. He emphasizes the storage of chain files in relational structure, topological access, and the use of topological information to enhance Geo-Quel's recognition of the graphtheoretic properties of a geographic file stored in relational form.

Geograf. Geograf is a system proposed by Peucher and Chrisman" to handle both planar and surface data. The system includes the concepts of
(1) the least-common geographic unit (an area that cannot be partitioned further);
(2) the chain group (a set of chains forming a boundary of two regional units of a given polygon class); and
(3) the attribute cross-reference table. To handle surface data, the system has a two-part data base that includes both a triangle structure and a set of points that lie along lines of high information content. The triangle structure is a low-level structure, comparable to the image data set of the CGIS. The points in the second set consist of peaks, pits, and passes. This set, in a way, corresponds to the descriptive data set of CGIS.
Raster- and grid-formatted geographic data bases These approaches to formatting the representation of spatial data are mainly used in image processing and raster
graphics display.

Computer-aided design applications
Computer-aided design is emerging as an important pictorial data-base application area. Systematic research
on CAD data-base systems has just begun69-72
A joint effort carried out in Tokyo and Texas by
Harada,69'70 Buchmann,71 and Kunii72 has resulted in
systems with user-friendly interactive computer graphics at the front end. Their CAD data-base system, named Sid-system for interactive design-formalizes design specifications and design processes through recu'rsively structured graphs and the relational data model. Their systems also support design evolution from one level of detail to another. The very basic logic for data-basesupported design evolution is called the design engine?3 Applications include computer-aided design of software and electronic circuits and engineering drawing evolu-
tion.
Similar activities are beginning at many research laboratories and universities in the US.

Weber's approach. The advantages and drawbacks of a grid-formatted data structure are almost perfectly complementary to those of the vector-formatted structure (i.e., the topological or polygonal data structures). Therefore, Weber65 has proposed a locational and gridformatted data structure. The operations working on this data structure are hierarchically defined such that

Conclusions
It is generally recognized that a flexible pictorial database system should support pictorial data encoded in various formats and provide automatic conversion among variously formatted pictorial data. Standardiza-

18 COMPUTER

tion will undoubtedly facilitate the design of future systems with versatile format-conversion capabilities.
It is also generally recognized that pictorial data at various levels of abstraction must be stored in a pictorial data-base system. The distinction between logical picture and physical picture in a pictorial data base is similar to the distinction between logical record and physical record in a traditional alphanumeric data base&2
The formatting problem is a main issue in physical pictorial data-base management; it can probably be solved through increased standardization. This is also the case for logical pictorial data-base management. The main issue here is whether a commonly acceptable framework for defining logical pictures can be established.
The relational model and the hierarchical model each has its appeal. Whether they can be combined into a commonly acceptable framework remains to be seen.
For the relational pictorial data-base system, the classical relational model must be generalized to accommodate pictorial data. Various proposed extensions have been reported, and future research could lead to the development of more sophisticated pictorial relational models. Their usefulness must be proven in practical applications.
Flexible user interface, as well as system interface, must also be developed32'26 This will facilitate the incorporation of a pictorial data-base system into a pictorial information system for general problem solving, image processing, and image understanding. The rapid ad-

vances in office information systems will cause intelligent user interfaces for multi-media data-base systems to receive even more attention in research and development.
Finally, new computer architecture for pictorial information systems will necessarily have an impact not only on image processing techniques, but also on techniques for the storage and retrieval of pictoriz4l data. U
Acknowledgment
This research was supported in part by NSF grant ECS-8005953.
References
1. L. S. Davis and T. L. Kunii, "Pattern Databases," in Data Base Design Techniques, ed. by S. B. Yao and T. L. Kunii, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981.
2. S. K. Chang, J. Reuss, and B. H. McCormick, "Design Considerations of a Pictorial Data-Base System," Intl J. Policy Analysis and Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 2, Jan. 1978, pp. 49-70.
3. T. L. Kunii, S. Weyl, and J. M. Tenebaum, "A Relational Data-Base Schema for Describing Complex Pictures with Color and Texture," Proc. Second Int'l Joint Conf. Pattern Recognition, Aug. 1974, pp. 310-316.
4. T. L. Kunii, T. Amano, H. Arisawa, and S. Okada, "An Interactive Fashion-Design System: INFADS," Com-

THE COMPUTER

M --

NEWS
You've needed to know more. Now you can read concise reviews of Industrial and Public Domain software packages for Computer Graphics.
Subscribe to the software user's newsletter
Fifty Dollars for Six Issues per Year 5857 South Gessner, Ste. 401, Houston, Texas 77036
Reader Service Number 3

puting & Graphics, Vol. 1, No. 4, 1980, pp. 297-302. 5. Proc. IEEE Computer Soc. Workshop Picture Data
Description and Management, Apr. 1977. 6. H. Tamura, S. Mori, and T. Shimado, "Data Management
for Manipulating Partitioned Large Images," Int'l J. Policy Analysis and Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 2, Jan. 1978, pp. 143-170. 7. T. L. Kunii and H. S. Kunii, "Architecture of a Virtual Graphic Database System for Interactive CAD," Computer-Aided Design, Vol. 11, No. 3, May 1979, pp. 132-135. 8. G. Nagy and S. Wagle, "Geographic Data Processing," Computing Surveys, Vol. 11, No. 1, June 1979, pp. 139-181. 9. T. L. Cox, H. C. Hitchcock, and S. G. Weber, "Processing Remotely Sensed Data for Dimensional Analysis," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Electronics, Vol. GE-14, No. 1, Jan. 1976, pp. 55-59.
10. K. S. Fu, "Pattern Recognition in Remote Sensing of the Earth Resources," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Electronics, Vol. GE-14, No. 1, Jan. 1976, pp.10-17.
11. T. K. Peucher and N. Chrisman, "Cartographic Data Structures," Am. Cartographer, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1975, pp. 55-69.
12. D. J. Peuquet, "Raster Data Handling in Geographical Information Systems," Proc. First Int'l Advanced Study Symp. Topological Data Structures for Geographical Information Systems, 1978.
13. S. Kawai, E. Goto, M. Sassa, K. Itano, T. Ida, and M. Yasumura, "A Graphic System with Halftone and Area Coloring Capabilities," Proc. First USA-Japan Computer Conf., AFIPS and IPSJ, 1972, pp. 320-324.
14. L. E. McCleary, "Techniques for the Display of Ocean Data on a Raster-Driven Color CRT," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 10, No. 2, Fall 1976, pp. 98-101.
15. A. L. Zobrist, "Elements of an Image-Based Information," Proc. IEEE Workshop Picture Data Description and Management, Apr. 1977, pp. 55-63.
16. S. Kawai, "A Graph Theoretic Formulation of Bit Pattern Algorithms for Graphics," Computer Graphics and Image Processing, Vol. 7, No. 1, Feb. 1978, pp. 84-104.
17. E. F. Codd, "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Bank," Comm. ACM, Vol. 13, No. 6, June 1970, pp. 377-387.
18. E. F. Codd, "Relational Completeness of Data Base Sublanguage," in Data Base Systems, Courant Computer Science Symposia, Vol. 6, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., May 1971.
19. C. J. Date, An Introduction to Database Systems, second ed., Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1977.
20. P. A. Alsberg, "The Management of a Large Data Base in IRIS," J. Chemical Information and Computer Sci., Vol. 15, No. 1, Feb. 1975.
21. J. McIntosh, "The Interactive Digitizing of Polygons," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 13, No. 3, Aug. 1978, pp. 167-172.
22. S. K. Chang, B. S. Lin, and R. Walser, "A Generalized Zooming Technique for Pictorial Database Systems," AFIPS Conf. Proc., 1979 NCC, Vol. 48, pp. 147-156.
23. S. K. Chang, J. Reuss, and B. H. McCormick, "An Integrated Relational Database System for Pictures," Proc. IEEE Workshop Picture Data Description and Management, 1977, pp. 49-60.
24. B. S. Lin and S. K. Chang, "Picture Algebra for Interface
with Pictorial Database Interface," Proc. Compsac 79, 1979, pp. 525-530.

25. N. S. Chang and K. S. Fu, "A Relational Database System for Images," Report TR-EE 79-28, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Purdue University, May 1979.

26. N. S. Chang and K. S. Fu, "Query-by-Pictorial-Example,"
Proc. Compsac 79, 1979, pp. 325-330.
27. M. M. Zloof, "Query-by-Example," AFIPS Conf. Proc., 1975 NCC, Vol. 44, pp. 431-438.

28. E. F. Codd, "Extending the Database Relational Model to Capture More Meaning," ACM Trans. Database Systems,
Vol. 4, No. 4, 1979, pp. 397-434.

29. K. Yamaguchi, N. Ohbo, T. L. Kunii, H. Kitagawa, and M. Harada, "ELF: Extended Relational Model for Large, Flexible Picture Databases," Proc. Workshop Picture Data Description and Management, Aug. 1980, pp. 95-100.

30. M. Sties, B. Sanyal, and K. Leist, "Organization of Object Data for an Image Information System," Proc. Third Int'l Joint Conf. Pattern Recognition, 1976, pp. 863-869.

31. D. M. McKeown, Jr., and D. J. Reddy, "A Hierarchical Symbolic Representation for Image Database," Proc. IEEE Workshop Picture Data Description and Management, Apr. 1977, pp. 40-44.

32. S. L. Tanimoto, "An Iconic/Symbolic Data Structuring Scheme," in Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, Academic Press, 1976, pp. 1975.

33. A. Klinger, M. L. Rhode, and V. T. To, "Accessing Image Data," Int'l J. Policy Analysis and Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 2, Jan. 1978, pp. 171-189.

34. A. Klinger, "Analysis, Storage, and Retrieval of Elevation Data with Application to Improve Penetration," Technical Report, US Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Topological Laboratories, Fort Belvoir, Va., Mar. 1979.

35. J. Omolayole and A. Klinger, A Hierarchical Data Structure Scheme for Storing Pictures, Technical Report, Computer Science Dept., UCLA, 1979.

36. J. Martin, Computer Data Base Organization, PrenticeHall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1975.

37. R. William, ''Image Processing and Computer Graphics," Computer Graphics and Image Processing 10, 1979, pp. 183-193.

38. Data Structures, Computer Graphics, and Pattern Recognition, A. Klinger, K. S. Fu, and T. L. Kunii, eds., Academic Press, New York, 1977.

39. L. G. Shapiro, "Data Structures for Picture Processing: A Survey," Computer Graphics and Image Processing 11, 1979, pp. 162-184.

40.

R. F. Sproull and W. M. Newman, "The Design of GrayScale Graphics Software," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 10, No. 2,

Fall 1976, pp. 18-20.

41. L. G. Shapiro and R. M. Haralick, "A General Spatial Data Structure," Proc. IEEE Computer Soc. Conf. Pattern Recognition and Image Processing, May 1978, pp. 238-249.

42. D. Weller and R. Williams, "Graphics and Relational Database Support for Problem Solving," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 10, No. 2, Fall 1977, pp. 183-189.

43. D. Weller and F. Palermo, Database Requirements for Graphics, IBM Research Report RJ2435, San Jcse, California, Jan. 1979.

44.

R. William, "A Survey of Data Graphics Systems," Computing

Structures Surveys,

for Vol.

Computer 3, No. 1,

Mar. 1971, pp. 1-21.

45.

A. Van Dam, "Data and Storage Structures Graphics, ACM Siggraph, Vol. 9, No.

for 2,

Interactive 1975, pp.

237-267.

46. M. D. Abrams, "Data Structures for Computer

20 COMPUTER

Graphics," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 9, No. 2, 1975, pp. 268-286. 47. H. G. Meder and E. P. Palermo, "Database Support and Interactive Graphics," Proc. Very Large Data Bases, Oct. 1977, pp. 396-402. 48. F. Palermo and D. Weller, Picture Building System, IBM Research Report RJ2436, San Jose, California, Jan. 1979.
49. R. Williams and G. M. Giddings, "A Picture Building
System," IEEE Trans. Software Eng., Vol. SE-2, No. 1, Mar. 1976, pp. 62-66.
.50. J. D. Joyce and N. N. Oliver, "REGIS-A Relational In-
formation System with Graphics and Statistics," AFIPS Conf. Proc., 1976 NCC, Vol. 45, pp. 839-844. 51. R. A. Lorie, R. Casajuana, and J. L. Becerril, GSYSR: A Relational Database Interfacefor Graphics, IBM Research Report RJ25 11, San Jose, California, Apr. 1979. 52. A. J. Myers, "A Digital Video Information Storage and Retrieval System," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 10, No. 1, Fall 1976, pp. 45-50. 53. J. Dalton, J. Billingsley, J. Quann, and P. Bracken, "Interactive Color Map Displays of Domestic Information," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 13, No. 2, Aug. 1979. 54. P. A. Bracken, J. T. Dalton, J. J. Quann, and J. B. Billingsley, "AOIPS-An Interactive Image Processing System," AFIPS Conf. Proc., 1978 NCC, Vol. 47, pp. 159-171. 55. S. Uno and H. Matsuka, "A General-Purpose Graphic System for Computer Aided Design," ACM Siggraph, Vol. 13, No. 2, 1979, pp. 25-32. 56. Data Base Computer Systems Session, Proc. Third Int'l Joint Conf. Pattern Recognition, Nov. 1976. 57. N. A. Bryant and A. L. Zobrist, "IBIS: A Geographic Information System Based on Image Processing and Image Raster Type," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Electronics, Vol. GE-15, No. 3, July 1977, pp. 156-163. 58. Y. E. Lien and R. Schroff, "An Interactive Query Language for an Image Data Base," Int'l J. Policy Analysis and Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 2, Jan. 1978, pp. 91 -1 1. 59. R. Tomlinson, Computer Handling of Geographical Data, UNESCO Press, New York, 1976. 60. H. Freeman and R. Shapiro, "Determining the Encasing Rectangle for an Arbitrary Curve," Comm. ACM, Vol. 18, No. 7, July 1975, pp. 409-413. 61. P. M. Wood, "Interactive Display of Polygon Data," Proc. First Int'l Advanced Study Symp. Topological Data Structures for Geographic Information Systems, 1978. 62. E. G. Johnson and A. Rosenfeld, "Geometrical Operations on a Digital Picture," in Picture Processing and Psychopictorics, ed. by A. Rosenfeld, Academic Press, New York, 1970, pp. 38-55. 63. R. Tomlinson, "A Geographic Information System for Regional Planning," in Land Evaluation, ed. by Stewart, McMillan, Sydney, 1968. 64. D. Cook and W. Maxfield, "The Development of a Geographic Base File and Its Uses for Mapping," Proc. URISA, Sept. 1967. 65. W. Weber, "Three Types of Map Data Structures, Their ANDs and NOTs, and a Possible OR," Proc. First Int'l Advanced Study Symp. Topological Data Structures for Geographic Information System, 1978.
66. R. R. Berman and M. Stonebraker, "GEO-QUEL: A System for the Manipulation and Display of Geographic Data," Proc. Very Large Data Bases, 1977, pp. 186-191.
67. A. Go, M. Stonebraker, and C. William, An Approach to Implementing a Geo-Data System, Memo No. ERL-M529,

Electronics Research Laboratory, College of Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, 1975. 68. M. Modeleski, Topology for INGRES: An Approach to Enhanced Graph Property Recognition by Geo-Quel, Association of Bay Area Governments, Berkeley, Calif., 1977. 69. M. Harada, T. L. Kunii, and M. Saito, "RGT: The Recursive Graph Theory as a Theoretical Basis of a System Design Tool-With an Application to Medical Information System Design," Proc. Int'l Symp. Medical Information Systems, Oct. 1978, pp. 503-507. 70. M. Harada and T. L. Kunii, "A Design Process Formalization," Proc. Compsac 79, Nov. 1979, pp. 367-373. 71. A. P. Buchmann and T. L. Kunii, "Evolutionary Drawing Formalization in an Engineering Database Environment," Proc. Compsac 79, Nov. 1979, pp. 732-737. 72. T. L. Kunii and M. Harada, "SID: A System for Interactive Design," AFIPS Conf. Proc., 1980 NCC, May 1980, pp. 33-40. 73. T. L. Kunii and K. Yamaguchi, "Formalism for Design Evolution," Proc. Compsac 80, Oct. 1980, pp. 306-312.
Additional reading
Chang, S. K., and K. S. Fu, Pictorial Information Systems, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980. Computing Surveys special issue on data-base management systems, Vol. 8, No. 1, Mar. 1976. Fu, K. S., Syntactic Methods in Pattern Recognition, Academic Press, New York, 1974. Rosenfeld, A., and A. C. Kak, Digital Picture Processing, Academic Press, New York, 1976. Shapiro, L. G., and R. M. Haralick, A Spatial Data Structure, Technical Report #CS 79005-R, Dept. of Computer Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Aug. 1979. Tang, G. Y., A Management System for the Integrated Database of Pictures and Alphanumerical Data, Technical Report, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, 1980, p. 45. Tanimoto, S. L., and T. Pavlidis, "A Hierarchical Data Structure for Picture Processing," Computer Graphics and Image Processing 4, Academic Press, New York, 1975, pp. 104-119. Ward, M., and Y. T. Chien, "A Pictorial Database Management System Which Uses Histogram Classification as a Similarity Measure," Proc. Compsac 79, 1979, pp. 153-156.
Shi-Kuo Chang is the guest editor of this issue. His biography appears on p. 11.
Tosiyasu L. Kunii is a professor in the Information Science Department of the
University of Tokyo. He has been active in computer graphics, data-base systems,
and software engineering since 1967. He is
on the IFIP Data-Base Working Group and the IFIP System Modeling Working
Group. He organized the Technical Committee on Software Engineering in the Information Processing Society of Japan and chaired it from 1976 to 1981. Since 1979, he has been the chairman of the IBM Japan Computer Science Symposiums Organizing Committee. He has authored and edited a dozen computer science books and published 60 refereed academic/technical papers in computer science and applications. Kunii received BSc, MSc, and DSc degrees in chemistry in
1962, 1964, aAd 1967, respectively, all from the University of
Tokyo.

November 1981

21

