Multi-agent systems and role games: 

collective learning processes for ecosystem management 

 
F. Bousquet, Cirad-Irri, Bangkok, Thailand, francois.bousquet@cirad.fr 
O. Barreteau, Cemagref, Montpellier, France 
P. d’Aquino, Cirad, Saint-Louis, Sénégal 
M. Etienne, Inra, Avignon, France 
S. Boissau, Wageningen University, The Netherlands 
S. Aubert, Cirad, Saint-Denis de la Réunion, France 
C. Le Page, Cirad, Montpellier France 
D. Babin, Cirad, Montpellier, France 
J.C. Castella, IRD-IRRI, Hanoi, Vietnam 
 
1. Introduction 
For  several  years  now,  a  field  of  research  on  simulating  societies  in  interaction  with  their 
environment has been taking shape. Methods such as multi-agent systems (MAS) can be used 
to  create  virtual  societies.  The  effects  of  the  interactions  among  different  behaviours  on 
resource dynamics, and the associated feed-backs are tested. Modellers use such methods to 
create  computer  representations  of  dynamics  observed  in  the  field.  The  multi-agent 
methodology,  which  results  from  research  on  complexity,  corresponds  to  the  evolution  of 
concepts  described  by  Attonaty  (Attonaty  et  al.  1990):  after  using  operational  research 
methods  to  identify  the  solution  to  a  given  problem,  researchers  turned  to  ways  of 
representing  a  stakeholder’s  strategic  and  tactical  decision  through  expert  systems  or 
simulation  methods.  Then,  multi-agent  systems  provided  a  new  tool  for  the  modelling  of 
complexity and particularly modelling of collective decisions. Our team1 has been using MAS 
in several ways.  

1.  First  we  developed  abstract  models,  also  called  artificial  societies,    that  helps  to 
understand  the  generic  properties  of  interacting  processes.  We  mainly  developed 
models  on  non-merchant  exchanges  and  reputation  (Rouchier  and  Bousquet  1998; 
Rouchier  et  al.  2001;  Thébaud  and  Locatelli  2001),    models  on  economic  tools  for 
regulation  of  economic  exchanges  (Antona  et  al.  1998),  and  models  on  spatial 
dynamics (Bousquet and Gautier 1998; Bonnefoy et al. 2000). 

2.  We also developed applied models to understand the dynamics of renewable resources 
and their management  (Barreteau and Bousquet 2000; Bousquet et al. 2001; Rouchier 
et al. 2001). 

3.  We  worked  on  a  MAS  platform.  A  modelling  tool  was  developed  (CORMAS, 

common-pool resources and multi-agent systems) (Bousquet et al. 1998) .  

                                                           
1 The various experiments described in this article, and some others still under way, originated from a process set 
in motion at CIRAD (Centre de cooperation internationale en recherche agronomique pour le développement) in 
1994 by its “Green (Renewable resource management, Environment) research group. 

4.  We  also  worked  on  defining  the  possible  uses  for  these  tools  within  the  very  wide 
framework of collective decision support. The objective of the paper is to propose a 
method and present our first results. 

 The use of such models is a key issue. As any kind of representation, these models can be 
used to increase the scientific  knowledge on the ecological and social processes at stake. The 
question of the organization of this learning process remains.  There is nowadays a debate 
between two opposed paradigm (Checkland 1981; Funtowicz and Ravetz 1994; Roling 1996). 
Schematically, on the one hand the researchers following a positivist paradigm try to discover 
the objective truth. This knowledge is used to develop and deliver new technologies or new 
management  rules.  On  the  other  hand  the  constructivist  paradigm  assumes  that  reality  is 
socially  constructed.  “Based  on  their  intentions  and  experience,  people  construct  reality 
creatively  with  their  language,  labour  and  technology. Different groups do this in different 
ways, even if they live in the same environment. The same people change their reality during 
the course of time in order to adjust to changing circumstances”(Roling 1996).  Although the 
scientific knowledge on biophysical and social processes is to be used, this second paradigm 
is the epistemological context of our research.  The collective creation of a common artificial 
world    serves  to  create  a  shared  representation  and  to  simulate  various  scenarios  with  the 
stakeholders, among which the scientists. We have been interested in the use of MAS models 
in  collective  decision  making  process  for  ecosystem  management.  Unlike  the  conventional 
decision-making  process  derived  from  Simon’s  model  (Simon  1947),  which  defines  a 
decision as a rational calculation on the part of a more or less fully informed decision-maker, 
the  decision-making  process  is  seen  in  our  studies  as  a  series  of  interactions  between 
stakeholders with varying degrees of importance and influence. Within this framework, any 
decision,  particularly  if  collective,  is  context-dependent  and  should  be  seen  as  a  stage  at  a 
given time t in the continuous process of management of a complex issue. The emphasis has 
shifted from the static to the dynamic, and from an individual to a collective level. Several 
approaches for collective ecosystem management exist.  
Adaptive management (Holling 1978; Walters and Hilborn 1978) is an approach based on the 
recognition that  ecosystem management requires flexible, diverse and redundant regulation, 
monitoring  that  leads  to  corrective  responses,  and  experimental  probing  of  the  continually 
changing reality. Although adaptive management is an approach conceived by ecologists they 
recognize  that  adaptive  capacity  is  dependent  on  knowledge  —  its  generation  and  free 
interchange — and the ability to recognize points of intervention and to construct a bank of 
options for resource management. Thus the interaction with stakeholders for generation and 
interchange of knowledge is required. This social process of generation and free interchange 
of knowledge may lead to new interactions and thus to the issue of devolution of power. Co-
management    (Berkes  1997;  Borrini-Feyerabend  et  al.  2000)  is  defined  as  a  partnership  in 
which  local  communities,  resource  users  and  governmental  agencies,  non  governmental 
organizations and other stakeholders share, as appropriate to each  context, the authority and 
responsibility for the management of a specific territory or a set of resources.   Patrimonial 
mediation is presented as one of the approaches contributing to understanding and practicing 
co-management (Borrini-Feyerabend et al. 2000).  Patrimonial is defined by Ollagnon  (1991) 
as “all the material and non material elements that work together to maintain and develop the 
identity  and  autonomy  of  their  holder  in  time  and  space  through  adaptation  in  a  changing 
environment”. A patrimonial representation of a territory, an area or a set of resources links 
past,  present  and  future  generations  of  managers,  focuses  on  the  owner’s  obligations  more 
than on the owner’s rights, and promotes a common vision of sustainability that reconciles the 
needs and opinions of various actors. Mediation is a negotiating method that brings in a third, 
neutral party in order to obtain agreement among the parties involved in the process; it is an 

approach  in  which  each  party’s  view  on  the  issue  or  problem  are  translated  to  the  others 
(Babin  and  Bertrand  1998).  In  our  research  we  try  to  develop  an  approach  for  the  use  of 
simulation models, in particular Multi-Agent Systems, within the context of such patrimonial 
mediation  experiments.  We  named  it  companion  modelling  because  it  is  used  as  a  tool  in 
mediation process –the social dimension of the companion-  and it co-evolves with the social 
process  –temporal  and  adaptive  dimension.  This  method  uses  role  games  to  acquire 
knowledge,  build  a  model,  validate  the  model  and  use  it  in  decision-making  process.  We 
started  different  applications  to  assess  if  models  and  role  games  can  be  successfully  used 
together to support collective decision making, and explore different uses of these coupled 
tools. 
Six tests of the approach have been conducted, and illustrate the article. The goals of the 
different experiences are: 
•  To simulate the variability of irrigation schemes in Senegal. A model was created and a 
role game designed to present the model to the various stakeholders. The model and game 
were used in villages and at a training centre. 

•  To  help  with  mediation  in  biodiversity  management  processes  in  Madagascar.  A 
spatialized resource dynamics model was programmed for use as a dynamic support for 
negotiations between stakeholders. 

•  To predict the impact of silvo-pastoral development within the framework of forest fire 
prevention  plans  in  region  in  French  Mediterranean.  A  model  of  negotiations  between 
foresters  and  livestock  farmers  was  developed  in  relation  to  Mediterranean  forest 
management. It was then simplified into a role game with a view to producing a typology 
of land management strategies and negotiating methods, and to providing a teaching aid in 
order to develop management capacities or explain the constraints relating to each user. 
This was subsequently used for training purposes. 

•  To simulate scenarios of adaptation to the spontaneous establishment of conifers in natural 
ecosystems  with  high  patrimonial  values  in  South  of  France.  A  model  of  herders 
individual  practices,  actions  of  conservationists  has  been  developed  and  led  to  a  role 
game. During the role game, the model serves to simulate the dynamics of the resource.  

•  To test hypotheses about the differentiation of households at the end of cooperative period 
in region in North-Vietnam. After the development of a model a role game is proposed 
(without computer use) to validate the simulation model and gather information from the 
stakeholders. 

•  To facilitate discussions between populations and their local representatives in the case of 
the decentralized allocation of land in the Senegal River delta. During village workshops, 
role  games  were  used  to  help  stakeholders  develop  a  common  model,  which  was  then 
computerized in the form of a MAS. The model was then used to simulate the scenarios 
imagined by the stakeholders, and triggered a group discussion of the possible evolution 
of the interactions between users and resources, and of the steps that could be taken. 

Our article begins by covering the principles on which this approach was based. We then go 
on to present the various tests that demonstrated that it is possible to use models in this way, 
and  indeed  that  this  is  effective  in  supervising  a  collective  decision-making  process.  The 
different  uses  of  role  games  and  models  in  the  mediation  process  for  co-management  of 
resources is then analysed.   In some cases, the model simulates the dynamics of a resource 
and provides a dynamic basis for a negotiating game, while in others the scientists’ model has 
been  converted  into  a  role  game  with  a  view  to  validating  or  more  clearly  explaining 

stakeholder  strategies.  In  the  remainder  of  cases,  role  games  are  used  for  the  collective 
construction of a MAS, which is implemented and then presented for discussion.  Lastly, we 
draw some conclusions from this work and suggest certain prospects, particularly the issues of 
institutional arrangement and assessment of the process. 
2 Models, games and stakeholders : a review 
The general theme of this literature review is the participatory development and use of models 
and  role  games  for  collective  decision-making  in  natural  resource  management  (NRM). 
Except for a few papers presented in the next paragraph, most of the literature does not fit 
completely with the theme.  There are contributions on the joint use of models and role games 
for  education  and  management  of  resources,  then  contributions  on  the  use  of  models  and 
experiments  to  explore  theories  on  human  behaviour  and  contributions  on  participatory 
modelling to support problem solving. 
2.1 Models and role games for education and management 
Our approach stems to a quite large extent in the works with role games and policy exercises 
and negotiation (Mermet 1993). These works have shown the suitability of such kinds of tools 
to support negotiated processes such as local development choices (Piveteau, 1995) as well as 
for  educational  purposes  (Burton,  1994).  They  have  also  pointed  out  some  difficulties 
encountered in their enforcement: 
•  design slow and heavy, 
•  comparison of results difficult, 
•  control of parameters difficult as well. 
Therefore they plea for the coupling with some modelling tools aiming at alleviating these 
difficulties. The several potential parallels between role games and MAS underlined in Table 
1, led us to try such joint use with MAS and Role Games. 
 

Role playing games 
players 
roles 
game set 
game session 
turn 
Table 1: correspondence table between role games and MAS 

Multi-agent systems 
agents 
rules 
interface 
simulation 
time step 

 
There  are  few  experiences  of  coupled  use  of  models  and  role  games  for  ecosystem 
management.  Meadows  and  Meadows  (1993)    have  developed  a  famous  role  game  named 
Fishbanks. This game is used for educational purposes. Human players play the role of fish 
companies who share a common resource (two fishbanks). A simulation model simulates the 
dynamics of the resource on which the human players harvest. The objective of the Fishbanks 
game is to illustrate and teach the Tragedy of the Commons principle: free access to resources 
leads to biological depletion and consequently to economic over-exploitation. This game is 
played by students or resource managers. Another game associated with models is Burton’s 
game (Burton 1994). It aims at simulating the management of an irrigated system. These role 
games and simulation models have been used for educational purposes. These two models use 
the system dynamics approach. The knowledge is represented as stocks and flows. Chapman 

compares gaming simulations (role games for us) and systems analysis (Chapman 1987). He 
states  that  systems  analysis  can  only  cover  a  very  small  part  of  the  complexity  games  can 
handle.  “Analytical  statements  are  limited  to  a  few  components  and  on  the  unwarranted 
assumption of a trend towards some equilibrium point (…). Systems are reflexive, acting on 
component  decision  makers,  who  through  their  own  actions  and  perceptions  act  on  the 
system. These perceptions are by definition partial and imperfect. The only simulations which 
can include self transformation and reflexive thought are (…) gaming simulations”. We think 
that, in 1987, Chapman was unaware of new modelling methodologies like MAS, which can 
capture the cited dimensions. The assumption is that MAS and role games share a common 
representation of complexity and thus can enrich each other. 
Recently,  following  the  experiments  presented  in  this  paper,  experiments  started  in 
Switzerland  within the context of the Firma (Freshwater Integrated Resource Management 
with Agent) project. The objective is to mediate coordination between stakeholders sharing 
water resources. 
2.2 Games and models to explore theory 
Modelling  interaction  between  players  is  the  objective  of  game  theory.  Many  models  have 
been developed, particularly in the field of resource sharing. Reference papers in the field of 
Common Pool Resources (CPR) management such as (Hardin 1968; Ostrom 1990; Stevenson 
1991;  Ostrom  et  al.  1994)  are  based  on  a  game  theory  approach.  We  do  not  cover  that 
literature because the stakeholders’ strategies are modelled but they are not involved in the 
process. Some experiences in the field of experimental economics are more relevant for our 
review.  Economists  involved  in  institutional  and  policy  research  link  game  theory, 
institutional  analysis  and  laboratory  experiments  (Ostrom  et  al.  1994).  They  also  stem  in 
works dealing with strategy and geopolitics (Schelling, 1961). In this field players are usually 
students but recent experiments have involved concerned actors such as farmers in Colombia 
(Cardenas, 2001). Players are usually interested in game results with a salary depending on 
their results in the game. The objective is to observe whether human beings behave as various 
economic theories predict. There are several experiments (Mason and Philipps 1997; Sell and 
Son 1997; Gintis 2000) and discussion on experimental economics and NRM.  One important 
conclusion of these experiences is that game theory is relevant to model situations where no 
communication  between  the  players  occur.  From  his  experiments  with  the  stakeholders 
Cardenas (2001) concludes that a better understanding of the composition of groups is needed 
if we are to understand and forecast the efficiency of cooperation. Other works based on the 
comparison of experiments with managers or students have also pointed out that expertise of 
players in the field of the game raise their strategic behaviour (Cooper et al., 1999). 
Agent-based modelling has been used linked with experimental economics. Duffy (2001) uses 
an  artificial  agent-based  computational  approach  to  understand  and  design  laboratory 
environments. Similarly, Deadman (2000) describes the development of a series of intelligent 
agent  simulations  based  on  data  from  previously  documented  common  pool  resource 
experiments. These simulations are employed to examine the effects of different institutional 
configurations and individual behavioural characteristics. The results are compared to those 
experienced with human players. For instance in non communication simulations as well as in 
experiments  high performance leads to over investment in the CPR and the resultant drop in 
performance  causes  a  reduction  in  group  wide  investment  in  the  CPR.  As  in  the  lab 
experiments, communication in these simulations does frequently result in the discovery of 
the optimal level of investment.  
In  these  experiments  there  is  a  linkage  between  human  players  involved  in  experiments  of 
social  interactions  and  agent-based  models.  The  models  may  be  useful  devices  for  both 

understanding and designing human subject experiments.  But the objective of the experiment 
is  to  test  very  theoretical  rules  given  by  economic  theory  and  not  to  simulate  a  real-life 
situation.  Consequently,  there  is  no  participation  of  the  players  in  the  design  of  either  the 
model  or  the  experiments.  The  objective  of  experimental  economics,  being  coupled  with 
MAS or not,  is to assess theoretical models when decision centres are more than one and 
psychological patterns activated. We use role games both to elicit knowledge and to test it, in 
a  less  controlled  way.  These  two  steps,  collectively achieved, aim at  setting up an agreed 
representation of reality rather than assessing a theoretical pre-given one. 
 
2.3 Participatory modelling to support problem-solving 
The  relationships  between  simulation  models  and  collective  decision-making  in  natural 
resource management occupies a large part of the literature on adaptive management (Holling 
1978;  Walters  and  Hilborn  1978).  Scientists    from  different  disciplines  and  some  decision 
makers  develop  a  model  and  explore  various  scenarios.    However,    the  model  is  often  a 
biophysical  one  and  there  are  very  few  papers  relating    participation  of  stakeholders  from 
different organization levels in one of the modelling steps (from conceptualisation to scenario 
simulation).  We  present  here  the  ecosystem  simulation  models  presented  by  Costanza 
(Costanza  and  Ruth  1998),  two  references  on  Integrated  Assessment  models,  and  some 
Australian experiments (see Abel and co-authors paper in this volume).  

•  Costanza and Ruth advocate the use of a three-step modelling process, with all steps 
involving the stakeholders. They use graphical STELLA programming, which allows 
the  simple  design  of  non-linear  dynamic  systems.  The  first  step  is  to  develop  high 
generality,  low-resolution  scoping  and  a  consensus-building  model  involving  broad 
representation  of  stakeholder  groups  affected  by  the  problem.  The  second  stage 
research models are more detailed and realistic attempts to replicate the dynamics of 
the  system.  It  is  still  critical  to  maintain  stakeholder involvement and interaction at 
this  stage  of  model  progress.  The  third  stage  of  management  models  is  focused  on 
producing  scenarios  and  management  options  based  on  the  earlier  scoping  and 
research models. They tested this methodology for Louisiana coastal wetlands, South 
African Fynbos ecosystems and the Patuxent River watershed. The main lesson drawn 
from  these  experiments  is  that  participation  of  various  stakeholders  has  to  be 
maintained through the various steps of the modelling activities. The second lesson is : 
these are long processes lasting for several years. 

•  Nick Abel (Abel 1999) presents the main principles of his approach on rangelands as 
complex adaptive systems. To understand these systems one needs to elicit the mental 
models of the stakeholder. A mutual exploration of these mental models in a collective 
learning  process  is  necessary  for  better  management.  In  the  project  stakeholders 
(Aboriginal  peoples,  pastoralists,  conservationists,  the  minerals  and  the  tourism 
industries) developed scenarios of sustainable patterns of land use, and policy makers 
designed the institutional changes needed to support change towards those scenarios. 
Researchers  organised  the  stakeholder  and  policy  processes,  and  estimated  the 
sustainability  of  land  use  scenarios  using  conventional  models.  In  this  approach  
stakeholders guide the questions and at the same time gain understanding of processes 
such as climatic changes or regional economic growth, with which they may not be 
familiar. Their scenarios were developed using a process and software developed by  
Cocks and Ive. The authors (Cockes and Ive 1996) developed a spatial information-
based mediation support process for resolving resource use disputes, SIRO-MED. It is 
supported by the software WinLUPIS (Land Use Planning and Information System). It 
uses  rules  proposed  by  stakeholders  to  allocate  land  uses  to  mapping  units. 

Stakeholders enter negotiations in which their land uses compete for land with the land 
uses of other stakeholders. Mutual adjustment of land allocations generally leads to an 
efficient and politically acceptable mix of land uses. WinLUPIS offers a range of tools 
to  aid  this  process.  Win  LUPIS    is  not  a  simulation  model,  but  it  is  an  interesting 
experiment reflecting a shift in the use of decision support systems. The authors state 
that  there  is  public  demand  for  the  procedural  legitimacy  the  process  offers.  The 
policy process was also participatory, practitioners working with researchers to build 
influence diagrams as a basis for understanding and then proposing changes to laws, 
policies and organisations.  

•  Van Asselt (Van Asselt et al. 2001) and co-authors have identified two examples of 
participatory modelling in the field of Integrated Assessment. The RAINS (Regional 
air pollution information and simulation) model started as an IIASA project (IIASA 
1999),  and  was  subsequently  used  as  the  worldwide standard model, with scientific 
experts,  policy  makers  participating  in  the  model  design.  QUEST  (Quite  Useful 
Ecosystem Scenario Tool) is a computer game (Rothman et al. 2001). The approach 
focuses on learning through scenario construction rather than on scenario results. Both 
these models were not participatory models when their design started. 

Little has been done in participatory modelling but lessons can be learned from participatory 
GIS research in NRM. This is a more advanced field of research. Today manuals are available 
for extension agents in rural areas (CBFMO 1998). Participatory GIS have demonstrated the 
ability of many illiterate people to use high-tech tools. The survey papers are those by:  

•  Fox (Fox 1998), who presents the principle of community mapping. Several responses 
followed  his  article.  The  use  of  spatial  technology  for  community  mapping  and 
counter  mapping  is  very  useful  but  some  weaknesses  appear.  These  constructive 
criticisms have to be borne in mind when using simulation models. Among others, the 
design  of  maps  destroys  the  fluid  and  flexible  nature  of  boundaries,  the  increased 
potential for surveillance and violation of privacy, and ownership of information.  

•  Abbott (Abbot et al. 1998) reviews participatory GIS. The same kind of constructive 
criticisms are made. GIS, like many technological innovations, both marginalizes and 
empowers  people  and  communities  simultaneously.  Issues  of  confidentiality  and 
privacy might be exacerbated : there are risks to local knowledge becoming recorded 
and centralised. 

One  interesting  experiment,  among  others,  is  the  work  of  Gonzalez  (Gonzalez  2000)  on 
watershed  management  in  the  Ifugaos  (Philippines).  The  author  presents  GIS  as  tools  for 
interactive learning, to facilitate what Giddens (1987) calls double hermeneutics in science, 
that  is  learning  from  one  another.  Furthermore,  these  experiments  of  participatory  GIS  are 
interesting  because  one  can  find  experiences  for  scaling  up  the  results  obtained  at  the 
community level. 
3. Companion Modelling 
One  of  the  classic  uses  of  simulation  is  for  prediction,  but  this  is  not  the  option  we  have 
chosen. The very long term cannot be predicted in the economic and social field, though it is 
partially decidable. This is the hypothesis underlying the "patrimonial approach" (Montgolfier 
and  Natali  1987;  Ollagnon  1989).  "Because  the  very  long  term  is  beyond  the  scope  of 
prediction, if we wish to take it into account in the analysis of environmental problems, we 
must  give  ourselves  very  long-term  reference  points  or  objectives  to  guide  the  possible  or 
impossible pathways of development. The long-term approach must inevitably be based on a 
scenario"  (Weber  and  Bailly  1993).  Because  the  rules  result  from  the  interaction  between 

stakeholders,  they  are  legitimised  in  the  eyes  of  all  stakeholders  and  they  incorporate 
particular perceptions. It is on the basis of a shared conception of how the present situation 
should  evolve  that  stakeholders  are  able  to  "decide"  on  very  long-term  objectives.  On  that 
basis  the scenarios that enable them to be reached can be discussed. The entire mediation 
approach presupposes the establishment of an initial situation, in which the stakeholders are 
clearly  informed  of  the  issues  that  divide  them  and  of  their  common  dependence  upon  a 
solution  to  the  problem  at  the  origin  of  the  mediation  process.  The  challenge  of  the 
initialisation  phase  is  to  enable  stakeholders  to  express  their  perceptions  of  the  present 
situation and of its evolution. When a "map of perceptions", all equally legitimate and equally 
subjective,  has  been  established  and  discussed,  the  stakeholders  are  asked  to  discuss  the 
acceptability of prolonging existing tendencies.  
How  can  simulations  be  involved  in  this  process,  ie  how  can  they  help  stakeholders  to 
govern?  The  various  stages  of  the  patrimonial  approach  were  given  by  Weber  (1998)  and 
presented  by  Borrini-Feyerabend  (2000).  Below  we  present  the  different  stages  when  a 
simulation model is used: 
•  Construction of an artificial world. The first stage, involving one or more researchers, is to 
gather information on the system under study. We suggest that fieldwork and modelling be 
performed in unison. The task is to identify the different stakeholders and perceptions and 
to use multi-agent systems for modelling. Faced with a highly complex world, multi-agent 
systems provide a means to identify the most acceptable form of simplification by focusing 
questions on problems of representations the agents have on their bio-physical and social 
environment,  communication  and  exchanges  between  the  agents  and  control  of  the 
interactions. Simulation raises questions in the field that provide new data for the model.  

•  The second stage is a feed back stage that could also be referred to as validation of the 
cognitive model. The aim is to test the model proposed for the decision-making process. It 
involves  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  representations  and  interaction  processes  between 
agents. Indeed, it is difficult to explain what has been "put into the machine". On the other 
hand, it is possible to put a stakeholder in the situation of the agent who is in the machine, 
with  the  hypotheses  of  representation,  communication  and  control  that  constitute  the 
model. To perform this operation, we propose to use the role game methodology tested by 
the authors mentioned above. The artificial world is evaluated by plunging the stakeholders 
into it, i.e., by creating a world similar to the model. These stakeholders may be actively 
involved in the management system as users of the resource (farmers), regulators of this 
management system (managers or administrators) or observers of the system (researchers). 
Does the artificial world inhabited by these stakeholders resemble the real world? The aim 
is to validate a simulator in the same way as, for example, a flight simulator. A good flight 
simulator incorporates the same components of the decision-making process as in reality, 
rather  than  simply  reproducing  an  actual  flight.  This  stage  may  be  included  in  the 
initialisation phase of the patrimonial approach as it provides a means to establish a map of 
the  various  types  of  stakeholder,  the  different perceptions and interactions, and to make 
them into shared knowledge.  

The third phase is the simulation phase. Simulation shows how the dynamics of the system 
arises out of interactions between stakeholders with different weights and representations. We 
can divide this phase into two sub-phases. Initially, the simulation can be performed in the 
form  of  role  play,  which  enables  stakeholders  to  validate  the  fact  that  it  is  indeed  in  the 
interactions  between  different  representations  that  the  motor  driving  the  dynamics  of  the 
system is to be found. This first sub-phase also brings to light the different scenarios that are 
worth testing. Then, once this phase has been completed, the multi-agent model can be used 

to make simulations based on different scenarios. Simulations, both "in ludo" and "in silico", 
are  also  involved  in  another  phase  of  the  patrimonial  approach  in  which,  after  long-term 
objectives have been defined, the various scenarios liable to lead to these objectives are tested 
and their results discussed. 
4 "SHADOC2" 
The  first  operation  was  conducted  under  Olivier Barreteau’s PhD thesis on the viability of 
irrigation schemes in Senegal. The initial objective was to explore the issue whether viability 
of these systems were in relation with the co-ordination modes among farmers within them. 
For that we had to design a virtual irrigated system on which to conduct experiments based on 
scenarios  dealing  with  collective  rules,  individual  behavioural  patterns  and  environmental 
parameters. This work could not be done on real systems for ethical and practical reasons.  
The  focus    on  coordination  methods  and  the  viability  of  irrigated  systems  led  us  to  use  a 
multi-agent system in building the model. The desire to concentrate on the processes involved 
in the coordination methods rather than on the specific case of each type of irrigation scheme 
led us to build a virtual irrigated system typical of the central Senegal River valley, but which 
did not represent any particular scheme. It was not until later that we converted the model into 
a role game and presented it to stakeholders. 
4.1 The model 
The  model  developed  is  an  experimental  aid  for  use  in  studies  of  real  systems,  which 
overcomes the constraints of size, duration, parameter checking and potential negative effects 
on  those  parameters.  In  particular,  it  can  be  used  to  simulate  the  evolution  of  the  system 
represented,  according  to  different  hypotheses  concerning  initial  collective  and  individual 
rules (Barreteau and Bousquet 2000). The MAS produced, SHADOC (figure 1), is based on a 
representation of an archetypal irrigated system in the central Senegal River valley. Computer 
agents represent mainly elements of the scheme (plots, watercourses, main canal and pumping 
station) in relation with a society (farmers, credit access and water allocation groups). Social 
agents have rules and partial representation of the system, containing notably representation 
of friendship links. The processes represented deals with circulation of water and credit and 
with interactions about their allocation and access to them. After sensitivity tests, the model 
obtained  was  deemed  appropriate  for  research  purposes,  and  capable  of  discriminating 
between scenarios according to their viability, which in this case was defined as the life span 
of the irrigated system without external intervention. 

                                                           
2 Simulateur Hydro-Agricole Décrivant les modes d’Organisation et de Coordination 

 
Figure 1: Interface of the model. The main window holds a view of the archetypal irrigated 
system  with  12  plots,  each  belonging  to  one  farmer,  distributed  among  two  watercourses. 
Colors  (here  levels  of  grey)  represent  cultivating  stage,  numbers  indicate  water  level  and 
symbols are linked to random events occurring at each time step, of obligations to stay outside 
the plot. On the left different buttons are available to entail user specifying scenarios “live”. 
 
However,  it  is  not  necessarily  easy  for  stakeholders  outside  the  model  creation  process  to 
grasp  its  logic.  Even  if  they  are  familiar  with  information  technology  or  with  the  area 
represented, the model is still somewhat of a “black box”. We therefore had to find a way of 
opening the box in order to show farmers the work that had been done. Three purposes laid 
beyond that need of opening the black blox: telling interviewed people what had been done 
with  collected  information,  validating  partially  the  model  and  testing  its  potential  as  a 
negotiation support tool (Barreteau at al., 2001). 
 
4.2 The role game 
The game is played with 10 to 15 players, and comprises three categories of trilingual cards 
(French, Pular, Wolof) describing possible behaviours for each player: the aim of planting for 
the first category (figure 2), social status for the second, and the farmer’s propensity to repay 
loans for the third. 
 

 

Figure 2:  the set of cards from which each player draws a card at random. The left one gives 
the role of a farmer interested in production for self sufficiency and income, the center one is 

for self sufficiency strategy and the right one for land tenure strategy 

 
Each player draws a card at random from each category, which describes his behaviour during 
the game. The players are in a place representing the village. In another place representing the 
irrigation scheme, a structure corresponding to the number of players is drawn on a board, 
with the name of the player to whom the plot is attributed, while the amount of water and the 
choices made at the time of planting are taken into account when calculating yields (figure 2). 
The game is played over a half-day, in three stages: presentation of the game and the roles, the 
game itself, and discussion of the game. Each season is sub-divided, in both the game and the 
model, into three phases that occur in strict succession: obtaining credit, irrigation operations, 
at the end of which potential yields are calculated, and evaluation, after which players may 
change cards if they wish. This role game was initially tested in the villages on which the 
thesis was based, and a year later, was presented to farmer associations and technical staff at a 
workshop  organized  in  Senegal.  The  workshop  lasted  three  days:  on  day  one,  the  players 
discovered the role game, enabling them to complete one or two seasons. Day two was given 
over to a long game over five or six seasons, so as to observe the long-term effects of the 
decisions made, while the last day was spent on computer simulations. 

 

Figure  3:  Blackboard  featuring  the  irrigated  scheme  with  plots,  name  of  players  and  water 
level  during  a  game  session  in  the  Senegal  river  Valley,  here  at  the  very  beginning  of  a 
simulated  cropping  season.  The  participants  are  in  discussion  (exchanging  services  and 
information) while the supervisors update the resource dynamics (amount of water in plots)  
4.3 Some conclusions 
The  representations  used  in  these  two  tools  are  both  relatively  abstract  in  terms  of  their 
relation  to  reality.  However,  this  abstraction  did  not  pose  any  particular  problems  when 
presenting the results of our work, either to field stakeholders or to researchers3. The game 
was well received in the survey villages, clearly showing the relevance of the two tools in 
representing irrigated systems: during game sessions, the players associated the roles with real 
                                                           
3 However, as far as the researchers were concerned, the more they specialized in a given issue concerning the viability of irrigated systems, 
the less comfortable they were with the representation in model form, which they felt did not go far enough. 

farmers, and in some villages, our transportable game board had to be erased before we left to 
prevent other villages seeing the “mistakes” that had been made. This therefore enables us to 
go some way towards validating the MAS, and the representations it includes, through play. 
The tools were also warmly welcomed in the games sessions conducted in the field: several 
players asked if they could keep the game for use in their own village. What now needs to be 
done is to distribute it and monitor how it is used, which sends us back to the question “how 
can stakeholders be brought to the negotiating table?” (Dupont 90). Even if the process has 
not yet fully reached this stage, the discussions prompted by the game show that the launch of 
a  discussion  process  can  lead  on  to  real  negotiations  including  a  comparison  of  different 
points of view. 
5 STRATAGENES 
In Madagascar, plant genetic resource management is sometimes transferred to a local level 
under contracts between the State and local communities. This transfer calls for coordination 
between  the  various  stakeholders  concerned,  prior  to  negotiation  of  a  contract.  Local 
management  of  plant  genetic  resources  involves  biologically,  economically  and  legally 
complex processes.   
The development of a game called “Stratagenes” made it possible to integrate knowledge of 
use  in  managing  certain  species  and  to  make  it  available,  albeit  in  different  forms,  to  the 
stakeholders  concerned  with  their  management  (local  representatives,  farmers,  foresters, 
NGOs,  collectors-exporters,  scientists,  etc).  The  completion  of  a  fictitious  negotiation, 
supervised by a mediator, enables the players to see the short- and long-term issues at stake in 
their  individual  and  collective  decisions.  The  players  are  challenged  to  negotiate,  within  a 
limited  time,  a  transfer  of  responsibility  enabling  viable  management  of  plant  genetic 
resources and a fair share-out of the resulting benefits. 
5.1 The role game  
The  role  game  was  created  interactively  and  iteratively.  Several  game  sessions  were 
conducted  with  experts  in  each  role  (sociologists,  biologists,  foresters,  economists,  etc)  to 
identify  the  elements  that  it  would  be  necessary  and  useful  to  model.  The  game  was  then 
tested with non-specialists to check that it was fun to play. After each session, it was adjusted 
and improved.   
5.2 The role of multi-agent modelling 
Role  games  use  multi-agent  modelling  to  create  the  biological  and  economic,  spatial  and 
temporal dynamics of the decisions made by players. At each stage, the decisions made by the 
players have an impact on the resources modelled and have economic repercussions on each 
stakeholder. Modelling can be used to test management schemes on a decade scale, to assess 
the long-term impact of contract conditions. 
5.3 Some conclusions  
This tool can now be used to identify useful knowledge and ensure that it is integrated into a 
formal model. The plan is to use it to help train those involved in the transfer of management 
and  local  negotiators,  before  negotiations  proper  begin.  To  this  end,  it  is  currently  being 
adapted semiotically and linguistically in conjunction with our Madagascan counterparts, and 
there are plans for tests with local stakeholders.  
The  development  of  such  a  tool  is  an  attempt  to  integrate  knowledge,  innovations  and 
practices into a decision-making process in which every stakeholder is involved and benefits 
from the representations of his partners or adversaries. The first game session with those in 
charge of plant genetic resource management on a national level in Madagascar demonstrated 

the  merits  of  such  role  games  in  fitting  administrative  decisions  into  a  decision-making 
process  involving  other  stakeholders.  It  also  brought  researchers  from  different  disciplines 
face  to  face  with  the  use  made  of  their  expertise  and  their  responsibility  to  identify  and 
prevent persistent misapprehensions.    
6 Sylvopast 
The Sylvopast model was developed in order to represent the spatial dynamics involved in 
silvopastoral  development,  and  to  describe  possible  strategies  for  striking  a  compromise 
between livestock farmers and foresters. Four fundamental questions were tackled: 
-  How  can  the  evolution  of  a  silvopastoral  system  governed  by  contrasting  pastoral  and 

silvicultural management rules be simulated? 

-  How  can  a  representation  be  produced  that  is  shared  by  all  the  stakeholders  in  the 

dynamics of the forest area being developed? 

-  How can the acceptable ways of co-operation in the medium and long term be evaluated? 
-  What type of spatial structure would best satisfy the objectives of each stakeholder? 
6.1 The model 
The basic principle behind the design of the MAS is that any forest area can be defined by 
combinations of plant structures (tree/shrub/herb), whose attractiveness differs depending on 
the  type  of  user,  and  which  are  subjected  to  a  specific  dynamic  linked  to  management 
methods. At the same time, the management methods used in the different spatial units are the 
result  of  a  compromise  between  the  different  agents  concerned,  based  on  a  hierarchy  and 
weighting of the objectives attributed to those units. 
In  the  case  of  the  Sylvopast  model,  eight  vegetation  structures  were  chosen,  based  on  the 
possible combinations of trees, shrubs and herbs, while two types of agents whose objectives 
sometimes  diverge  but  who  are  subject  to  the  same  main  risk  (fire)  intervene  in  the  area: 
foresters and their labourers, and herdsmen and their herds.  
The virtual forest is a closed space of 2 500 cells subject to a westerly wind, and with some 
probability of fire and climatic hazards. Each cell is randomly defined by its plant formation 
and the age of the dominant trees it contains. It also bears traces of the human interventions it 
has  experienced  (date  of  last  grazing,  clearing,  sowing,  etc),  which  affect  the  temporal 
evolution  of  its  vegetation  structure.  From  time  to  time,  it  is  affected  by  fires  that  destroy 
some of its vegetation and trigger a new vegetation dynamics. 
Herdsmen  and  their  herds  see  the  forest  as  a  resource  area  defined  by  the  fodder  potential 
determined  by  the  plant  formation,  the  crop  management  sequence  and  the  climatic 
conditions, and by the number of pasture zones capable of feeding the herd for at least ten 
days. Herdsmen undertake to remain in the area for at least 250 days a year, and are paid if the 
impact of their herds helps to reduce the risk of fire. 
Foresters manage a protection and recreation area defined by the patrimonial value linked to 
the  dominant  species  and  the  type  of  stand,  and  by  the  fire  risk  determined  by  the  plant 
formation. They need to break down the forest into enclosures of a sufficient size to be able to 
apply silvicultural rules and ensure effective protection against fires. Their aim is therefore to 
minimise the fire risk at the lowest possible cost, while ensuring the persistence of the forest 
and  fostering  the  diversity  of  structures  and  species,  within  the  framework  of  a  20-year 
management plan.  

6.2 The role game 
The Sylvopast role game was developed once finished the development of the MAS, in order 
to  support  silvopastoral  training  programmes.  However,  it  rapidly  became  a  means  of 
enriching  and  improving  the  representation  within  the  MAS  of  the  negotiations  and 
interactions between livestock farmers and foresters. Numerous adaptations have been made, 
some  of  which  are  specific  to  the  creation  of  a  teaching  aid  with  a  fun  aspect:  it  proved 
necessary to make the playing time as short as possible, look for a substitute for the computer 
tool used, and simplify the rules, without fundamentally altering the MAS. Other adaptations 
were necessitated by the need to simplify the representations: it was necessary to work with 
smaller areas, shorter time lapses and indicators that were easy for the players to measure. 
Finally,  it  rapidly  proved  necessary  to  replace  the  graphic  interfaces  in  CORMAS  with 
appropriate “scorecards” so as to keep track of the progress of the game easily. 
 

Tree
Tree
Tree
Tree

Schrub
Schrub
Schrub
Schrub

Herb
Herb
Herb
Herb

 

Figure 4 : the interface of the Sylvopast model and role game adapted for publication. In the 
real game specific colors  correspond to combination of land cover. The initial state presented 
in this figure is calibrated: proportions of each vegetation structure are respected and forest 

cells are grouped. 

The  change  in  the  rules  regarding  vegetation  dynamics  primarily  concerned  long-term 
processes such as the encroachment of abandoned areas by trees or the substitution of forest 
species, which were not included in the role game. However, the negotiating methods were 
left entirely open, with the only constraint being the need to develop a way of recording the 
sequence of actions on the part of each agent. The method consisting in asking each player to 
justify each of his actions in writing was abandoned, since it excessively reduced spontaneity. 
The  new  method  chosen  involves  a  confrontation  between  two  pairs  of  players  who  are 
required to explain their choices and discuss them with their partner, under the watchful eye 
of  an  observer.  The  observer  also  has  a  computerised  version  of  the  role  game,  which 

facilitates  monitoring,  carries  out  automatic  calculations  and  keeps  a  full  record  of  all  the 
strokes played and their sequence.  
6.3 Some conclusions 
The  role  game  was  developed  with  a  view  to  three  objectives  adapted  to  three  different 
targets: 
- 

in  playing  with  managers,  the  aim  was  to  create  a  teaching  aid  to  enable  forestry 
practitioners  to  appreciate  the  constraints  on  herdsmen,  and  vice  versa.  The  game  thus 
enabled players to put themselves in the other players’ shoes and better appreciate their 
needs and difficulties. 
in playing with technicians, the aim was to “switch” the development operation based on a 
broad sample to an area they were used to managing or evaluating. In this case, the game 
served  to  identify  the  main  spatial  organisation  strategies  developed  and  to  establish  a 
typology of the negotiating tactics used. 
In playing with amateurs with no knowledge of either animal production or forestry, the 
aim  was  to  test  the  clarity  of  the  rules  of  the  game,  their  ease  of  application  and  their 
ability to express the problem of silvopastoral development clearly. The game in this case 
served to make players aware of the complexity of forest development, and was a means 
of  teaching  everyone  to  test,  and  even  improve,  his  own  natural  resource  management 
capacities. 

- 

- 

Many positive points showed that some of the objectives of the role game had been achieved. 
The fact that the players understood quickly the rules and easily adopt the provided markers 
demonstrated  that  they  got  a  satisfactory  representation  of  their  reality.  The  fact  that  they 
commonly  used,  for  discussing  and  negotiating,  the  codes  proposed  as  a  way  to  set  up  a 
shared  representation  of  the  land,  pointed  out  the  effectiveness  of  translating  multiple 
resources into a common language. The fact that the stimulation of the negotiation process by 
gaming lead to a set of satisfactory final solutions, proved that role games help to raise up 
reasonable collective solutions to collectively shared problems. 
However,  several  questions  remain.  Is  it  better  to  use  tokens  that  are  seen  as  fun  (playing 
cards, coins, pawns, dice, etc), which stimulate the desire to win rather than the desire to act 
appropriately? even if it is less fun to play, is not the computerised version, more explicit in 
terms of the shared constraints and processes? As regards the categories of players, should 
each game be played by players with the same level of knowledge, or should the categories be 
mixed  to  increase  the  range  of  experience  and  rationales?  In  searching  for  a  socially 
satisfactory solution, isn’t it necessary to replay a game whose final result was unsatisfactory 
for one of the two players? Alternatively, should a single person play both roles at once to 
find out what should be the best compromise for him? 
7 Mejan 
The Mejan model was developed with a view to simulating contrasting scenarios of behaviour 
in front of the encroachment of conifers in natural ecosystems with high patrimonial stakes. 
Its main two aims are to compare management scenarios and enable the different categories of 
protagonists  to  exchange  their  views  on  an  ecological  process  over  which  they  have  little 
control.  If  successful,  the  approach  can  enable  the  development  of  joint  management 
strategies for natural areas. An initial MAS serves to represent the system based on scientific 
knowledge  of  the  ecological  processes  in  play  and  the  practices  with  which  the  agents  are 
familiar, and a simplified MAS is then drawn up to make this formal expression accessible to 
agents and share the representation of the system with them. The simplified MAS is then used 
in support of a role game that serves to make agents  be all aware of the ecological process 

and react to its overspreading. The role game permits to put the agents in a virtual context that 
is neutral enough to minimise local social tenseness but sufficiently similar to their reality, to 
push  them  to  anticipate  the  probable  changes  in  their  practices  as  a  result  of  the  spatial 
dynamics likely to occur in the near future. 
7.1 The model 
The basic principle behind the design of the MAS is that the different categories of agents 
found in the isolated area constituted by the south of France Causse Méjan (farmers, foresters 
and  conservationists)  are  all  involved  in  managing  a  natural  area  affected  by  the  strong 
encroachment of Scots pines and Austrian pines, but on very different temporal and spatial 
scales.  All  three  categories  are  concerned  by  this  biological  process,  which  affects  their 
development  objectives  (meat  or  milk  production,  timber  production,  conservation,  and 
preservation of open spaces) in different ways. 

Forest
Forest

landes
landes

Herb
Herb

+
+

+ +
+ +

+
++

+
++

Crops
Crops

Figure 5 : Map of land cover 

The  natural  resources  available  are  defined  by  vegetation  structure,  topographical  position, 
land tenure status and  patrimonial value (fauna, flora and landscape). This land, which was 
represented by rasterizing a real vectorial map, evolves as a result of the natural spread of 
conifers and the range management and timber harvesting regimes (figure 5). 
 

 
 

Lowest Values
Lowest Values

 

Figure 6a : The map of the conservationist (full area) : Lowest values are indicated. Then the 

darker the patch, the highest the value. 

 

shrublands
shrublands
shrublands

woodlands
woodlands
woodlands

grasslands invaded
grasslands invaded
grasslands invaded

by pine trees
by pine trees
by pine trees

a paddock
a paddock
a paddock

grasslands
grasslands
grasslands

croplands
croplands
croplands

grasslands spotted
grasslands spotted
grasslands spotted

with pine trees
with pine trees
with pine trees

Figure 6b: the map of a farmer 

Agro-pastoral  strategies  depend  on  the  ratio  of  cultivated  land  to  rangelands,  on  grazing 
pressure,  on  the  position  of  the  livestock  farm  and  on  the  farmer’s  degree  of  ecological 
awareness.  Forest  management  strategies  depend  on  land  tenure  status  and  on  whether  the 
area  is  covered  by  specific  regulations.  Faced  with  the  impact  of  the  combination  of  these 
multiple  strategies  on  conifer  dynamics,  the  conservationists    asked  for  a  MAS  to  test 
different intervention scenarios, in support of, in addition to, and even in opposition to the 
operations conducted by farmers and foresters.  
7.2 The role game 
The Mejan role game sets out to make farmers, foresters and conservationists (The Cevennes 
National Park staff) react to spatial dynamics likely to occur in the near future. It is based on a 
representation of a natural area sufficiently close to reality for players to be able to relate to it, 
but  sufficiently  distant  from  it  for  the  game  to  take  place  in  a  neutral  context,  with  no 
preconceptions.  The  role  game  relies  on  a  combination  of  a  simplified  MAS  and  a  GIS, 
enabling the rapid production of updated thematic cartographic representations on different 
scales. 
The temporal and spatial scales are different from the MAS model, with the rules of conifer 
dynamics and plant and animal sensitivity to changes in their habitat remaining the same. The 
participants playing the role of farmers have a limited view of the area, reduced to the area 
covered  by  their  farm.  Within  that  area,  they  distribute  their  animals  according  to  their 
livestock production system and the cover of conifers on their farm. They also cultivate all the 
flat  lands.  The  participants  playing  the  role  of  conservationists  (figure  6a)  have  an  overall 
view of the natural area, in the form of a patchwork of holdings used for farming, forestry or 
hunting. From several patrimonial viewpoints (fauna, flora, landscape), they can define the 
plots with priority patrimonial stakes  and develop a control strategy of pine encroachment. 
The  participants  playing  the  role  of  foresters  define  the  priority  objectives  for  the  forest 
holdings and propose a management and exploitation plan for those holdings. At the end of 
each round, there are negotiations concerning the technique to control pine encroachment , the 
location of the plot to be cleared and the labour required. A cartographic representation of the 
effect  of  the  practices  adopted  by  the  players  on  natural  resource  dynamics  and  land 

in 

representing  different 

occupation in each agricultural holding is produced for use as in the following round (figure 
6b). 
The  minimum  number  of  players  is  four  farmers,  two  conservationists  and  another  two 
foresters. It can only be played by local managers playing their own role, which means that 
the  players  playing  farmers  have  to  include  representatives  of  each  of  the  main  livestock 
production systems included in the model. Likewise, it is important that the fauna viewpoint 
and  the  flora  viewpoint  be  clearly  dissociated  by  being  played  by  two  different 
conservationists. However, the role game makes it easy to formalize the functioning of the 
interaction between agents and makes it possible to produce a representation of the conifer 
establishment  process  rapidly,  to  be  shared  with  them.  Above  all,  it  gives  free  rein  to  the 
players’ inventiveness in developing a strategy for action or negotiations, both for agents at 
the origin of the process and for those subjected to it.  
7.3 Some conclusions 
The  MAS  entirely  fulfils  its  role  as  an  aid  in  testing  different  scenarios  of  intervention  on 
natural  dynamics  and 
types  of  collaboration  between 
conservationists, farmers and foresters. It is innovative in that it shows how agents adapt their 
behaviour according to the changes in the area concerning them, as a result of both natural 
dynamics and day-to-day management of those dynamics.  
The role game makes an essential contribution to the MAS in that it helps to determine the 
range  of  possible  strategies  through  which  farmers  and  conservationists  may  adapt  to  a 
process with which they have not yet been confronted. It also helps to explain and share issues 
that arise on different temporal and spatial scales. 
Although  the  spatial  environment  characteristics are much more closely linked to the local 
level than in Sylvopast, the overall structure of the model and the way in which it is simplified 
into a role game can be transposed to many other resource sharing simulations. Moreover, the 
generic value of the problem posed (the threat to patrimonial stakes by pine encroachment) 
permits to easily adapt the approach to similar ecological situations. Finally, the potential for 
using  the  approach  under  the  developing  trend  of  contractualising  the  interactions  between 
agricultural practices and environmental protection, are particularly promising. 
 
8. SAMBA 
The “Regional” component4 of the SAM (Mountain Agrarian System) program is working in 
the  mountainous  area  of  Bac  Kan  Province,  northern  Vietnam.  It  aims  at  understanding 
agricultural dynamics and their consequences on land use systems in order to promote more 
sustainable  natural  resource  management  from  the  village  to  the  regional  level.  In  this 
framework,  several  methodologies  have  been  combined  using  and/or  developing  different 
tools from traditional fieldwork using on-farm surveys to remote sensing data interpretation 
through computer modelling and role games. These various tools, methodologies, and the way 
they are used, pursue different objectives, especially in the relationship between researchers 
and their objects of investigation, as well as between researchers and stakeholders (Castella 
and Boissau 2001).  
A first multi-agent model named SAMBA has been developed for testing hypotheses about 
the differentiation of households at the end of the cooperative period in Xuat Hoa commune, 
Bac Kan province (Castella and Boissau 2001). The way this model has been developed could 

                                                           
4 SAM-Regional is a joint research programme of the Vietnam Agricultural Science Institute (VASI, Vietnam), the Institut de Recherche 
pour le Développement (IRD, France), and the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI, Philippines). 

be seen as "armchair modelling"5 as it was built upon data collected in the field but it was 
constructed and run without interaction with stakeholders. This kind of model serves as a tool 
for representing, testing, sharing and discussing hypotheses among researchers from different 
disciplines and thus having different representations of the world. 
The problems experienced in validating this kind of model (Axelrod 1997) led us to adopt a 
new methodology in the process of building it and sharing it with stakeholders. Following an 
previously  described  experiment  in  Senegal  (cf.  §9),  we  adopted  role  games  similar  to 
gaming-simulations (Greenblat and Duke 1981) as a way to collect information and "feed" a 
multi-agent  model  that  is  subsequently  presented  to  stakeholders  for  validation  and 
discussion.  
8.1 Role game and model 
This methodology, which is still under development, follows four steps that take place over a 
one-week period: 

Step 1: collection of preliminary information and selection of participants (one day) 

From one to three villages in a commune of Bac Kan province are selected based on their 
original  characteristics  and  the  topic  pursued6.  Village  headmen  are  interviewed  to  collect 
some basic information and identify participants representing the diversity of the village. 

Step 2: role-playing (one day) 

The  “SAMBA”  role  game  is  conducted  around  a  game  board  composed  of  1,600  wooden 
cubes, each one having six colours representing different land uses. The aim was to use an 
environment  as  close  as  possible  to  the  one  in  the  SAMBA  multi-agent  computer  model, 
developed under the CORMAS simulation platform (Figure 7). Around ten players and a few 
observers  (eg  village  headmen,  forest  wardens)  usually  participate  in  the  role  game.  The 
players draw household cards describing the composition of their virtual household and thus 
their food needs and available labor force. They also get an initial endowment of lowland rice 
fields and buffaloes. Then, the players have to propose and manage activities in order to feed 
their family and develop their own strategy. Actions of the players are situated on the board 
game  and  registered  by  facilitators.  During  the  one-day  sessions  we  already  organized, 
players could simulate around six years (ie six rounds of play). The meetings ended with a 
debriefing session during which the sequence of the game was analysed by both participants 
and facilitators. 

Step 3: individual interviews and model construction (three days) 

During the third step, two activities are carried out in parallel. On the one hand, a multi-agent 
model  aimed  at  representing  the  sequence  of  the  role  game  is  developed.  On  the  other, 
individual interviews are conducted with participants in the role game session (step 2). These 
individual interviews build upon the actions of the players during the role game. Through a 
comparison with the real situation, the surveyors investigate the individual behaviours of the 
players and the various strategies developed during the role game. 

Step 4: participatory computer simulation (one day) 

A  new  meeting  with  participants  in  the  role  game  is  organized  and  the  model  constructed 
during the third step is presented. The similarities of the environments in the role game and in 
the model help participants get comfortable with the computer. A first simulation similar to 

                                                           
5 In reference to the "armchair economics" denounced by Herbert Simon (1986) 
6 So far, topics have been: the allocation of the labour force between paddy fields and upland crops; livestock management systems; the 
saturation of uplands and the emergence of forest land as a scarce resource. 

the  role  game  session  is  easily  described  by  the  participants.  Inconsistencies  with  and/or 
alternatives to this first model can thus be discussed for possible simulations. 
8.3 Some conclusions  
The methodology described here serves several interrelated objectives. 
Firstly,  the  role  game  was  used  to  gather  information  on  selected  topics.  It  did  this  very 
efficiently.  More  traditional  interviews  usually  face  problems  of  confidence  between  the 
researchers  and  the  stakeholders,  the  interviewees  sometimes  being  reluctant  to  give 
information requested in a formal way. On the contrary, the gaming aspect of the role game 
helps  create  a  more  natural  and  friendly  environment,  which 
turn  facilitates 
communication.  Information  can  then  be  collected  at  two  levels:  (1)  when  the  player  is 
playing  on  the  board,  questions  can  be  asked  about  his  actions,  and  (2)  through  direct 
observation  of  conversations  and  interactions  between  participants  in  a  more  ethnographic 
way.  Information  gathered  during  the  role  game  is  completed  by  subsequent  individual 
interviews and discussions around the computer model. Such information is used to explore 
the evolution of land use systems. 

in 

 
Figure 7: Similarity between the SAMBA computer model(right) and SAMBA role-play (left) 
environments.  The  white  boundaries  of  the  square  are  the  limits  of  an  area  protected  from 
livestock. The limits were set during the game and reproduced in the model. 
The  second  objective  is  to  enable  the  rules  of  the  game  to  emerge  and  change.  When 
conducting the role game, an initial situation is assigned to the players but no rules, especially 
social rules, are predefined. These rules have to be set by the players themselves in the course 
of play, whenever they feel the need for it. The players may for example ask for the election 
of a village headman or organize collective pasture areas. Thus, if such rules are enacted, one 
can  say  that  they  are  emerging  from  the  convergence  of  individual  actions  in  a  particular 
environment.  Emergence  is  also  a  basic  principle  of  multi-agent  modelling,  where  macro-
phenomena are seen as emerging from micro-actions following a bottom-up approach. The 
combination of role games and multi-agent modelling thus appears to be a powerful tool for 
studying the emergence of collective rules that can be identified in the role game and more 
precisely explored by the computer model. 
Finally,  through  the  information  gathered  and  the  discussions  with  participants,  problems 
faced  by  the  local  peoples  in  their  production  systems  can  be  identified.  Role  games  and 
multi-agent  systems  can  then  be  used  as  communication  platforms  for  the  introduction  of 
technical  innovations.    The  need  for  accompanying  organizational  changes  is  explored 

through  the  construction  of  scenarios  to  ensure  successful  diffusion  of  the  proposed 
innovations. 
9 SelfCORMAS 
The  third  experiment  has  been  under  way  since  1998  at  the  POAS  (Plan  d’Occupation  et 
d’Affectation  des  Sols)  experimental  unit  in  northern  Senegal.  In  support  of  a  local 
decentralization policy, the aim is to test simulations that will help local rural authorities and 
the  people  under  their  jurisdiction  to  organize  sustainable  land  management,  taking  into 
account the different forms of land use (agriculture, animal production, the environment, etc). 
The management scale considered is around 2 500 km² and 40 000 people. The simulation 
developed needs to help to stakeholders at every stage of the decision-making process: when 
zoning the area, identifying rules of access to a given type of area, and evaluating possible 
social  and  environmental  impacts.  It  should  also  make  it  possible  to  forecast  the  different 
possible options, and therefore needs to be flexible. 
Two precise objectives were set right at the start of the experiment. The first was to test direct 
design  of  the  MAS  model  by  the  stakeholders  right  from  the  initial  stages  (unlike  the 
SHADOC process), with as little prior design work by the modeller as possible, hence the 
“self”  added  to  the  CORMAS  name.  This  means  that  upstream  modelling  work  had  to 
concentrate on producing an environment enabling the stakeholders to express themselves in 
designing their model. The second objective was to test the use of a geographical information 
system (GIS) managed by the region’s public development company7, to sustain the decision-
making process and modelling work regularly if necessary. 
Rather  than  developing  a  specific  model,  the  modellers  developed  tools  within  and  around 
CORMAS  (cf.  role  game,  GIS,  etc),  so  as  to  formalize  as  accurately  as  possible  the 
knowledge  and  views  expressed  by  the  stakeholders  (including  the  GIS)  during  the 
continuous, collective decision-making process.  
9.1 The role game and model 
The  "self-design"  experiment  was  organized  in  the  form  of  discussion  workshops.  Three 
three-day  workshops  were  organized  by  the  rural  council  for  the  village  of  Ross-Béthio,  a 
local partner that volunteered for the experiment. The first workshop, in French, concerned a 
group of source-persons from the rural community, chosen directly by it (a teacher, a young 
person who had moved back to the village, etc). The other two workshops were a test, in the 
local Wolof language, conducted directly with illiterate members of the local population. The 
subject,  which  was  chosen  by  the  local  stakeholders,  was  coordination  between  crop  and 
animal farming in the area. Each workshop set out to have the stakeholders construct and then 
test a model enabling them to make progress in solving this local management problem. The 
modellers, who attended the workshops as mere spectators of the discussions, were then to 
model  the  progress  of  the  discussions  in  terms of the collective construction of the model, 
change and regulatory scenarios, hypotheses as to changes in external factors, etc. 
 

 

                                                           
7 SAED, Société d’Aménagement et d’Exploitation des terres du Delta du Sénégal et des vallées du fleuve Sénégal et de la Falémé (a public 
regional development company) 

 

Figure 8: The initial map of Ngnith 

Around twenty-five people attended each of the workshops, which were held over three days 
as follows: 
Day one: 

The first stage was the identification by the participants of the different stakeholders’ 
requirements in terms of crop and animal farming (soil quality, water salinity, distance 
from a water supply, distance between plots, etc), in other words the definition and 
above  all  the  collective  approval  or  legitimization  of  the  minimum  requirementsof 
each stakeholder. This was also the first stage in the design of the MAS model, the 
form of which was thus dictated to the modellers by the stakeholders. 
The  second  part  of  the  day  was  given  over  to  the  introduction  of  the  cartographic 
support: the representation of the “resources” in the zone concerned, with “resources” 
defined  from  criteria  chosen  by  the  stakeholders  in  the  previous  stage.  Maps  were 
produced  based  on  the  farmers’  perceptions  in  the  first  stage,  using  data  from  the 
SAED geographical information system. Data  were amended and approved jointly. 

Day two:  

A  role  game  was  proposed  to  represent  the  dynamics  of  the  model  designed  the 
previous  day.  The  cartographic  support  was  based  on  the  maps  produced  the  day 
before,  but  broken  down  into  regular  rectangular  polygons  (figure  8).  In  the  game, 
month after month, each player decides on his activity and his position within an area 
he knows well, according to a definition of his requirements established jointly on day 
one. To show his position at every time lapse (a month), each player uses a post-it note 
that he moves around the map. After several rounds, there is a discussion to analyse 
significant    phenomena  and  events  that  have  occurred  during  the  game    (conflicts, 
resource degradation or shortages, dissatisfaction of a particular stakeholder, etc). The 
discussion then turns to the joint definition of possible futures (scenarios) in the form 
of either trends (for instance population growth) or events (for instance the digging of 
new canals). 

Day three: 

Between days two and three, the multi-agent model corresponding to the role game is 
programmed,  for  presentation  on  day  three.  The  first  simulation  concerns  the  role 
game played the day before (figure 9). After that, the scenarios identified the previous 
day, and new ones that have emerged since, are simulated and discussed. 
 

Lake
Lake

Plot
Plot

Permanent water
Permanent water

 
Figure 9 : The map at the end of the simulation. Zones in which the resource has been 
consumed are shown in white. This screen shows that the livestock farmers who do 
not have access to water move west. 

9.2 Some conclusions 
There is a good deal of information to be drawn from this experiment, which is continuing. 
Developing a role game in conjunction with stakeholders seems to be an interesting way of 
enabling novice stakeholders to play an active part in designing a multi-agent model. The role 
game  serves  in  this  case  as  a  sort  of  dialogue  interface  between  computer  modelling,  the 
“machine”, and stakeholders8. It enables them to interpret the behaviours and interactions in 
the  simulation  correctly.  The  stakeholders  who  developed  and  played  the  game  were  fully 
capable of interpreting the results of the model and linking them with reality. As they were 
themselves the initial designers of the simulations carried out, they were also aware of the 
distance between the model and reality, and of the way in which simulation results should be 
used: having largely designed the model, they were well aware that it was not a black box 
capable of seeing into the future. 
Simulation made it possible to go much further than the role game. For one thing, it would 
have been physically impossible without computer simulation to “play” the different scenarios 
selected by the stakeholders and to observe their multiple impacts over sufficiently long time 
lapses. Furthermore, a sufficiently flexible modelling platform offers many more possibilities 
of modifying the rules on request than cumbersome game sessions. Simulation thus multiplies 
the effectiveness of the role game and can take the decision-making process much further, be 
it by taking account of the long-term future or through the feasibility of the decisions made. 
Concerning this last point, the permanent link with a GIS for data restitution and their precise 

                                                           
8 The low educational level of the participants in the workshop (a very high rate of illiteracy) is no obstacle to the use of such computer 
simulations. 

mapping enabled the local stakeholders to shift from a mere exercise to a heated discussion of 
the future of each area (and of each stakeholder) in a zone they knew well. The satisfaction 
expressed by the participants largely stems from this return to a precise local reality, using a 
GIS fed with quite detailed, relevant information.  
This  operation  provided  us  with  confirmation  of  the  feasibility  of  using  computers  in  such 
socio-cultural  situations.  By  progressing  gradually  over  three  days,  the  stakeholders  are 
capable of following the different scenarios on screen, discussing them and proposing new 
ones. There is no need for sophisticated agents for the main land and resource management 
problems  to  appear  easily  in  the  simulation.  As  the  simplifications  were  instigated  by  the 
stakeholders  themselves,  they  reflect  the  most  important  aspects  of  actual  behaviour.  As 
regards  cartographic  representation,  we  were  surprised  to  see  how  easily  the  stakeholders 
adopted  the concept and used it as a negotiating tool, even in the case of a simplified map in 
grid  form  (CORMAS),  which  was  just  as  well received and used by the participants. As a 
result,  if  we  measure  the  educational  progress  made,  it  is  clear  that  a  CORMAS-type 
simulation platform can be used with participants with a very limited level of schooling. As a 
result, in a nevertheless conflict-laden local context, our simulation enabled new progress to 
be  made  in  local  negotiations.  For  instance,  at  one  of  the  workshops,  the  establishment  of 
rangelands was debated, whereas it had previously been a taboo subject, and a decision was 
even made to ask the local technical services to talk about the issue. In another area, in which 
the  problem  was  access  to  water,  simulation  resulted  in  an  agreement  on  new  collective 
regulations to protect animal production.  
The emphasis placed on the flexibility of the platform also accounted for the progress made in 
the  local  decision-making  process.  For  instance,  it  enabled  a  response  to  a  wide  range  of 
situations. At one of the workshops, the problem posed and discussed was that of agricultural 
diversification  and  its  consequences  for  animal  production  and  environmental  areas.  At 
another, it was rangeland development, and at another, water access regulations. 
The model was not designed to provide solutions to problems, but to encourage discussion of 
the different alternatives, to improve the effectiveness of a collective decision-making process 
and even to change the behaviour of local stakeholders with respect to their technical partners. 
In our approach, recourse to technical expertise is the stage that follows, and not that which 
precedes,  the  collective  choice  of  scenarios  that  can  “reasonably”  be  envisaged  by  the 
community. Thus for the project itself, one of the main achievements of this experiment is to 
have reversed the relations between local populations and technical staff. After the interactive 
simulations  it  was  the  representatives  of  local  populations  who  themselves  identified  the 
priority types of support they required within their decision-making process (information on 
rangeland development, appraisals of certain crops on sandy soils, etc).  
10 MAS MODELS AND ROLE GAMES: SOME PRELIMINARY LESSONS 
Several conclusions can be drawn from this set of experiment. We start with some practical 
conclusions and propose a discussion on the different processes these tools can be involved in. 
The practical conclusions are: 
- 

confirmation of the results obtained by participatory GIS: people are capable of following 
simulations on screen and interpreting and discussing them. 
The role-game-simulation model seems to be appropriate to favour the involvement of the 
stakeholders in the exploration of scenarios (see Samba and Self Cormas). Through the 
game, participants gain an idea of what the model is. They are then capable of following 
simulations. Better still, they are able to understand the relation between the model and 
reality. Having been played a role game, they measure the simplification of the process. 

- 

The MAS model associated  is then also considered as a simplification. As a result, they 
can  better  interpret  the  result  of  the  simulations.  As  the  aim  is  not  to  predict  but  to 
encourage  and  enrich  discussion,  simulations  and  role  games  serve  to  identify  and 
formalize problems for discussion. 
Usually each actor plays his role in the game. In certain cases it can be useful to switch the 
roles. Each actor playing the role of the other can understand better the constraints the 
other faces and the resulting behaviour. This sometimes prepares very well the discussion. 
The environment of the MAS and the role game is often different from the reality. It is 
structurally similar to reality (proportions, neighbourhood) but we do not use the map of 
the  case  studied.  The  stakeholders  have  no  difficulties  with  that,  they  are  more  free  to 
discuss and this preserve some confidentiality on the knowledge.   
KISS, “keep it simple and stupid”, is one of the principles of complex simulations: the 
interactions between simple processes are a result of complex dynamics. As a rule, the 
argument is that this principle is valid on paper, but is not operational. In this particular 
phase, the collective identification of problems, it appears that simplicity is required. For 
instance,  when  developing  SHADOC,  huge  efforts  were  required  to  make  the  model 
simple  enough  to  play.  The  same  was  also  true  for  the  Sylvopast  model.  On  the  other 
hand, in the case of SelfCORMAS, a collective discussion process was triggered based on 
a simple model (designed by the participants themselves), which increased in complexity 
as the discussions became deeper. 
Once created the role-game model is an interesting tool to test the regional diversity. The 
game can be played in several villages to check its validity (in terms of behaviours and 
interactions processes) and thus contribute to the scaling-up process. 
The game has to be played with players of each level represented in the model. This aims 
at  validating  the  behaviours  and  interaction  processes.  In  case  of  separated  validations 
(with stakeholders belonging to different levels surveyed separately) it is better to start the 
validation  process  with  the  players  at  the  lower  level.  Once  validated,  this  part  of  the 
model can serve to implement the upper levels’ behaviour and interactions.  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Although both authors in this text use role game and Mas for INRM, some differences can be 
pointed out. Both researchers think that the decision-making process for NRM can be viewed 
as  a  collective  learning  process.  This  process  involving  representations  and  emotions,  has 
been  conceptualized  by  Maturana  and  Varela  (Varela  et  al.  1993;  Maturana  1996),  and 
advocated  by  Roling  (Roling  1996).    The  stakeholders,  among  which  the  researchers, 
exchange their knowledge and generate new knowledge that is used to monitor or transform 
the environment.  However, we experienced three possible modes of interaction: 

1.  Interactive modelling for the creation of a better model of the reality. The modeller, 
alternating modelling activities and field work, conceptualise a model of the studied 
ecosystem. The knowledge is elicited with the stakeholders and the model is validated 
through  role  games,  among  other  methods.  The  model  is  then  used  within  the 
scientific  community  or  for  educational  purposes.  This  is  the  case  for  instance  for 
Shadoc  or  Sylvopast  or  Stratagenes.  For  instance  the  Sylvopast  game  on  Forester-
Herder  negotiation  has  been  played  about  40  times.  The  scientist  has  now  a 
classification of individual strategies correlated to the forms of negotiations. 

2.  Interactive  modelling  to  give  back  the  representation  of  the  scientist.  The  scientist 
work  on  a  model,  often  based  on  bio-physical  processes,  and  then  gives  back  and 
share  his  results  and  conclusions  with  the  other  stakeholders.  The  scientist  is  pro-

active  in  the  decision  making  process.  This  is  the  case  for  instance  for  the  game 
Mejean where the objective is to help coordination against pine invasion. 

3.  The  model  for  mediation.  The  scientist  act  as  a  mediator  in  a  collective  decision 
making  process.  The  model  is  one  of  his  tools  and  he  will  develop  his  model 
accompanying the social process: more than an accurate model of reality, the purpose 
is to reach an agreement: models are used as a mediator towards this agreement. This 
is the case of SelfCormas experiment. 

The status of the modeller and the use of the model is different for each of these cases. This 
depends  on  the  context.  Sometimes,  there  is  no  need  of  intervention  in  a  decision  making 
process. For instance when institutions regulate correctly the use of resources, or if there is no 
demand from the stakeholders at all. The model can be developed interactively for a better 
understanding of the dynamics of the system. In other cases there will be a demand for the 
intervention of the scientist, either as an expert or as a mediator.  
There is no strong relation between the status of the scientist and the linkage between role 
games and Mas. At first we were thinking that the scientist who wants to build a model for 
understanding should start with a model to be transformed in role game. But we realized how 
much the role game is efficient to get knowledge on social dynamics and even on individual 
decision-making (see experiment). At first we were thinking that the mediation process would 
be  facilitated  if  no  previous  model  exist  before  the  role  game.  But  it  happened  that  a  role 
game based on a model can be used as a mediator tool to facilitate discussions and decisions 
in emerging organizations. This is the case for the Shadoc game.  
As noticed by many other authors, it appeared that the efficiency of the tools lies much more 
in the social process at stake rather than the combination of tools. If institutions for mediation, 
also called platforms, already exist or are emerging, this tools are positively perceived and can 
be  appropriated.  Furthermore,  placing  these  tools  in  such  institutions  lower  the  risk  of 
sidelining 
the  concept  of 
accompaniment apply. 

the  responsabilities  attributed 

to  decision-makers.  Again 

 

11. CONCLUSION 
To  conclude,  the  supportive  approach  on  which  all  these  experiments  and  CORMAS  are 
based  can  be  seen  as  a  “bottom-up”  rather  than  a  “top-down”  modelling  method.  These 
experiments  enabled  us  to  explore  an  interesting  way  of  using  MAS,  in  support  of 
negotiations between stakeholders. A new horizon has now opened up and other applications 
are under way or are planned. Now that this feasibility has been demonstrated and that the 
elements of a method are in place, it is important to study the contributions and effects of such 
tools  over  longer  periods.  How  do  the  models  evolve  with  a  decision-making  process?  Do 
they disappear? Do they change status? It is now necessary to establish ways of monitoring 
such research-action dynamics, either in relation to their final purpose or, more generally, in 
relation to their impact on the local community (impact on stakeholders in the decision, ethics 
of intervention, etc). 
Because  they  allow  to  consider  agents  of  very  different  nature  with  their  own  perceptions, 
modes of communication and control, MAS have a considerable potential in INRM research 
for  the  modeling  and  simulation  of  complex  processes  between  stakeholders,  as  well  as 
between social and ecological dynamics. 

References 
Abbot, J., R. Chambers, C. Dunn, T. Harris, P. G. de Merode E., J. Townsend and D. Weiner (1998). 

"Participatory GIS: opportunity or oxymoron?" PLA Notes 33: 27-34 

Abel, N. (1999). Resilient rangeland regions. VIIth International Rangeland Congress, Townsville, 

Australia.1: 21-30 

Antona, M., F. Bousquet, C. Le Page, J. Weber, A. Karsenty and P. Guizol (1998). Economic Theory 
of Renewable Resource Management: a Multi-Agent System Approach. Multi-Agent Systems 
and Agent-Based Simulation, Paris (France), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 
Springer-Verlag.1: 61-78 

Attonaty, J. M., M. H. Chatelin and J. C. Poussin (1990). L'évolution des méthodes et langages de 

simulation. Modélisation systémique et système agraire. J. Brossier, B. Vissac and J. L. 
Lemoigne. Paris, INRA Editions. 

Axelrod, R. (1997). "Advancing the Art of Simulation in the Social Sciences." Lecture Notes in 

Economics and Mathematical Systems 456: 21-40 

Babin, D. and A. Bertrand (1998). "Managing pluralism: subsidiarity and patrimonial mediation." 

Unasylva 49(3): 19-25 

Barreteau, O. and F. Bousquet (2000). "SHADOC: a Multi-Agent Model to tackle viability of irrigated 

systems." Annals of Operations Research 94: 139-162 

Berkes, F. (1997). "New and not-so new directions in the use of the commons: co-management." The 
Common Property Resource Digest. Quaterly Publication of the international association for 
the study of common property(42): 5-7 

Bonnefoy, J. L., C. Le Page, J. Rouchier and F. Bousquet (2000). Modelling spatial practices and 

social representations of space using multi-agent systems. Applications of simulation to social 
sciences. G. Ballot and G. Weisbuch, Hermes: 155-168. 

Borrini-Feyerabend, G., M. Farvar, J. C. Nguiringuiri and V. A. Ndangang (2000). Co-Management of 

Natural Resources: Organising, Negotiating and Learning by Doing. Heidelberg (Germany). 

Bousquet, F., I. Bakam, H. Proton and C. Le Page (1998). Cormas : common-pool resources and 

multi-agent Systems. Lecture Note in Computer system, Springer. 1416: 826-838. 
Bousquet, F. and D. Gautier (1998). "Comparaison de deux approches de modélisation des 

dynamiques spatiales par simulation multi-agents : les approches spatiales et acteurs." 
CyberGéo 89 

Bousquet, F., C. LePage, I. Bakam and A. Takforyan (2001). "Multi-agent simulations of hunting wild 

meat in a village  in eastern Cameroon." Ecological modelling 138: 331-346 

Burton, M. (1994). "The irrigation management game: a role playing exercise for training in irrigation 

management." Irrigation and Drainage Systems 7: 305-348 

Cardenas, J. C. and O. E. (2001). What do people bring into the game? How norms help overcome the 

tragedy of the commons. 4eme journées d'Economie de l'environnement, Toulouse, INRA:  

Castella, J. C., S. Boissau, H. Lan Anh and O. Husson (2001). Enhancing communities' adaptability to 

a rapidly changing environment in Vietnam uplands: the SAMBA role-play. Sustaining 
Upland Development in Southeast Asia: Issues, Tools & Institutions for Local Natural 
Resource Management, Makati, Metro Manila, Philippines, SANREM CRSP/ Southeast Asia:  

Castella, J. C., S. Boissau, T. N. Trung and D. D. Quang (2001). How allocation of lowlands affects 

upland agricultural dynamics in Northern Vietnam mountains: From systems analysis to 
multi-agent model. Hanoi, Vietnam Agricultural Science Institute. 

CBFMO (1998). Community mapping, manual for resource management. Quezon City, Philippines, 

Environmental Science for Social Change: 45 pages. 

Chapman, G. P. (1987). "Gaming simulations and systems analysis: two factions of the truth." Journal 

of Applied Systems Analysis 14: 3-15 

Checkland, P. (1981). Systems thinking, systems practice. Chichester, John Wiley. 
Cockes, K. D. and J. R. Ive (1996). "Mediation support for forest land allocation: the SIRO-MED 

system." Environmental management 20: 41-52 

Costanza, R. and M. Ruth (1998). "Using dynamic modeling to scope environmental problems and 

build consensus." Environmental management 22(2): 183-195 

Deadman, P. J., E. Schlager and R. Gimblett (2000). "Simulating Common Pool Resource 

Management Experiments with Adaptative Agents Employing Alternate Communication 
Routines." Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 3(2).http: 
//www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/JASSS/3/2.2.html 

Duffy, J. (2001). "Learning to speculate: experiments with artificial and real agents." Journal of 

Economic Dynamics and Control 25: 295-319 

Fox, J. (1998). "Mapping the commons: the social context of spatial information technologies." The 

Common Property Resource Digest. Quaterly Publication of the International Association for 
the Study of Common Property(45): 1-4 

Funtowicz, S. O. and J. R. Ravetz (1994). "The worth of a songbird; ecological economics as a post 

normas science." Ecological economics(10): 197-207 

Giddens, A. (1987). Social Theory and Modern Sociology. Cambridge, Polity Press. 
Gintis, H. (2000). "Beyond Homo economicus: evidence from experimental economics." Ecological 

Economics 35: 311-322 

Gonzalez, R. (2000). Platforms and terraces: bridging participation and GIS in joint learning for 

watershed management with the Ifugaos of the Philippines. PhD. ITC-Wageningen University. 

Greenblat, C. S. and R. D. Duke (1981). Principles and Practices of Gaming-Simulation., Sage. 
Hardin, G. (1968). "The tragedy of the commons." Science 162: 1243-1248 
Holling, C. S. (1978). Adaptive environmental assessment and management. London, John Wiley. 
IIASA (1999). Cleaner air for a cleaner future: controlling transboundary air pollution, International 

Institute for Applied System Analysis. 

Mason, C. F. and O. Philipps (1997). "Mitigating the tragedy of the commons through cooperation: an 
experimental evaluation." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 34: 148-172 

Maturana (1996). Le langage et la nature de la communication humaine. JFIADSMA 96, Hermes. 
Meadows, D. and D. Meadows (1993). Fish Banks News. Durham, NH, USA, Fish Banks Ltd and 

Laboratory for Interactive Learning University of New Hampshire. 

Montgolfier, J. and J. M. Natali (1987). Des outils pour une gestion patrimoniale. Le patrimoine du 

futur, Economica: 111-137. 

Ollagnon, H. (1989). Une approche patrimoniale de la qualité du milieu naturel. Du rural à 

l'environnement, la question de la nature aujourd'hui. ARF, l'Harmattan. 

Ollagnon, H. (1991). "Vers une gestion patrimoniale de la protection et de la qualité biologique des 

forêts." Forest, trees and people Newslette(3): 2-35 

Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons. New York, Cambridge University Press. 
Ostrom, E., R. Gardner and J. Walker (1994). Rules, games, and common-pool resources. Ann Harbor, 

Roling, N. (1996). "Towards an interactive agricultural science." European Journal  of Agricultural 

University of Michigan Press. 

Education and Extension 2(4): 35-48 

Rothman, D., J. Robinson and D. Biggs (2001). Signs of life: linking indicators and modelling in the 

context of QUEST, SCOPE project on Integrated Adaptive Ecological and Economic 
Modeling and Assessment. 

Rouchier, J. and F. Bousquet (1998). Non-merchant Economy and multi-agents systems, an analysis of 

structuring exchanges. Multi-Agent Systems and Agent-Based Simulation, Berlin, Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Springer-Verlag.1534: 11-124 

Rouchier, J., F. Bousquet, M. Requier-Desjardins and M. Antona (2001). "A multi-agent model for 

transhumance in North Cameroon." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25: 527-559 

Rouchier, J., Martin O'Connor and F. Bousquet (2001). "The creation of a reputation in an artificial 

society organised by a gift system." Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 
4(2).<http://www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/JASSS/4/2/8.html> 

Sell, J. and Y. Son (1997). "Comparing public goods with common pool resources: three 

experiments." Social Psychology Quarterly 60(2): 118-137 

Simon, H. A. (1947). Administration et processus de décision. Paris, Editions Economica. 
Stevenson, G. G. (1991). Common Property Economics: A General Theory and Land Use 

Applications, Cambridge University Press. 

Thébaud, O. and B. Locatelli (2001). "Modelling the emergence of resource-sharing conventions: an 

agent-based approach." Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 
4(2).<http://www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/JASSS/4/2/3.html> 

Van Asselt, M., J. Mellors, N. Rijkens-Klomp, S. Greeuw, M. K., P. B. Beers and V. N. P. (2001). 
Participatory methods in integrated assessment. Maastricht, The Netherlands, International 
Center for Integrative Studies. 

Varela, F., E. Thompson and E. Rosch (1993). L'inscription Corporelle de l'Esprit, Sciences 

Cognitives et Expérience Humaine, Seuil. 

Walters, C. J. and R. Hilborn (1978). "Ecological optimization and adaptive management." Annual 

Review of Ecology and Systematics 9: 157-188 

Weber, J. (1998). Perspectives de gestion patrimoniale des ressources renouvelables. Quelle Politique 

Foncière en Afrique Rurale? P. e. Lavigne Delville. Paris, Karthala-Coopération Française. 

Weber, J. and D. Bailly (1993). "Prévoir c'est gouverner." Natures, sciences, sociétés 1(1) 
 
 
 

 

