Break Up the Psychiatric Monopoly - NYTimes.com HOME PAGE TODAY'S PAPER VIDEO MOST POPULAR Edition: U.S. / Global

14/05/12 19:36 Log In Register Now Help Search Opinion

WORLD U.S. N.Y. / REGION BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY SCIENCE HEALTH SPORTS OPINION ARTS STYLE TRAVEL JOBS REAL ESTATE AUTOS

Advertise on NYTimes.com

OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Diagnosing the D.S.M.
By ALLEN FRANCES Published: May 11, 2012

AT its annual meeting this week, the American Psychiatric Association did two wonderful things: it rejected one reckless proposal that would have exposed nonpsychotic children to unnecessary and dangerous antipsychotic medication and another that would have turned the existential worries and sadness of everyday life into an alleged mental disorder.

FACEBOOK TWITTER GOOGLE+ EMAIL SHARE

Enlarge This Image

But the association is still proceeding

PRINT

with other suggestions that could

REPRINTS

potentially expand the boundaries of

psychiatry to define as mentally ill

tens of millions of people now

considered normal. The proposals are

part of a major undertaking: revisions to what is often

called the "bible of psychiatry" -- the Diagnostic and

Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or D.S.M. The fifth

edition of the manual is scheduled for publication next

May.

Shannon May I was heavily involved in the third and fourth editions of

Related
Times Topic: Psychiatry and Psychiatrists

the manual but have reluctantly concluded that the association should lose its nearly century-old monopoly on defining mental illness. Times have changed, the role of

psychiatric diagnosis has changed, and the association has

Connect With Us on Twitter
For Op-Ed, follow @nytopinion and to hear from the editorial page editor, Andrew Rosenthal, follow @andyrNYT.

changed. It is no longer capable of being sole fiduciary of a task that has become so consequential to public health and public policy.
Psychiatric diagnosis was a professional embarrassment and cultural backwater until D.S.M.-3 was published in

1980. Before that, it was heavily influenced by

psychoanalysis, psychiatrists could rarely agree on diagnoses and nobody much cared

anyway.

D.S.M.-3 stirred great professional and public excitement by providing specific criteria for each disorder. Having everyone work from the same playbook facilitated treatment planning and revolutionized research in psychiatry and neuroscience.

Surprisingly, D.S.M.-3 also caught on with the general public and became a runaway best seller, with more than a million copies sold, many more than were needed for professional use. Psychiatric diagnosis crossed over from the consulting room to the cocktail party. People who previously chatted about the meaning of their latest dreams began to ponder

Log in to see what your friends are sharing on nytimes.com. Privacy Policy | What's This?

Log In With Facebook

What's Popular Now
Student Loans Weighing Down a Generation With Heavy Debt

Fables of Wealth

Advertise on NYTimes.com
Today's Headlines Daily E-Mail
Sign up for a roundup of the day's top stories, sent every morning. See Sample | Privacy Policy

MOST E-MAILED

MOST VIEWED

1. Can You Call a 9-Year-Old a Psychopath?

2. OPINION Capitalists and Other Psychopaths
3. DEGREES OF DEBT A Generation Hobbled by the Soaring Cost of College
4. PAUL KRUGMAN Why We Regulate
5. So Eager for Grandchildren, They're Paying the Egg-Freezing Clinic
6. OPINION

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/12/opinion/break-up-the-psychiatric-monopoly.html?_r=1&src=me&ref=general

Page 1 sur 3

Break Up the Psychiatric Monopoly - NYTimes.com

14/05/12 19:36

where they best fit among D.S.M.'s intriguing categories.

The Amygdala Made Me Do It

The fourth edition of the manual, released in 1994, tried to contain the diagnostic inflation that followed earlier editions. It succeeded on the adult side, but failed to anticipate or control the faddish over-diagnosis of autism, attention deficit disorders and bipolar disorder in children that has since occurred.
Indeed, the D.S.M. is the victim of its own success and is accorded the authority of a bible in areas well beyond its competence. It has become the arbiter of who is ill and who is not -- and often the primary determinant of treatment decisions, insurance eligibility, disability payments and who gets special school services. D.S.M. drives the direction of research and the approval of new drugs. It is widely used (and misused) in the courts.

7. Vermont Towns Have an Image, and They Say Dollar Stores Aren't Part of It
8. THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN This Column Is Not Sponsored by Anyone
9. ON EDUCATION Strict but Trusted, Nun Who Leads Girls' School Is Irreplaceable
10. FALLING LIMBS Neglected, Rotting Trees Turn Deadly

Until now, the American Psychiatric Association seemed the entity best equipped to monitor the diagnostic system. Unfortunately, this is no longer true. D.S.M.-5 promises to be a disaster -- even after the changes approved this week, it will introduce many new and unproven diagnoses that will medicalize normality and result in a glut of unnecessary and harmful drug prescription. The association has been largely deaf to the widespread criticism of D.S.M.-5, stubbornly refusing to subject the proposals to independent scientific review.

Go to Complete List »

Show My Recommendations

Many critics assume unfairly that D.S.M.-5 is shilling for drug companies. This is not true. The mistakes are rather the result of an intellectual conflict of interest; experts always overvalue their pet area and want to expand its purview, until the point that everyday problems come to be mislabeled as mental disorders. Arrogance, secretiveness, passive governance and administrative disorganization have also played a role.
New diagnoses in psychiatry can be far more dangerous than new drugs. We need some equivalent of the Food and Drug Administration to mind the store and control diagnostic exuberance. No existing organization is ready to replace the American Psychiatric Association. The most obvious candidate, the National Institute of Mental Health, is too research-oriented and insensitive to the vicissitudes of clinical practice. A new structure will be needed, probably best placed under the auspices of the Department of Health and Human Services, the Institute of Medicine or the World Health Organization.

Stage scenes: Audra McDonald
ALSO IN THEATER » Tony Nominations: Musicals Tony Nominations: Plays
ADVERTISEMENTS
Introducing Business Day Live - Watch Now!

All mental-health disciplines need representation -- not just psychiatrists but also psychologists, counselors, social workers and nurses. The broader consequences of changes should be vetted by epidemiologists, health economists and public-policy and forensic experts. Primary care doctors prescribe the majority of psychotropic medication, often carelessly, and need to contribute to the diagnostic system if they are to use it correctly. Consumers should play an important role in the review process, and field testing should occur in real life settings, not just academic centers.
Psychiatric diagnosis is simply too important to be left exclusively in the hands of psychiatrists. They will always be an essential part of the mix but should no longer be permitted to call all the shots.
Allen Frances, a former chairman of the psychiatry department at Duke University School of Medicine, led the task force that produced D.S.M.-4.

Ads by Google
IMG Artists
Global Performing Arts Management Consulting and Advisory Services
www.barrettwissman.com

what's this?

A version of this op-ed appeared in print on May 12, 2012, on page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Diagnosing the D.S.M..

FACEBOOK

TWITTER

GOOGLE+

EMAIL

SHARE

Get Free E-mail Alerts on These Topics Psychiatry and Psychiatrists
American Psychiatric Assn

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Book)
Mental Health and Disorders

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/12/opinion/break-up-the-psychiatric-monopoly.html?_r=1&src=me&ref=general

Page 2 sur 3

Break Up the Psychiatric Monopoly - NYTimes.com
Ads by Google
The End-Time is Here
2008 was God's last warning, 2012 is economic collapse & WW III
www.the-end.com

what's this?

14/05/12 19:36

INSIDE NYTIMES.COM

N.Y. / REGION »
For Nepalese Pedicurists, a Cultural Hurdle

OPINION »
Fixing the Student Loan System
In Room for Debate: How can young people get degrees without taking on an onerous financial burden?

WORLD »
Writers Put Pens Down to Prove a March's Might

TELEVISION »
An Inscrutable Alternative to Sleep

OPINION »

BUSINESS »

Op-Ed: Rethinking Pro Bono
If New York begins a free legal-services program, the burden should be shared either by all lawyers or by taxpayers generally.

As Talent Flees to Cable, Networks Fight Back

Home World U.S. N.Y. / Region Business Technology Science Health Sports Opinion Arts Style Travel Jobs Real Estate Autos Site Map

© 2012 The New York Times Company Privacy Your Ad Choices Terms of Service Terms of Sale Corrections

RSS Help Contact Us Work With Us Advertise

MORE IN OPINION (1 OF 17 ARTICLES)
Op-Ed Columnist: Diplomat Dissidents
Read More »

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/12/opinion/break-up-the-psychiatric-monopoly.html?_r=1&src=me&ref=general

Page 3 sur 3

