Development issues in specification of Web systems

David Lowe1, John Eklund2
1University of Technology, Sydney PO Box 123 Broadway NSW 2007 Australia
david.lowe@uts.edu.au
2Access Testing Centre 112 Alexander Street, Crows Nest, NSW 2065 Australia
johne@testingcentre.com

Abstract
In spite of the recent rapid growth in the development of Web-based systems, little research has attempted to understand processes for eliciting client needs and how the business processes that surround the early phases of a Web project affect the outcome. Commercial practice has been addressing these issues in an ad-hoc manner by adapting processes from the constituent disciplines (software engineering, information systems, graphic design, marketing, etc.). While idealised models of web development proliferate in the literature, there is evidence that commercial practice is interpreting them broadly. This paper presents industry-focused research into the current commercial practices in the gathering, refining and implementation of requirements for Web systems. We report on a series of practitioner interviews and surveys aimed to determine current development practice. Based on this empirical evidence, we make recommendations for best-practice for handling requirements in Web projects.

Keywords: Web systems, Specification, Requirements, Acceptance Criteria

1. Introduction
There is a major worldwide expansion in investment in Web-based technologies, applications and systems. Despite the rapid growth in the industry, and the obvious commercial impacts, there is little research that is attempting to understand practices related to Web development, and in particular the processes for eliciting clients' needs, negotiating tenders and contracts, and developing and utilising specifications. Nevertheless, commercial practice has, perforce, been addressing these issues, though often in an ad-hoc manner and adapting processes from the constituent disciplines (software engineering, information systems, graphic design, marketing, etc.).
Anecdotal evidence within the Web industry has indicated that difficulty in understanding client needs and in defining criteria for project acceptance from multiple perspectives is one of the primary components in the causes of failure of many web development projects. We would argue that the consequences of failing to understand the needs of these systems, how they relate to a relevant business plan/model, and/or how to appropriately utilise the technology is evident in the high profile failure of numerous e-business "dot.coms" (such as Boo.com, ToySmart, CraftShop, DrKoop.com and Value America). The same problems are also evident with many conventional "bricks and mortar" companies that have attempted unsuccessfully to develop an on-line presence (Sears and Levi's are

two excellent examples) ­ where Web-enabled projects often result in systems that may be technically successful but are business failures1.
The research reported in this paper indicates that specifications often do not demonstrate how the project's objectives may be accomplished, and manifest in underlying problems later in the project. These include: understanding which aspects should be specified (e.g. setting functional and usability goals), how these are documented in a way that is meaningful to both client and developer, and at what stage of the project lifecycle various requirements need to be articulated and agreed.
This problem is typically encountered during contract and tendering negotiations for the outsourced development of Web-based projects. It is not uncommon to find Web sites or applications that do not meet core stakeholder objectives or basic user requirements, project bids which vary in estimated cost by anything up to an order of magnitude, and significant conflicts arise between developers and clients over costs and development results. In particular, these problems become most noticeable as the project evolves and develops.
These problems are at least partly due to the uncertainty that is inherent in many Web projects. The nature of Web technologies is such that they can tend to
1 See, for more information: http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1007-201-2084725-0.html

Design and implement

Specify

Design

Evaluate

and implement

Specify

Design Evaliaumnadtpelement

Specify

Evaluate

Figure 1: Layers of Usability, Technical and Business in the iterative development process

lead to rather fundamental changes in business models and organisational processes. This, coupled with the rapid pace of technological change, the short development timeframes and the evolutionary maintenance that occurs, typically leads to a significant lack of understanding by clients about their own needs with respect to the systems being developed. Often this uncertainty is not resolved until system designs are available to facilitate education and clarification. Another difficulty with web development in particular is with members of design teams from varying backgrounds failing to understand how a change in one aspect of the system can affect another. Keeping development on track in meeting business, technical and user requirements can also be a significant challenge.
A common means being used to overcome this problem is the use of a project phase that focuses on understanding the overall project scope, where the client contracts the developer to develop a set of specifications and associated costs, for the entire project. However, web development tends to follow a far more iterative development cycle than traditional software engineering development, and specifications can change markedly as successive designs are created and evaluated against requirements in an interactive manner. Further, the evolution of specifications occurs at three interwoven levels: business (and marketing); technical; and usability (Figure 1). While a fixed fee for project scoping is commonplace, it has not addressed the problems of the business dealing with changing requirements, as they often change well into the design phase.
In this paper we investigate these issues, and in particular how they are reflected and addressed by current commercial practice. We examine the development of specifications for a sample of Web

systems, and highlight some of the key issues and make practical recommendations for development teams.
2. Commercial Practice
There is a growing body of literature regarding the differences in the development of Internet-enabled or Web systems and conventional software systems. In general, this literature identifies unique characteristics of internet-enabled systems that reflect technical, usability and organisational requirements [1-3]. These include aspects such as: a tighter linkage between business architecture (which are usually coupled to significant changes to the business model of the client) with both a complex information architecture and a highly component-based technical architecture [4]; increased importance of quality attributes (since applications are typically more visible externally); open modularised architectures; and rapidly changing technologies.
Usability considerations reflect an increased emphasis on user interfaces and the requirement of the system to meet the needs of end users, who are more often a broader and more general demographic than for larger software systems. These considerations include both user acceptance of the system as well as making them usable - developed according to interface standards and matching user preferences and workflow.
More fundamental than the technical or usability aspects are some of the developmental, or organisational, characteristics that are either unique or heightened in Web systems [1]. These include: uncertainty in the project domain; volatility of the client needs; a highly uninformed competitiveness; short delivery timeframes; and fine-grained evolution and maintenance. Of most interest in this paper is the first two of these. In particular, the domain uncertainty makes resolving requirements very problematic and the

requirements that do exist tend to be very volatile. Specifically, clients' understanding of not only the technology's capabilities but also their own needs can change dramatically during the course of a project, as they learn more about the capabilities of the technology and how it will be likely to impact on their business processes and models. In particular, many web projects are vision-driven rather than needs-driven leading to an initial lack of clarity. This is also coupled with business models that are non-existent, immature, or evolving rapidly as organisations migrate to an increased reliance on Internet technologies [5]. These issues are exacerbated by the fact that Web projects tend to be driven by time-to-market pressures, and as a consequence shortcuts in process are used.
There is, as yet, little assistance from the research literature to be gained in addressing these problems. The design methods that have been emerging (for example, OOHDM [6] and more recently WebML [7], and various adaptations of UML [8] [9] [10]) have yet to become widely adopted, and focus on design approaches rather than understanding requirements. One exception is the work by IBM on patterns for eBusiness [11], which identifies common business patterns that can form the basis of client discussions, but even this fails to address specific processes for resolving client and user requirements.
Essentially much commercial practice has evolved from conventional software development processes. Conventional processes assume that clients either understand their requirements, or at the very least understand the problem that is being addressed. Even when the client is not able to articulate their requirements precisely, they are at least able to understand whether a given design will address their needs. This is often not true in Web projects. Further, conventional software development tends to be less iterative, more focussed on a technical solution, and assumes well-defined requirements exist or can be easily elicited and analysed.
This is problematic for Web projects, where many clients not only have a poor understanding of what they want, but also of the problems being addressed by the new system. In these circumstances, using a design to clarify whether it addresses the problem will be insufficient, as the problem itself is only poorly understood. Lightweight iterative and/or incremental approaches, such as XP [12], inherently use designs (through the rapid development of partial "spike" solutions) to evaluate alternatives, but do not explicitly aim to improve clients understanding of their problem domain, and hence don't assist in the client's formulation of their needs.
One attempt to integrate support for Web projects directly into the development process is work on Web OPEN [14]. This extends OPEN (a process framework) to include additional activities, tasks, and

roles that are applicable to Web projects. Although a significant step forward, this work does not inherently provide guidance in structuring the process to deal with the requirements volatility.
In effect, conventional software engineering processes see requirements as preceding and driving the design process. Even where an iterative or incremental approach (such as XP [12]) or a spiral approach (involving multiple feedback loops) is adopted the design is still viewed as a way of assisting in the identification and validation of requirements, but rarely does it help the client to actually formulate their needs. In other words (and somewhat simplistically) with conventional practices a developer is saying to the client "Do you think this design addresses your problem?" rather than "Here is an example of how the system might help you achieve something useful?".
In commercial Web development the design process not only helps developers and clients articulate the needs, but also helps developers and clients to jointly explore possibilities and to understand the system domain and formulate their understanding of their needs. In effect, the design allows developers to manage the inherent uncertainty and volatility. In order to develop a clearer understanding of these issues we undertook a comprehensive analysis of current industry practice with regard to the handling of requirements in Web projects.
In this context we have hypothesised that, for internet-enabled and Web systems development, the explicit joint-exploration by developers and clients of partial designs is critical to the emergence of an understanding of the clients needs, particularly in the context of necessary changes to business processes.
3. Research Method
In order to explore the above hypothesis, and given that current research largely fails to address the inherent uncertainty and volatility in Web requirements, it is appropriate to investigate how commercial practice deals with these issues, and whether there is any evidence to support the hypothesis. Note that the intention of this initial empirical research is not to prove this hypothesis, but to provide sufficient information to justify a more detailed analysis and to provide pointers to the way forward.
In order to achieve this we undertook an extensive set of industry interviews and surveys. The interviews were intended to identify general perceptions and qualitative trends. The surveys were intended to capture more quantitative data. The goal of both was to understand current best-practice, and the various motivations driving this practice.
The interviews were conducted over a period of 6 weeks, primarily during April/May 2000, were typically 20-40 minutes and involved a series of

questions focusing on interactions with clients and the processes for understanding client needs. Transcripts of the surveys were analysed to identify areas where there was either significant differences or significant congruence of opinion. Details of the questions asked in the interviews are given in Appendix 1. The survey questions are provided in Appendix 2.
A total of 23 interviews were carried out. The interviewees were selected based on a mailout request to 32 Web development companies and a subsequent telephone follow-up (i.e. a 72% response rate). The interview questions were designed by analysing the core issues identified in the literature. It is important to note that this stage of the research is not intended to prove or disprove specific hypotheses, but rather to provide sufficient information on which detailed hypotheses could be based for ongoing work.
Of the interviewees, 18 also completed the online survey. An additional 38 participants completed only the online survey. This gave a total of 56 responses (47 from an e-mail sent to 148 potential participants, with an additional 9 responses from unsolicited sources). All respondents were from within Australian industry and so care would need to be taken in extrapolating to an international context.
4. Results
Whilst we do not have the scope within this paper to describe the detailed results, the following is a summary of the more salient data from the surveys and interviews.
4.1 Organisation Profiles
The companies that took part in the research interviews covered a broad spectrum of development areas (multimedia, Internet, and intranet development) and application domains (financial institutions, medical organisations, travel and tourism, legal, manufacturing, government, etc.). 37% were small companies (typically 2-4 permanent staff with up to 10 contact positions), 32% medium companies (up to 25 employees), 26% large national and multinationals and 5% government departments. Project teams had relatively uniform compositions (in terms of defined roles). Average figures were: project management ­ 21%; programming ­ 20%, user-interface/graphic designers ­ 16%; structural design ­ 14%; content markup ­ 13%; content capture ­ 11%; analysts ­ 10%; sales/marketing ­ 10%; testing/evaluation ­ 10%2.
2 Note that these categories were not exclusive, and so the figures are not cumulative. i.e. it is feasible for a team (or section of a team) to fulfil multiple roles.

4.2 Complexity and Duration of Projects
The projects of individual companies varied greatly in complexity and cost (a reflection of the range of scale of applications being developed for the Web). Project cost range was from $2,000 to $50 million with the average company working on contracts ranging from $100,000 to $1 million. Interestingly, there was generally a low correlation between cost and scale variables such as number of source documents and number of resultant client pages. The frequency of content changes had a surprisingly high correlation. Numerous respondents felt that hidden costs were a major issue in projects (average of 3.4 on a scale of 0=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree), and that clients have difficulty understanding the implications or details of project bids (average of 3.4)
Teams consisted of a minimum of 1 person to a maximum of 16 persons on a project ­ though the majority of projects under $200,000 involved teams of 4 or fewer people. It is worth noting that in a significant number of cases, clients also often contributed their staff members to teams ­ though the form of this contribution varied significantly. Project duration varied from 2-3 days on small projects, 2-4 months on medium sized projects and 9-12 months on large-scale projects. The average expected lifetime of systems was marginally under 18 months, with few projects expected to have a lifetime of over 24 months.
There was also a high level of outsourcing amongst most of the respondents. This extended to aspects such as graphic design, usability evaluation, functionality testing, scripting or application development and development of specific functional areas (database development and administration, server management, etc.). Outsourcing supported the gaps in respondent companies' areas of expertise and tended to be the areas where contractual staff and strategic alliances were called upon.
4.3. Client/Developer Interaction
Many of the companies aim towards having only one point of client contact (56%) and using a designated project leader rather than having multiple points of contact (44%). The one client liaison seemed to be important though the respondents who opted for several leaders or team focussing had strong team processes in place.
There was a very strong feeling (average rating 4.4 on a 0-5 scale) that clients did not well understand the capabilities of the technologies. Similarly it was felt (average rating 4.2) that clients did not understand their own needs. Perhaps surprisingly, anecdotal evidence indicated that respondents felt that clients had a low understanding of their own organisations and existing processes (most of the time undocumented) that need to be changed to allow for the effective integration of the

new system. There was a consensus from the majority of the respondents (83%) that there needed to be a process at the beginning of the projects focussed on educating their clients.
Almost all respondents (96%) interviewed clients as part of the process for identifying requirements. A much smaller number (58%) felt that interviewing potential users was important. The majority of respondents (84%) found that the look and feel and content issues were secondary to the business case. Interestingly, critical success factors (i.e. acceptance criteria or essential requirements) were brought up only by 5% of respondents as a vehicle for capturing the business case. The majority of respondents indicated the importance of getting the requirements and specification correct ­ though there was considerable divergence of opinion as to when this should occur. Some other important points that contribute to the success of a Web project are senior executives and management commitment to the project, early user analysis and usability evaluation, and recognising the concomitant changes to the organisations workflows and business practices.
4.4. Development Processes
Most of the respondents attempt to capture requirements before they sign final contracts. It was also recognised that initial tendering often occurs before this point ­ leading to a two-step contract negotiation. Some clients were seen to be happy to commit to a budget (during the tender process) based on broad business objectives, and then finalise the contract at a later stage based on specific analysis of the detailed requirements. The scope of the contracted requirements is typically constrained by retaining a focus on the business case and establishing that there is good basis for specific detailed requirements.
Essentially all respondents recognised that client needs will change and evolve over the life of a project, despite a well-written requirements specification. Most respondents had some form of change management process, though few companies had formal tool-level support for change or configuration management of applications. Most document all changes whether minor or major in formal proceedings mainly to justify their reasons for working out of scope. Liaison with clients on their reasons for change are important as are the implications of the change in areas such as cost and impact to the product and if it still meets the brief.
Of the respondents that did not indicate having in place formal procedures there seemed to be a feeling that business cases change during the development phase and that contracts (both scope and price) need to be renegotiated during the course of a project. In one respondents case there was the feeling that to refuse

change or make change difficult the company eventually delivers a product out of the business case.
4.5. Primary Divergences of Views
There were a number of areas where there was divergence of views. In particular, a number of these differences of opinion highlight potential uncertainty within the industry. The key statements that generated significant differences in the levels of agreement were:
We interview the clients to determine requirements
We interview intended users to determine requirements
It is important to respond to changes in user requirements as they occur
Changes in the user requirements require the site or application to be renegotiated. We often have difficulty in the relationship with clients
We prefer a single client liaison It is important to identify technologies to use as
soon as possible It is important to be able to modify the system
once it is completed Technical, design and management staff work
well together Management reviews and approves all
commitments made to groups external to the organisation The project size is tracked and corrective actions are taken The project costs are tracked and corrective actions are taken
5. Recommendations
Based on a detailed analysis of the interview and survey data, a number of key observations and recommendations can be made with respect to optimising the handling of requirements within Web projects. Note that whilst many of these could be viewed as good general software engineering practice, the specific context and emphasis is important.
Establish a client liaison who understands both the IT/Technical aspects and the business domain. Although such a person may not be in a position within the client's organisation that allows them to readily interact with developers or contractors, there is much to be gained from encouraging the client to bring such a person into the liaison. In particular, this improves the likelihood that the client will more rapidly develop a good understanding of the implications of the evolving system, and be in a position to articulate appropriate requirements.
Establish effective client education mechanisms. A major problem in many projects appears to be the lack

of understanding by the client. This extends from an understanding of the capabilities of the technologies to an understanding of their own business processes and how these should possibly be modified with the introduction of the new Web system(s). Client education mechanisms can at least in part, mitigate this. It is important that clients accept the need to develop a clearer understanding, and be willing to work with the developers in building up this knowledge. For small projects in particular, this needs to be as early as possible in the development, and typically prior to any substantial outlay. Note also that this does not imply that the developer will understand the client's business. Rather it indicates that they need to understand mechanisms for jointly exploring the application domain and the implications of the technology within this domain.
Ensure that clients understand their role. The data indicated that often clients do not have a clear view of their responsibilities within the development process. For small projects, and at a simple level, this may mean an understanding of their responsibilities in the initial provision of, and subsequent evolution of, content within the site. For larger projects, the relationship becomes more complex. There is no absolute "right" role ­ but it does need to be clarified and made consistent with the development approach being adopted.
Clarify business cases as early in the process as possible. The business case forms the foundations on which the requirements, specifications and subsequent development are grounded. Often without a clear understanding of the clients' business case a project can waste considerable effort going around in circles ­ proposing designs that subsequently require considerable change.
Adopt early evaluation of potential designs. A primary characteristic of many Web projects is the lack of client understanding with regard to desired attributes of the system being developed. A key way to handle such uncertainty is evaluation of potential designs. This can be through mechanisms such as usability evaluations, focus groups, etc.
Accept an appropriate level of flexibility in requirements. Projects under $100k are likely to benefit from significant flexibility in requirements, and are typically small enough (and involve sufficiently simple technologies and architectures) that the changes can be accommodated with minimal difficulty. Above $100k, it becomes much more important to have formal specifications with suitable client sign-off and structured processes for managing changes.
Adoption of effective configuration management tools and methods. Related to the above point is the

establishment of suitable procedures for managing requirements changes once they are accepted. Substantial benefits have been claimed from a number of sources.3
Establish effective outsourcing or subcontracting management and strategic alliances. The nature of Web projects is that few companies have a sufficiently broad range of in-house skills to effectively manage all aspects of the development. Typical aspects that are often outsourced include evaluation, graphic design, server management, etc. Given the critical nature of aspects such as these it is important to establish effective procedures for managing the outsourcing. In particular, consideration should be given to aspects such as appropriate service level agreements and relevant partnering.
Finally, based on the areas where there were significant differences of opinion, we can identify several key areas that would benefit from additional consideration, both in terms of research and investigation of existing practices.
· Cost estimation of Web projects · Negotiation of changes to the project scope · Handling of requirements volatility during the
development process · Understanding of the relationship between
requirements and system architecture
6. Conclusions and Further Work
In this paper we have analysed current commercial practice with regard to the management of requirements for Web projects. We have identified a number of key measures that characterise best practice and have the potential to address some of the key differences between Web projects and more conventional software projects.
One issue that has been highlighted by the outcomes of this work is the discrepancy between the focus of most research in Web development, and the focus of efforts to improve commercial practice. Research has emphasised the development of approaches to the design of Web systems, whereas commercial practice has been more interested in investigating the use of business modelling as a driver for structuring requirements, coupled with the utilisation of designs in assisting clients to develop an understanding of the problem and potential solutions.
Considerable work still remains to be carried out in this area. There are two key areas that we are investigating - both addressing areas highlighted in this research. The first is to develop empirical evidence
3 See www.susandart.com

that adoption of these principles can lead to improved development outcomes.
The second area is the development of a designdriven requirements process that structures the way in which design activities can be linked to the clarification of requirements through an appropriate model of domain uncertainty.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the collaborative funding support from the Australian Research Council, Access Online Pty Ltd and Allette Systems Ltd. Under grant no. C4991-7612. In particular we wish to thank Ross Jeffery, Vassiliki Elliott, Louise Scott, Lucila Carvalho, and John D'Ambra for their contributions to this research project.
We also wish to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the numerous companies and individuals who participated in the industry interviews and surveys.
References
[1] J. Burdman, Collaborative Web Development: Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[2] E. England and A. Finney, Managing Multimedia: Project Management for Interactive Media, 2nd ed: Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[3] S. Overmyer, "What's Different about Requirements Engineering for Web Sites?," Requirements Engineerng Journal, vol. 5, pp. 62-65, 2000.
[4] P. Russell, "Infrastructure - Make or Break your EBusiness," presented at TOOLS-Pacific 2000: Technology of Object-Oriented Languages and Systems, Sydney, Australia, 2000.
[5] L. D. Stein, "Profit, the Prime Directive," WebTechniques, vol. 5, pp. 14-17, 2000.
[6] N. Guell, D. Schwabe, and P. Vilain, "Modeling Interactions and Navigation in Web Applications," presented at Proceedings of the World Wild Web and Conceptual Modeling'00 Workshop - ER'00 Conference, Salt Lake City, USA, 2000.
[7] S. Ceri, P. Fraternali, and A. Bongio, "Web Modeling Language (WebML): a modeling language for designing Web sites," presented at Proceedings of WWW9 Conference, Amsterdam, 2000.
[8] H. Baumeister, N. Koch, and L. Mandel, "Towards a UML Extension for Hypermedia Design," presented at UML 1999, 1999.
[9] J. Conallen, Building Web Applications with UML, 1st ed: Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[10] P. Vilain, D. Schwabe, and C. S. d. Souza, "A Diagrammatic Tool for Representing User Interaction in UML," presented at UML'2000, York, U.K., 2000.

[11] J. Lord, "Patterns for e-business: Lessons learned from building successful e-business applications,".: IBM, 2000, pp. 4.
[12] K. Beck, Extreme Programming Explained: AddisonWesley, 1999.
[13] D. Lowe, "A Framework for Defining Acceptance Criteria for Web Development Projects," presented at Second ICSE Workshop on Web Engineering, Limerick, Ireland, 2000.
[14] B. Haire, B. Henderson-Sellers, and D. Lowe, "OPEN Process Support for Web Development," Annals of Software Engineering, Submitted.
Appendix 1: Interview questions
The following is the information collected, and questions asked, during the structured interviews.
Q0a: Company Name Q0b: Respondents Name Q0c: Respondents Position
Q1a: What is your primary business? Q1b: Does your company target a specific business domain? Q1c: Approx. how many employees would you have involved in interactive media or web development? Q1d: What is the complexity of the applications that you develop? Can you describe the types of technologies you use and the scale of the projects that you typically handle?
Q2a: Does a single person handle all liaisons with clients for a specific project?
Q2b:If a developer finds an issue that isn't covered by the information available from the client, how is this typically resolved?
Q2c: Does the client explicitly sign-off on the requirements that you identify? At what stage does this occur?
Q2d: How are changing requests from the client handled once development is underway?
Q3a What types of things typically would you identify from the client? (Eg. Content, look and feel, existing information sources, current workflows, etc.)
Q3b: What aspects are clients typically least aware of?
Q3c: Which aspects make the biggest difference with respect to the cost of the project? The ultimate success of the project? Why?
Q3d: Do you feel that clients typically have a poor understanding of their own needs and what the technology is capable of providing them? Does this change during the project?

Q4a: Are most of the client needs captured before or after signing a contract for the project? What types of requirements are identified before? After?
Q4b: Do you find that client requirements, needs or expectations evolve significantly during the course of a project? What brings this about? How are these changes handles?
Q4c: Do you have a standard pro-forma for documenting client requirements? Is this adhered to consistently?
Q4d: Is the project evaluated against and then signed off against the original requirements at the end of a project?
Q4e:Is the documentation on client requirements typically maintained?
Q4f: At what point is the contract typically renegotiated?

Appendix 2: Survey Questions
The following is a summary of the questions asked in the online survey.

Section 1. Background Information: In this section of the survey we wish to gain information about different application domains so that we can correlate later results against different domains.

Question 1: Depending on the size and domain of your organisation, it may be appropriate to answer the questions in this survey for your whole company or only for your division or department. To which level will your answers apply?
o Entire company o A division/department

Question 2: Company profile

a. Your companies / department primary business:

b. No. of employees in organisation / department

c. No. of employees directly involved in interactive

media production (CD-ROM development, website

development, electronic document development etc.):

d. Of all staff involved in interactive media

development, what proportions would you classify as:

Project management

Content capture

User-I/F design

Structural design

Programmers

Content mark-up

Quality control

Sales/Marketing

Testing/Evaluation

Analyst

Other (please specify):

Question 3: Development domain a. Which of the following is your company involved in (select as many as appropriate): Web Development, Intranet Development, Extranet Development, Access to legacy systems, Data Warehousing, Electronic Commerce Systems, Software Development, Educational Applications, Entertainment

Applications, Business Applications, Online Advertising, Information Kiosks, Document Publishing, Other:
Section 2. Project Information: Here we want to obtain information on the typical project size, cost, form etc., so that we can evaluate the success or failure of projects, and the appropriateness of the approach to development against various project characteristics.
Question 4: Project Size a. What is the estimated size of your development projects in terms of (ignore those measures which are irrelevant in your case):
· Number of staff · Estimated total cost · kBytes of data · Pages of information · No. of source doc.'s · Other (please specify): Comments (on project size, variability,etc.): b. What is the complexity of the applications which you develop? (ignore those measures which are irrelevant in your case): · Links / page · Frequency of update · "Hits" / day (for websites) · Other (please specify): Comments: c. Could you please provide an indication of the characteristics you typically use to measure the size of a project, and how you estimate the scope of a project prior to commencing development: d. Are your estimates usually accurate? Yes/No
Question 5: Project Costing: a. Rate each of the following according to the extent to which you agree with the statement (by circling the relevant number): [6 point scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree] · We always achieve budget · We know how much a site will cost to develop
before we start · Hidden costs are a major issue · Cost estimation is a significant problem for us · Our clients have difficulty understanding the
implications or details our project bids · We often make a loss on a project
Question 6: Project duration a. What is the average duration (initial identification to commissioning) of your development projects: b. What is the average expected lifetime of the applications or systems which you are developing?

c. What factors do you believe impact most on the expected lifetime of the applications or systems which you are developing (e.g. changing technology).?
Section 3. Desired Process: In this section of the survey we will identify characteristics of development processes which are considered important, irrespective of whether or not you are able to adhere to these characteristics.
Question 7: General perceptions of process a. Rate each of the following according to the extent to which you agree with the statement (by circling the relevant number): [6 point scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree] · It is important for team members to meet
regularly. · It is important for team leaders to meet regularly · It is important to understand the user
requirements totally before starting development · It is important to respond to changes in user
requirements as they occur · It is important to identify technologies to use as
soon as possible · It is important to identify how the system will
work before implementation · It is important to have very strong technical
skills · Interface design skills are more important than
information management skills · It is important to test a system thoroughly once
completed · It is important to regularly test the system as it is
being developed · It is important that the system is complete before
commencing testing · It is important to be able to modify the system
once it is completed
Section 4. Current Development Practices: In this section we wish to obtain information regarding the carrying out of actual development projects.
Question 8: Development tools and techniques: a. Is your company committed to the use of specific tools, systems or applications? Yes/No. If Yes, please describe or list these tools (e.g. specific database vendors or web servers): b. Do you regularly use any of the following tools or techniques?
· Storyboards · Prototypes · Entity-Relationships Diagrams · OO models of info. structure · Formal requirements specs · Example screen dumps · Other:

Question 9: Development processes: a. Do you have a standard process or methodology which you follow for all or most of your development processes? Yes/No b. Was this developed in-house? Yes/No c. Is this process formally documented? Yes/No d. Do you typically adhere closely to this process? Yes/No e. Does this process require specific deliverables? Yes/No f. Please list the major activities in this process or methodology (e.g. contract negotiations, structural design, coding, markup, etc.) g. Where possible, can you provide indications of factors which impact on the risks associated with any of the above activities. h. Do you use techniques to mitigate the risks associated with your development projects? Yes/No. If Yes, please describe: i. Please list any tools which you use to support the development process (design tools, project management tools, etc.)
Question 10: Development processes: Rate each of the following according to the extent to which you agree with the statement (by circling the relevant number): [6 point scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree]
· Team members meet regularly · Team leaders meet regularly · Document changes are tracked well · Team members communicate changes to other
team members well · We interview the clients to determine
requirements · We interview intended users to determine
requirements · We prepare a system specification before
allocating resources · We develop a model of the system before
attempting to implement it · Implementation is a matter of converting a
system model into an appropriate technology · Implementation is where we make most of our
decisions about the system structure · A comprehensive test plan allows us to
identify/fix errors as they occur · We reduce time spent testing by
comprehensively testing the final product · Careful planning early on allows us to
incorporate additions into a site or application after it has been deployed · Changes in the user requirements require the site or application to be redeveloped
Question 11: Project Outsourcing / Subcontracting:

a. Do you ever outsource aspects of your development projects? Yes/No. If Yes, what aspects do you typically outsource?
b. Is this because of: · A lack of appropriate skills · More effective cost man'gment · More effective time man'gment · Other:
c. Do you require that contractors / subcontractors have in place an appropriate development process? Yes/No
d. Do you audit the development process of contractors / subcontractors? Yes/No
Comments:
Question 12: Development skills: a. Could you rate each of the following according to the extent to which you agree with the statement (by circling the relevant number): [6 point scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree] · The technical skills of our staff are adequate · We have great difficulty obtaining staff with an
appropriate level of skills · We have difficulty retaining our staff · Hiring staff is problematic · Development teams typically have a very
eclectic mix of skills · We have problems managing the balance
between technical and design skills · Technical, design and management staff work
well together · We have in place effective training mechanisms · We prefer to employ staff and train them
ourselves · As soon as we train staff they leave · We provide effective incentives to retain staff b. Do you have in place formal training mechanisms? Yes/No. If yes, please describe: c. Do you have difficulty in obtaining staff with skills in particular areas? Yes/No. If Yes, please describe which areas:
Question 13: Client Interaction: Rate each of the following according to the extent to which you agree with the statement (by circling the relevant number): [6 point scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree]
· We prefer a single client liaison · We have regular meetings with our client · Our clients usually do not understand the
technology · It is important to have a formal contract with the
client · It is important to carefully specify the client
requirements Comments:

Question 14: Project Tracking: Rate each of the following according to the extent to which you agree with the statement (by circling the relevant number): [6 point scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree]
· A documented development plan is used for tracking all activities
· The project development plan is revised according to a documented procedure
· Senior management reviews and approves all commitments made to groups external to the organisation.
· Approved changes to project schedules are explicitly communicated to project staff
· The project's size is tracked and corrective actions are taken
· The project's costs are tracked and corrective actions are taken
· The project's schedule is tracked and corrective actions are taken
· Technical activities are tracked and corrective actions are taken
· The software, technical, cost, resource, and schedule risks are tracked throughout the project life
· Actual measured project tracking data is recorded for future use
· Development staff conduct regular reviews to track technical progress
Question 15: Project Completion a. Are your project generally completed on time? Yes/No. Could you please indicate those factors which most strongly affect your ability to complete projects on schedule:
Section 5. Contact Information: [Note: The following information is for our own records and to allow us to provide you with follow-up information (including a summarised copy of the results of this survey). The information will be kept strictly confidential. No identifying information will be released to other survey respondents.]
Question 16: Contact details a. Your company name: b. Your name: c. Your address d. Your phone: e. Your fax: f. Your email (if available)
Question 17: May we contact you if we need additional information or wish to discuss your answers to this survey? Yes/No

