Map generalization : 
Making rules for  knowledge representation 

Edited by 
Barbara P. Buttenfield 
National Cen~er for  Geographic Information  and  Analysis 
Department of  Geography. SUNY- Buffalo 
Robert 6. McMaster 
Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Minnesota 

Foreword by 
Herbert Freeman 
Professor  of  Computer Engineering, and 
Director,  Machine  Vkion taboratory, 
CA I P  Center, Rutgers  University, 
Piscaraway, New Jersey 

Longman  Scientific & Technical, 
Longrnan  Group UK 
Longrnan  House,  Burnt  Mill,  Harlow, 
Essex CM20 U E ,  England 
and Associated  Companies  throughout the  world. 
Copublished  in  the  United States  with 
John  Wiley & Sons,  lnc., 605  Third Avenue,  New  York, NY  10158 
0 Longman  Group UK  Limited  1991 

All  rights  reserved;  no  part  of  this  publication  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  any 
retrieval system, or transmitted  in any form or by any means, electronic,  mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without  either the prior written  permission of 
the  Publishers  or  a  licence  permitting  restricted  copying  in  the  United  Kingdom 
Ltd, 90 ~ o t t e n h a m  Court Road.  ond don, 
issued  by  the Copyright ~ i c e n s i n ~  ~
WlP 9HE. 

e & ~

~

 

First published  1991 

Trademarks 
Throughout  this  book  trademarked  names  are  used.  Rather  than  put  a  trademark 
symbol  in  every occurrence  of  a  trademarked  name,  we  state  that we are using the 
names only in an editorial fashion  and to the benefit of the trademark owner with  no 
intention  of  infringement  of  the  trademark. 

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Map generalization: Making rules for 
knowledge representation. 
I. Buttenfield, Barbara P. 
11. McMaster, Robert B. 
526.028 

ISBN 0-582-08062-2 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Map generalization  : making rules for knowledge  representation 1 

editors, Barbara P. Buttenfield,  Robert B. McMaster  ; foreword  by 
Herbert Freeman. 

p.  cm. 

Articles based on papers delivered  at a symposium held during 

April 1990 in Syracuse, N.Y. 

Includes bibliographical  references and index. 
ISBN 0470-21803-7 
1.  Cartography-Congresses. 

I.  Buttenfield, Barbara Pfeil. 

11.  McMaster, Robert Brainerd. 
GA101.2.M36  1991 
526-4~20 

Set in Times 10112 point by Columns of Reading. 

Printed and bound  in Great Britain at the Bath Press,  Avon 

91-22294 
ClP 

9 
A  rule for  describing line feature geometry 

Barbara P.  Buttenfield 

Introduction 

A continuing challenge  for  automating the  cartographic process  relates to 
using  data  from  a  digital  cartographic  database  for  representation  at 
multiple  map  scales.  The  challenge  involves  feature  simplification,  and 
specifically the determination of  feature details that must either be retained 
or omitted  for  appropriate graphic  representation. The digital  database is 
often produced for multiple purposes, including mapping at multiple scales; 
it  is  increasingly rare  that  a  base  map  is  digitized for  mapping at  a single 
scale.  A  related  problem  is  that  tolerance  values selected  for  simplifying 
base  map  information must  be  modified  as  feature geometry  varies within 
the digital file to ensure both  accuracy and recognizability of  graphic details 
on a generalized map. At present, decisions about where to adjust tolerance 
values  are  made  manually,  and  form  an  expensive  bottleneck  to  map 
production for government and  commercial organizations. 

This chapter explores a method for generating base map features at many 
scales from  a single digital  file,  and  presents a rule  by  which  to determine 
those scales at which  line feature geometry might  be  expected  to change in 
map  representation.  The  research  has  application  to  automating  map 
simplification, incorporating numeric guidelines into digital files about what 
magnitude  and  variation  in  geometric  detail  should  be  preserved  as  the 
digital file is simplified for  representation at  reduced  map scales. 

Derivation  of  rules  to  guide  the  mapping  process  has  been  of  long- 
standing interest to cartographers, primarily  for reasons of  consistency and 
quality  control.  The  National  Map  Accuracy  Standard  was  established in 
1947  (Thompson 1979)  to ensure horizontal and  vertical control on  USGS 
topographic maps. The Radical Law  (Topfer and Pillewizer  1966) provided 
numeric guidelines by  which  to determine how  much  detail to retain during 
map  compilation and  reduction. This is  one  of  the earliest  published  rules 

A  rule for  describing line feature  geometry 

formalized for map reduction and simplification. The inclusion of coefficients 
in  the formula to control for map purpose and for dimensionality of treated 
features  attests  to  the  recognition  that  the  appearance  of  map  features 
depends  upon  both  feature  type  and  map  purpose.  But  because  a  map 
surface is  not homogeneous in the amount or type  of  detail it  contains,  the 
rule cannot be  applied  with  mechanical  uniformity. 

For  example,  a  topographic  sheet  may  contain  very  dense  settlement 
features within an urban  area, with  rectangular street patterns composed of 
(uniformly) rectangular geometry.  It  might be  logical to apply a  single rule 
to  simplify  the  street  pattern.  Another  part  of  the  same  sheet  may  lie 
beyond the confines of  the urban  area, and contain few settlement  features, 
but  perhaps  include  a  drainage  channel,  o r   transportation  network,  or 
agricultural  areas.  Here,  there  may  be  very  few  features  displaying 
rectangular  patterns,  or even  uniformity.  Coefficients for  the  Radical  Law 
that  are  appropriate  for  one  part  of  the  map  are  not  likely  to  provide 
appropriate  simplification  for  every  part  of  the  map.  In  every  case,  the 
geometry of  the map symbols must reflect  the geographical structure of  the 
landscape,  and vary accordingly during map simplification. 

One  might  argue  that  the solution  to this problem is to simplify first the 
point features, then the tine features,  and so on.  It can be shown, however, 
that the problem will arise even when treating line features (for example) in 
isolation. In digital form, cartographic lines are bundled  as features that  are 
not  always tied  to geographical  or geometric  uniformity.  For  example,  the 
outline of  the USA may  be stored in  a small-scale database as a single entity 
and  incorporate  both  natural  (coastline)  and  artificial  (arcs  of  latitude) 
portions. Another example is provided by a digitally stored contour line that 
may  contain very different  amounts and  types of  crenulation and geometry 
as the  terrain  it  crosses varies in  bedrock  hardness  and  composition. 

The cartographic challenge is to apply simplification operators (rules) that 
accommodate the  geographical  and  geometric changes occurring  along  the 
extent  of  the  base  map  file.  At  one  level,  rules  may  involve  changing  the 
simplification  or  smoothing  algorithm.  At  a  different  level,  rules  may 
involve changing tolerance values to preserve various geometric characteris- 
tics (e.g. line length). In a similar fashion, automating decisions about where 
to  modify either  the  algorithm  or the tolerance  value  must  be  based  upon 
recognition  of  where  the  feature  details  can  be  seen  to  change  in  size  or 
density.  This  creates  problems  for  simplification  of  base  map  details, 
particularly for  naturally  occurring  linear  features. 

The purpose of  this research is  to evaluate automatic methods  to describe 
line feature geometry as it  varies with  map  scale.  This  requires  formalized 
description (knowledge) of  the  amount  and  type  of  details that  occur  along 
the  extent  of  the  digital  file,  and  knowledge  as  to  the  scale  at  which  the 
feature  representation  should  change.  In  Chapter  5,  three  types  of 
knowledge  are  discussed,  including  geometric,  procedural,  and  structural 
(Armstrong  1991); it  is  the  geometric  knowledge  which  is  the  focus  here. 
This chapter presents a method by  which to determine changes in geometry. 

Formulation of  rules 

and demonstrates its application  for several  small examples. 

The need to accommodate scale dependence in geographical depiction has 
been  argued  in  previous  literature,  as  geographical  line  features  vary  in 
appearance  with  changing  scale  of  map  representation  (Mandelbrot  1986; 
Buttenfield  1984;  Mark  and  Aronson  1984;  Carpenter  1981;  Goodchild 
1980).  It  will  be  shown  here  that  such  features  vary  in  their  graphical 
geometry as well.  Information  identifying the type of  geometric change and 
the specific map scales at which that change becomes visually evident can be 
utilized  during  map  simplification to choose  tolerance  values that  preserve 
both  realism  and  accuracy  of  the  feature  as  it  is  represented  at  multiple 
scales.  The information  can  be  collected  as a  formalized  rule  that  can  be 
stored  in  a  digital  coordinate  file  and  used  by  a  knowledge-based 
generalization  system. 

The rule presented  in  this chapter  is termed  a structure signature. It is a 
method  of  hierarchic  subdivision  and  geometric  measurement  of  a  k t a l  
line  feature.  It  provides  formalized  description  of  the  line  feature's 
geometric  characteristics  at  successively  finer  levels  of  resolution,  to 
accommodate the  issue  of  scale  dependence.  The  rule  will  be  applied  to 
demonstrate distinctions in three different geometric characteristics common 
to line features on  maps,  and  to justify  the need  to break digital Line  files 
into smaller pieces to preserve uniform  geometry during map simplification. 
Determination  of  changes  in  geometry  may  be  inferred  statistically, 
although  the shape of  the probability density  function  on urhich inferences 
are based  may  be  non-standard. 

It is important to note at the outset that while the following discussion will 
be  expressed  primarily  in  terms  of  vector  coordinates  and  a  vector-based 
solution,  a  similar  argument  (and  solution)  might  be  proposed  within  a 
raster  environment  with  negligible  modifications  in  analytical  geometry. 
Many  existing  cartographic  data  sets  (USGS  DLG-E,  National  Ocean 
Survey (NOS) World Vector Shorelines, and Census Topologically Integrated 
Geographic  Encoding  and  Reference  (TIGER)  files,  for  example)  are 
currently  formatted  as  vector  strings or  (as  in  the  case  of  TIGER  data) 
vector  links  between  topological  nodes.  Many  large  G I s   packages  (e.g. 
ARUINFO, System9, TYDAC) store feature data in vector  form; thus the 
vector  solution  seems  relevant.  Where  feasible  in  the  discussion  below, 
examples and  references  to raster  processing will  be  incorporated  into the 
discussion. 

Preservation of details during line simplification 

In  map  simplification,  algorithms  are  applied  to  digital  files  to  remove 
unwanted  detail,  to  select  or emphasize  particular  items,  or to  clarify  by 
removing  visual  clutter.  Most  simplification  algorithms  incorporate  some 
mechanism  to control the amount of  detail that is removed; for example, in 

A  rule for  describing line feature  geometry 
an  'dh point'  algorithm,  the  n  refers  to  a  numeric  threshold  (a  tolerance 
value)  determining  that  lln  points  will  be  eliminated  systematically  or 
randomly  (Tobler  1966).  Tolerance  values  can  take  many  forms.  They 
provide  the  width  of  corridors  within  which  coordinates  are  eliminated 
(Deveau 1985; Douglas and Peucker 1973). or the number of coordinates to 
be  considered  for  conversion  to  a  straight  line  segment  (Lang  1969).  As 
argued above, tolerance  values must  be  modified where it  becomes evident 
that feature geometry has changed. Van Horn (1985) presents an example of 
the Virginia coastline, demonstrating problems with  application of  constant 
tolerance  values.  Manual  tolerance  value  modification  is  accomplished 
intuitively,  by  visual  inspection and  reliance  upon  geographical  familiarity 
with  the  map  feature.  Two cartographers will  probably  simplify  the same 
line feature in  nearly the same way, and vary  their manual simplification in 
similar localities.  But  it  will  be  rare  that  the  identical coordinate  location 
will  be  marked for transition  in  manual simplification. 

In computer simplification, different solutions may result from the starting 
bias  of  a  particular  algorithm;  this  is  particularly  true  of  the  family  of 
'corridor'  tolerancing  routines  just  discussed  (Deveau  1985; Opheim  1g82; 
Reumann  and  Witkam  1974;  Ramer  19n).  Inconsistent  treatment  of  the! 
same  geographical  feature  in  various  digital  map  products  can  lead  to 
incompatibility of  adjacent  map coverages, or of data products generated at 
multiple scales, and compound  problems of  inter-agency data transfer.  The 
decision  of  how  to  choose  simplification  algorithms  or  how  to  select 
tolerance  thresholds  that  guide their  operation  is  neither  well  understood 
(McMaster  1987)  nor  readily  formalized.  Visual  appearance  and  accurate 
positioning of  a feature must be preserved, and appearance may  vary  across 
a range of  map scales. Then, too,  variations in  size and  frequency of  detail 
will  occur  along the  extent of  the  file,  as  geomorphology and  terrain  vary. 

Line File 

Left Piece 

Right Piece 

SODUSBAY J v2/ 

Fig. 9.1  Lines sampled from the McMaster (1983) data set 

Formulation of  rules 

For example, in Fig. 9.1, the line BISUKAID (1499 points) is a 1 : 62 500 
feature whose  details  differ  in  amplitude  along  its  extent.  The  left  piece 
shows smaller crenulations and  a more  unidirectional trcnd  than  the  right 
piece, whose geometry approaches a space-filling curve. 'Ibe cusps by  which 
the  left  piece  is  defined  may  be  eliminated  by  a  simplification  algorithm 
designed  to  generalize coarser angular details within  the  right  piece.  The 
line  CWATROUS  (875  points)  is  a  1 : 62 500  contour  extending  across 
differing  bedrock  material.  The  left  piece  exhibits  sharp  angularity, 
indicating softer bedrock and more localized downcutting, while the harder 
bedrock beneath the right half is apparently more resistant to local erosion. 
Graphically  speaking,  the  details  do  not  differ  in  size  so  much  as  in 
angularity  for  this line  feature.  SODUSBAY  (1213  points)  represents  a 
coastline  (1 : 62 500)  and  exhibits wave  deposition  and  erosion  along  its 
extent.  The  left  piece  is  characterized  by  higher  frequency or  density  of 
detail. (All three line features are drawn from the McMaster 1983 data set.) 
The  research  question  to be  posed  in  this  c4apter  concerns whether  the 
geometric distinctions (amplitude, angularity, and density) of  detail can  be 
identified  by  formalized descriptions,  and whether  the formalized  descrip 
tions can be bnplemented as rules for knowledge-based simplification. 

Knowledge-based  simplification  requires  that  the  amount  and  type  of 
detail in the digital file  are defined before the algorithm begins to operate, 
and  that  expectations  of  the  amount  and  type  of  details  that  should  be 
retained  or eliminated  at  the  reduced  scale  are  also defined.  The  current 
cartographic practice  is  to design algorithms with  variable tolerance values 
that  may  be  modified  until  the  resulting simplification  'looks  about  right'. 
For  large  files  containing  many  features  of  non-uniform  geometry,  the 
current practia is to assign initial tolerance values and then to monitor the 
progress  of  the  algorithm  through  a  large  coordinate  file,  halting  its 
operation to modify  the  tolerance  threshold. 

Returning to the lines in Fig. 9.1, the tolerance value needed to eliminate 
large  amplitude details along the right  piece  of  the  BISUKAID file  would 
probably eliminate too much  of  the  smaller amplitude detail along the  left 
piece.  Breaking out pieces of the line with different amplitudes of  detail and 
applying different tolerance values to each piece will preserve both the large 
and small amplitudes during simplification. For a small example such as this, 
of  course, the decision of where  to break  the  line can  be  accomplished  by 
visual inspection. For large-volume mapping (i.e. coordinate files of 50 000 
points  or  more)  this  type  of  manual  intervention is  inefficient, expensive, 
and  will  probably  produce inconsistent results during simplification. 

Formal  description  of  the  geometry  contained  within  a  digital  file  is 
complicated by  the  necessity  to  accommodate  scale  dependence.  Natural 
features  such  as  coastlines  and  river  channels  can  be  seen  to  vary  in 
appearance  depending  upon  the  scale  at  which  their  representation  is 
digitally  encoded.  One  might  argue  that  this  is  because  the  geographical 
feature  is  continuous,  while  the  digital  encoding  methods  for  map 
representation are discrete. As pointed out by  several researchers (Richard- 

A  rule for  describing line feature geometry 

son  1961; Steinhaus  1954,  1960; Volkov  1949; Shokalsky  1930). geometric 
parameters  of geographical  features obtained  by  repeated  measures  using 
smaller  and  smaller  units  of  measure  do  not  always  converge,  and  map 
representations  at  differing  scales  must  therefore  be  in  some  respects 
unique. 

From  the  context of  satellite remote sensing, an  example  is  revised  from 
Buttenfield (1985). If the length of  the Puget Sound coastline is measured on 
a LANDSAT image by  counting pixels, its length  will  tally at some (rough) 
multiple of  79 m, assuming that image pixels are 79 m on a side. Features of 
the  coastline  smaller  than  79 m  will  not  be  resolved,  and  thus  escape 
measure.  A  thematic  mapper  (TM)  image  (resolution  30 m  pixels)  will 
incorporate some of  these features, and the coastline will not be identical to 
the  LANDSAT  representation.  Its length  will  be  roughly equivalent to the 
length of  the  79  m representation  plus  the  length  of  all  additional features 
resolved  by  the  TM  encoding.  A  Systtme  Probatoire  d'obsewation  de  la 
Terre (SPOT) image of Puget Sound (10 m resolution)  will  incorporate still 
more  features.  Adding  the  length  of  these  to  the  coastline  measure  will 
increase  the  length  once  again.  This  process  will  continue,  through 
resolutions collected by  high-altitude and  low-altitude raster imaging, down 
to actual geodetic traverse  measuring straight-line distance between selected 
points.  Thus  the  length  and  consequently  the  details  of  the  Puget  Sound 
coast will  continue  to vary  with  changes in  the  scale of  their  (data  capture 
and) measurement. 

Geometric  parameters  as  simple  as  line  length  have  demonstrated 
capabilities for  crude  geomorphic  distinctions (Buttenfield  1989), and  one 
would  expect  that  other  parameters  in  addition  to  line  length  will  serve to 
refine  these  distinctions.  The  formalized  description  of  scale-dependent 
geometry may  be  thought  of  as a set of  rules by  which the geomorphic logic 
is  preserved  during map  generalization;  the  set  is  comprised of  a group of 
descriptions governing  specific  geometric  parameters.  The  rules should  be 
encoded into the digital files in  a form directly available to the simplification 
algorithm.  An  example  follows  to  demonstrate  the  utility  of  geometric 
parameters  in  a  mapping context. 

The cartographic importance of parametric description 

With decreasing scale, the map representation of  a large river narrows from 
an  areal  strip to  a single  line. The  parallel  indentations  of  a  mapped fjord 
behave somewhat differently, however. At  first, the two sides become more 
closely spaced, remaining proportional  to the scaled width of  the fjord. At  a 
certain  scale  the  fjord  disappears  altogether from  the  map  representation. 
Rules for depicting fjords and  rivers differ in  this respect, and cartographers 
take  this  into account in  deciding at  what  scale  the  graphic metamorphosis 
takes  place.  Intuitively  speaking,  two  lines  can  be  said  to  have  different 

Formulation of rules 

Scale Denomhalor 

Scale Denomlnalor 

Scale DcnoWlor 

Ffg. 9.2  The 'width  of  spacing' parameter provides a comparison of  the relationship 

between size in graphic and geographical space across a progression from 
large-scale maps (left side of  graphs) to small-scale map (right side of 
graphs). The parameter d i s t i n ~ e s  scaledependent behnviour for three 
types of  map features 

geometries if  they  behave  differently at  different  scales.  Behaviour in this 
case refers to the digital values which  geometric parameters take on as the 
representation  is  depicted  at  various  scales.  In  differentiating fjord  from 
river  in  this  example,  one  may  differentiate  'width  of  spacing'  between 
roughly parallel lines bounding the areal strip of  river bed or fjorded valley. 
It is possible to plot hypothetical spacings for categories of  line features at 
various scales in  order to  provide  a graphic comparison of  the relationship 
between size in graphic and geographical space. Three categories of  lines are 
shown in Fig. 9.2, each of  which  is symbolized by  a double line. The x-axis 
represents the denominator of  the  representative fraction, implying larger- 
scale representations on the left-hand side (e.g. 1 : 50 000) and smaller scale 
(e.g.  1 : 1 000 000) on  the  right.  The  y-axis  represents  the  relationship 
between  line spacing on  the  map  and the  actual width  of  the geographical 
feature.  Negative-sloping  lines  on  the  graph  indicate  that  as  the  scale 
denominator  increases,  map  spacing  decreases  in  proportion  to  geo- 
graphical  width.  Positive  slopes  indicate  that  map  spacing  is  becoming 
disproportionate to geographical width. 

At  large scales the river symbol width  is proportional to actual width  of 
the geographical feature it represents. With  scale reduction, the river width 
on  the  map should decrease in  linear proportion to the scale change. This 
kind of  generalization is similar to the  measurement of  river channel width 
using aerial photography taken at increasing altitudes. Notice that the limits 
of  resolution  for  the  riverbank  width  will  vary  for  a  single channel.  For 
example, the banks of the mouth  of  the Columbia River will be  resolved at 
much  smaller  scales  than  will  the  headwaters.  Thus  a  single  entity in  the 
database may  require a variety of  cartographic treatments along its extent. 
Below  the  limits  of  resolution,  the  river  should  most  appropriately be 
symbolized by  a single line. The relationship between plotted line width and 
actual  geographical  width  will  change  suddenly  with  the  single  line 
depiction, as shown by  the vertical jog  in  the plot. The single line may  be 
more  narrow  than  the  feature  which  it  represents at  the  particular  scale. 

A  rule for  describing  line feature  geometry 

With  further  reduction  (and  especially  if  pen  width  is  kept  constant)  the 
relationship  between  graphic  and  geographical  width  will  rebound  some- 
what,  and  then  approach  some  equilibrium  at  which  the  cartographer 
decides  to remove  the  feature  from  the  map.  The map  scale  at  which  the 
feature  is  deleted  will  be  a  function  of  the  importance  of  the  river  to  the 
particular  map purpose. 

Line  spacing  for  fjords  differs  from  rivers  in  cartographic  treatment, 
although at the largest scales the two symbols are treated  in similar fashion. 
With decreasing scale, the width of the symbol is decreased proportionately. 
At  the  limits of  resolution,  however,  both  lines of the fjord symbol will  be 
removed:  by  cartographic convention,  fjord  geometry  is  not  defined  by  a 
single line. The convention is reflected by the abrupt termination of the plot. 
The third plot stands in juxtaposition  to the first two to exemplify cultural 
features.  For  fjords and rivers, the double line symbol is  irregular at larger 
scales,  reflecting  irregularities  of  terrain.  For  parallel  lines  symbolizing a 
road or highway,  the sides of  the line symbol will be more regular, to reflect 
civil  engineering  standardized  specifications  of  road  width,  radius  of 
curvature, etc. At larger scales, of c o w ,  line spacing remains proportbqal 
to its geographical counterpart. At the limits of  resolution,  the double line 
representation  may  be  preserved,  as with  interstate  highway  symbols on a 
road  map. With further decrease in scale, the symbol is neither deleted nor 
modified. Line spacing will  eventually  become  'larger  than  life'  as the  map 
feature becomes disproportionately wider  than  the geographical road. 

An  important  aspect  of  all  three  plots  is  that  each  one  contains  an 
identifiable  jog  or  elbow.  In  a  topographic  mapping  situation,  one  can 
identify quite  specifically the  scale  at -which the  jog  will  occur.  Limits of 
resolution  are  defined  as  half  the  National  Map  Accuracy  Standard,  or 
0.01 inch  (0.3 mm)  (1/100  inch)  at  scale.  According  to  this  rule  the  jog 
should occur  at  the scale for  which  river width,  road  width,  or fjord width 
reaches  0.01 inch  (0.3 mm)  on  the  map.  For  a  1 : 62 500  quadrangle, 
fjorded  valleys  smaller  than  about  50  feet  (15.2 m)  across  should  not  be 
represented.  At  1 : 125 000 the threshold is doubled. The resulting effect on 
rivers,  for example, will  be  symbolization  of  all channels  less than  100 feet 
(30.5 m) wide  by  a single line. Muller  (1990) has also described evidence of 
such  jogs,  which  he  terms  cusps,  for  settlement  features  generalized  on 
Dutch  topographic  map  series.  One  goal  of  formalizing  scale-dependent 
descriptions  is  to  identify  specific  scales  at  which  cusps  are  expected  to 
occur,  for  these  are  the  levels  of  resolution  at  which  the  form  of  the  map 
feature can  be  expected  to  metamorphose  during  generalization.  For scale 
ranges  between  the  cusps,  one  can  speculate  that  the  map  features  will 
change  in  some  proportion  to  the  scale  change. 

This example describes a relationship between  three hypothetical  features 
and  their  graphic  representations  at  progressive  scales  in  terms  of  a 
parameter  relating  line  spacing  on  the  map  to  geographical  width  of  the 
feature.  The  cartographic  application  demonstrates  how  parametric  ~ l e s  
may be used  to predict  the structure of  map representations for the category 

Formula~wn of  rules 

called 'river'  on topographic  maps. The advantage of  using parametric rules 
relates to the flexibility with which slight modifications can be implemented. 
For example,  the cartographic simplification  of  a freely meandering stream 
will differ somewhat from the cartographic treatment of a tightly constrained 
stream channel in preserving the periodicity of meanders.  One would expect 
the rule for rivers will be similar but not equivalent for all classes of  rivers, 
although  this  remains  to be  demonstrated. 

One is  reminded  of  the  techniques  applied  in  a  remote  sensing training 
exercise to build a spectral signature for grass or asphalt and then apply it to 
distinguish  land  cover  types  on  a  satellite  image.  'Ibe  spectral signature 
describes  the  reflectance  pattern  for  a  given  type  of  land  cover.  This 
description  is  then  compared  with  the  image  to  delineate  areas  having 
similar  patterns  of  reflectance,  and  to  distinguish  between  dissimilar land 
covers.  The spectral signature provides rules for expected  reflectance across 
a  range of  wavelengths.  In  analogy, the line spacing plots described  in  this 
chapter may  be thought  of  as a s h c h r e  signature providing ruks for tbe 
expected  feature  geometry  represented  across  a  range  of  map  scales 
(Bunenlield  1984, 1986, 1987). 

Other researchers  have  considered  the signature concept in  categorizing 
information at multiple scale (Pike 1988). Varying forms of  the concept are 
referred  to by  similar  names,  for example 'fingerprint'  (Witkin  1986). The 
parametric  approach  and  the  reduction  of  continuous  data  to  discrete 
geometric measurement  are common to all, although parameters vary from 
one implementation  to another. In any implementation,  a set of  parameters 
(rather "han a  single measure) will  probably  be required  to capture the full 
complexity  of  geographical  details.  Some  parameters  will  best  distinguish 
certain  kinds  of  features,  but  not  others.  It  is  not  the  purpose  of  this 
research  to compare  between  parametric signature  methods,  but  rather  to 
explore  the  application  of  a  particular  method,  the structure  signature,  to 
the description of topographic line features. Extensions to line simplification 
and tolerance  value  modification will  be proposed  subsequently. 

A parametric rule for scale-based description 

The parameters 

Five  parameters  will  be  incorporated  into the  structure  signature.  Each  is 
based  on  a  geometric  measurement,  for  example  line  length,  or  zero- 
crossings  (Thapa  1988) of  a  coordinate  string  across  some sort  of  anchor 
line.  Measurements  are  repeated  for  subdivisions  of  the  line  using  the 
Douglas  reduction  algorithm  (Douglas  and  Peucker  1973).  As  the  line  is 
subdivided,  each 'section  is  stored  in  a  striptree  data  structure  (Ballard 
1981).  Measures  are made  for each strip, and summarized  across the  tree. 
This procedure  and  the  parametric  measures  are refined  from  Buttenfield 
(1986,  1989) and  Jasinski  (1990). 

- 

' 

right piece \ 

left piece 

A  rule for  describing line feature  geometry 

CWATROUS 

left and right 3' * 

kft Diece 

3.0  4.0 
7.0 
Awrage Awhor Line Length 

5.0 

6.0 

(a) 

2.0 

3.0 

6 0  
(b) Average Anchor Une lrngth 

4.0 

5.0 

2 6   3 5   4 5  

6.5 
(c) Average Amha line Length 

5 5  

1 

Fig. 9.3  Richardson line length plots provide clearest distinctions between features 
whose details vary in amplitude, as in the case of  BISUKAID. The lack of 
differentiation for plots of  CWATROUS and SODUSBAY indicates that 
angularity and density of  detail are not so clearly distinguished by this 
parameter 

The first  parameter  (shown  in  Fig.  9.3)  relates  the  decrease of  average 
strip length at  finer  levels of  resolution to the  increase in total  line length. 
This measure  was  first  reported  by  Richardson (1961).  and is  the  basis  for 
(1967)  subsequent  derivation  of  fractal  dimension.  The 
Mandelbrot's 
Richardson  plots  are  used  here  instead  of  the  fractal  D value,  which  has 
been  criticized  by  a  number  of  cartographic  researchers  for  problems  of 
instability  (see  Clarke  1990 for a  good  summary  of  this work).  Buttenfield 
(1989) modified  Richardson's  original procedure by  relaxing his  assumption 
of  linearity.  Instead  of  fitting  a  linear  regression  model  to  the  set  of 
measured  lengths,  she  found  that  merely  connecting  points  in  the  graph 
discloses values of average anchor line length at which  the rate of increasing 
total line length changes suddenly.  These sudden changes identify cusps, as 
predicted  in  the  line  spacing  example  above,  and  were  also discovered  by 
Muller  (1990). 

The  resolution  (average  anchor  line  length)  at  which  both  pieces  of 
the  CWATROUS graph  (Fig.  9.3(b))  change  slope is just  under  5.0  units, 
whereas  for the  left  piece  of  SODUSBAY  (Fig.  9.3(c))  a  marked  cusp  is 
apparent at a resolution  of just  over 5.0 units.  One should expect that cusps 
will  occur  at  different  resolutions  for  different  line  features.  This  kind  of 
information  justifies  the  avoidance  of  single  tolerance  thresholds  applied 
uniformly  to simplify all features on a  map coverage,  for clearly a tolerance 
value  that  is  sensitive  to  (that  is,  eliminates)  details  smaller than  5.0 units 
will  simplify both  the CWATROUS  pieces,  but  have no visible effect  upon 
the SODUSBAY file. A small increase in the tolerance value will generate a 
very  different  looking  simplification  of  the  map  as  a  whole.  Knowledge 
about  the  type  and  amount  of  details contained  in  specific features can  be 
used  to  computational  advantage  (that  is,  avoiding  the  computation  time 
when  applying a tolerance value that will have no visible effect) as well as to 
select  a  tolerance  value  that  will  reduce  details  more  uniformly  across  the 
map surface. 

While the Richardson line length  parameter can provide knowledge about 
the amount of detail contained in  a line feature, other geometric distinctions 

Formulation of  rules - Anchor LineLength  - 

Fig.  9.4  Parameters for a structure signature include the measurements displayed 
here. The MBR is the rectangle bounding the line segment. Anchor line 
length is the length of the MBR, and bandwidth is the width. Segmentation 
is the distance from the beginning coordinate to the location on the anchor 
line where the maximum deviation occurs. Error variance is the discrete 
approximation of  the shaded area. Concurrence is a count of the number 
of  times the coordinate string crosses the anchor line 

are  not  made  clear.  One can  see  in  comparing  Richardson  plots  for  the 
pieces  of  BISUKAID  that  the  line  length  parameter  distinguishes  readily 
between variations  in  amplitude of  detail, although it  is not providing clear 
separations  for  the  changes  in  angularity  found  in  the  CWATROUS  file. 
The varying density of  detail  evident  in the pieces of  the SODUSBAY line 
is evident at finer levels of  resolution, where denser (high frequency) details 
increase overall line length.  However, the distinction betwecn  line pieces  is 
not as apparent for frequency of  detail  as for amplitude.  Robust  distinction 
between  the  line  files  probably  requires  .combining  the  Richardson  line 
length parameter  with  other  parameters in  the  structure signature. 

In Fig.  9.4,  the original  coordinate string for a line  (or piece of  a line) is 
shown to crenulate around a straight line connecting endpoints of the string. 
The  first  computation  (anchor  line  length)  measures  Euclidean  distance 
between  the beginning  and ending  coordinates of  the string. 

Length  = v [ ( X b  - xJ2 + (Yb - ye)2] 

[9.11 
This  measure  is  used  to  standardize  two  parameters  describing  the 
minimum  bounding  rectangle  (MBR) surrounding  the coordinates  for each 
piece  of  the  line  as it  is  subdivided.  With  further subdivisions,  the  anchor 
line length for a  line piece  will  more closely  approximate  the  length  of  the 
coordinate  string  within  the  MBR.  The implication,  of  course,  is  that  the 
anchor  line  provides  the  most  simplified  representation  of  the  original 
coordinate  string,  which  justifies 
to  standardize  both  MBR 
parameters. The first of these, labelled 'bandwidth',  measures the niaximum 
perpendicular  deviation  of  any  coordinate  in  the  original  string  on  either 
side of  the anchor line.  Deviations  are summed to compute the width of  the 
MBR. The bandwidth  label is used  in  the same context  as Peucker's  (1975) 
appellation. 

its  use 

A  rule for  describing line feature  geometry 

Bandwidth  = 

(WidPos  + WidNeg) 

Length 

In the formula, 'WidPos'  and 'WidNeg'  represent deviations on either side 
of  the anchor line (the positive side is on the same side of the anchor line as 
the origin of  the coordinate space) (Bartsch  1974: 263) and are illustrated in 
Fig.  9.4.  'Length'  represents  anchor  line  length,  as computed  in  the  first 
equation. The bandwidth  parameter  additionally  provides  a  measure of  the 
cross-sectional  symmetry  of  the  line  feature,  for  equal  deviations  on  both 
sides  of  the  anchor  line  indicate  a  feature  with  symmetric  amplitudes  of 
detail. This measure should therefore provide good distinctions between  line 
pieces  exhibiting  differing  amplitudes  of  detail, .,as,  in  .tbg,- qse  of 
BISUKAID. 

Segmentation  = d[(Xb - xIZ + (Yb - Y)*] 

Length 

location  of 

the  coordinate  (x,  y)  which 

The second MBR  parameter  is called segmentation  and  is defined  as the 
location along the anchor line where the next subdivision will occur, that is. 
the 
lies  at  the  maximum 
perpendicular distance from the anchor line.  Distance is measured from the 
the  anchor  line  (Xb,  Yb).  Segmentation  is 
beginning  coordinate  of 
standardized  to the  anchor  line  length  to  eliminate  bias  of  measurement 
units.  For  example,  a  segmentation  value  of  0.25  indicates  that  the 
line. 
maximum  deviation  occurs 
indicate  ranges  of  self-similar 
Interpretation  of 
geometry.  If  the  segmentation  value  is  preserved  across  several  levels  of 
resolution,  that  would  imply  that  the  line  details  (at  least  the  maximum 
deviation)  are  occurring  again  and  again  at  the  same  (relative)  location 
along  the line. 

this  parameter  may 

1/4  of 

the  way  down 

the  anchor 

Z 

5 .  

I 

I 
I 

Two other  parameters  describe  the path  of  the  coordinate  string  within 
the  MBR.  Error  variance  is  computed  in  the  format  of  any  standardized 
deviation,  as  the  sum  of  the  squared  deviations  of  distances  between 
coordinates  in  the  original  string  and  the  anchor  line.  McMaster  (1986) 
computes a  very  s ~ m ~ l a r  measure  to reflect  areal displacement. 

The error  variance parameter  is illustrated in  Fig. 9.4 as the shaded area. 
Error  variance  is a discrete approximation of  the total discrepancy  between 
the  anchor  line  (the  most  simplified  representation  of  the  line)  and  the 
original coordinate string).  Error variance is standardized by  the number of 
coordinates  in  the  string,  and  is  reported  logarithmically.  The formula  for 
distance is expressed  in the usual  format for directed distance from a straight 
line in the plane.  using the generalized  coefficients  ( A ,  B, C)  for the anchor 

Z  ( ~ i s t a n c e ) ~  - 

Error variance  = 

Z  ( ~ i s t a n c e ) ~  I 

No.  of  coordinates 

No.  of  coordinates  - 1 

(9.41 

Formulation of  rules 
line  equation  (Bartxh  1974:  261).  Distance  of  any coordinate  (x, y)  from 
the  anchor line is  given  by 

Distance  = 

Ax + By  + C 

Length 

The slope of the anchor line will affect the sign of  the coefficients A, B, and 
C, and  therefore  of  the  distance  value.  Positive  distance  values  indicate 
deviations  lying  on  the  same  side  of  the  anchor  line  as the  origin  of  the 
cdordinate  space,  and  negative values  indicate  deviations on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  anchor  line.  Maximum  positive  and  negative  values  of  the 
distance  computation  produce  the  WidPos  and  WidNeg  values  used  to 
measure bandwidth  above. 

Concurrence,  the  fifth  parameter,  is  also  measured  using  the  distance 
computation.  It  is  defined  as a  count  of  the  number of  times the  distance 
value  cbanges  sign  (from  positive  to  negative  values)  going  in  sequence 
along the coordinate string. This indicates the number  of  times the original 
string crosses the  anchor line,  or how  closely the anchor  line concurs with 
the original coordinates* path.  Concurreace is standardized  by  the number 
of  coordinates  in  the  string,  to  give  a  count  of  actual  crossings  as  a 
proportion of  the potential number of crossings. This allows the concurrence 
to vary between 0 and  1, in similar fashion to a correlation  coefficient. An 
arc of  a circle will  have  a value of  zero,  for  example,  and  the value for  a 
coordinate  string  in  which  coordinates  alternate  back  and  forth  in  zigzag 
fashion about the anchor line will  approach 1.0. in Fig.  9.4, the coordinate 
string crosses the  anchor  line  four  times (endpoints are excluded).  Thapa 
(1988) applies a similar measure (referred to as 'zero  crossings',  to indicate 
the change in signed values),  although he measures the parameter for only a 
single level of  resolution  and does not  standardize  his values. 

Incorporating tbe parameters into the rule 

The  generation  of  the  structure  signature  rule  involves  measuring  and 
summarizing five  parameters of  a  line (Richardson  line length,  bandwidth, 
segmentation, error variance, and concurrence) at successively finer levels of 
resolution.  For  a digital file, this  means measuring the  line as a whole, by 
constructing the anchor line and MBR, then computing (anchor line) length 
and width of  the MBR,  concurrence, segmentation and error variance. The 
line  must  be  subdivided in  some  consistent fashion  and  the  procedure  of 
measurement  repeated,  to  simulate  finer levels  of  resolution.  Subdivision 
may  proceed  by  means of  breaking the line file in  two equal-sized portions 
(in  half),  or  into  two  randomly  sized  portions,  or  by  some  substantive 
criteria (for  example, choosing as a breakpoint the coordinate marking first- 
order  geodetic  control,  or  the  location  of  a  city,  major  shipping port,  or 
prominent  landmark).  In  this research,  the goal is to retain  recognizability 
of the line feature as it is represented  at many levels of  resolution; thus the 

4 

c 

$ t 

l 

A  rule for  describing  line feature  geometry 

line subdivision must be designed to account in some way for preservation of 
details important  for  Line  recognition. 

This is accomplished  by  application of Douglas and Peucker's  (1973)  line 
simplification algorithm.  Its application in  this research  is not incidental, for 
several  reasons.  First,  the  line  reduction  routine  has  been  shown  (Kelley 
1977) to identify coordinates  of  maximum  angular change,  which  Attneave 
(1954) identifies as a major priority for shape recognition.  Additionally,  the 
Douglas  routine  identifies  an  almost  identical  set  of  coordinates  as  those 
selected  by  visual  inspection  to be  critical  for  recognition  of  the line in  its 
simplified  form  (White  1985).  The  algorithm's  selection  of  these  critical 
points (as Marino  1979 has referred  to them)  generates simplifications that 
mimic those generated by  manual generalization, and retains details critical 
for map reader recognition.  Finally, the Douglas algorithm can be applied in 
hierarchic  fashion  (Douglas  and  Peucker  1973)  to  subdivide  a  line  file 
automatically, while  retaining  the  line's  critical shape information  overall. 
The  line  files  used  in  this  project  (BISUKAID,  CWATROUS,  and 
SODUSBAY) were subdivided in  the following maaner.  First, points were 
selected  randomly  to  initialize  eight  pieces  without  introducing  carto- 
graphers'  bias.  This action might  be considered  analogous to the identifica- 
tion of certain points in a coordinate file that must be preserved, such as city 
locations,  points  where  hydrographic  channels intersect,  map sheet  edges, 
and  other  constraints  beyond  the  cartographer's  control.  The  five  para- 
meters  were  measured  for  this  (random)  subdivision,  and  stored  in  a 
striptree data  structure. Each  piece  was  next  subdivided using  the Douglas 
algorithm.  to  produce  16 pleces,  wh~ch were  measured  and stored.  The  16 
were  subd~vided again  using  the  Douglas-Peucker  algorithm  to  produce  32 
pieces. Any given  piece of  the  line within which  the maximum  deviation fell 
below 0.0005 inch (0.0127 mm) was not further subdivided, as this is half  the 
resolution  at which  the lines were orig~nally digitized.  When  90 per cent of 
the line pieces reached the limits of tolerance, the subdivision procedure was 
terminated. 

A  final  step in  generating  the  structure  signatures  involves summarizing 
the  measured  parameters  for  each  level  of  resolution.  A  logical  choice 
summarizes  by  computing  a  mean  and  variance  for  each  measured 
parameter, as ~t can  be argued that the subdivision process (by any method) 
is a sampling  procedure.  Many  different  line  pieces could result  from  using 
different subdivision methods. Thus the particular set of  line pieces resulting 
from  any  particular  s u b d ~ v ~ s ~ o n  
is  one sample representing  the  line  broken 
into finer  and finer pieces.  Use of  the first and second moment statistics also 
provides  a  good  check  on the  homogeneity  of  line  measurements, that  is, 
the magnitude of the varlance may lndlcate lack of uniform  geometry within 
the line file  as a  whole.  This point  will  be returned  to later  in  the chapter. 
The intention  in summarizing  parameters for  any  level of  resolution is to 
incorporate  the  measurements  for all  of  the  pieces,  including pieces  whose 
details  have  been  previously  resolved.  Parameters  for  line  pieces  whose 
details had  reached  the  resolution  limits  at  a  previous  level  of  subdivision 

Formulation of  rules 
were incorporated  into the summaries for subsequent  subdivisions, so that 
summaries  for  any  single  level  of  resolution  incorporated  a  complete 
representation  of  the  line  file.  As  discussed  earlier  in  the  chapter,  it  is 
reasonable  to  expect  non-uniformity  in  the  amount  and  type  of  detail 
occuning on a  map.  Likewise it  is reasonable  to find  that  details within  a 
single feature will also vary,  as geometry is not currently used as a criterion 
for breaking out features in a digital file. Therefore, one can predict that any 
striptree formed by  this procedure will be sparse in some locations.  Further 
discussion of  structure signatures may be  found in  Buttenfield (1984,  1986) 
and  Jasinski  (1990).  The  remainder  of  the  chapter  demonstrates  a  small 
implementation  of  the structure signature concept to show how  it  may  be 
applied  to distinguish geometric  character. 

Calibrating the structure signature rule 

In  order to formalize  a  rule  for  distinguishing between  types of  geometric 
variation,  such as amplitude,  angularity,  q d  frequency of  detail,  one must 
calibrate  the  rule  so  that  parameters measured  for  features  of  equivalent 
geometric  character  are  (nearly)  equivalent,  and  parameters  for  different 
geometric  character  are  distinctive.  This  should  hold  true  for  differing 
features  as well  as  for portions  within  a  digital  line  file  whose  geometric 
character  is non-uniform  (not  homogeneous).  If  portions  of  a  line  feature 
differ  then  the  structure  signatures  for  those  portions should  reflect  those 
differences,  if 
the  signatures  are  to  be  considered  useful  rules  for 
distinguishing between  types of  detail  to be  preserved  during simplification. 
To demonstrate, nine signatures have been constructed (see Figs 9.5-9.7), 
three  for each  of  three  features taken  from  the  McMaster  (1983) data set 
and  shown  previously  in  Fig.  9.1.  These  features  display  differences  in 
geometry  along  their  extent.  The  lines  differ  in  one  case  in  amplitude  of 
detail,  in  another case  in  blockiness  or angularity,  and  in  a  third  case  the 
variation in frequency of  detail is the distinguishing factor. For the purposes 
of  calibrating  the  structure  signature  rule,  the  line  pieces  have  been 
arbitrarily  broken on the basis of  visual inspection.  Once it has been shown 
that  the  signatures  are  distinctive,  then  the  question  of  implementation 
becomes  realistic.  Without  the  'proof  of  concept',  the  rule  is  difficult  to 
validate. 

It  is important to realize  during the following discussion of the structure 
signatures that  comparisons  are limited  to  pieces  of  a  single line file,  not 
between  them.  For  BISUKAID, comparisons on  the basis of  amplitude of 
detail  will  be  emphasized.  Emphasis  for  CWATROUS and  SODUSBAY 
will  be based on angularity and frequency of  detail, respectively. The digital 
files were broken into the pieces already displayed  in Fig. 9.1, and structure 
signatures generated  for the entire file and  for each piece. 

Each column of  the figure represents a  structure signature, including the 
parameters measuring the MBR  and the parameters  describing the path  of 

A  rule for describing  line fccrrure  geometry 

BISUKAID 
Line File 

0.4  1 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

Level of Resolution 

Fig. 9.5  Structure signatures showing differences in amplitude of detail 

levels  of  resolution  at  which 

the coordinate strings within  the  MBR. Along the  x-axis of  each plot,  tick 
marks  represent 
the  parameters  were 
measured.  For level 3, the line was subdivided into 8 pieces (Z3), for level 4, 
into  16 pieces  p 4 ) ,  and  so on, using  the  Douglas-Peucker  routine.  Due to 
the differential  details  along each  line,  and the  fact  that  not  all of  the  line 
files contain  1024 points to begin  with,  the striptree will  become  somewhat 
sparse at finer levels of resolution;  however, at least 90 per cent of the nodes 
are filled  at every  level,  as described  above.  Signature  parameters  for  the 
entire line  are graphed  in  the  leftmost column,  and  signatures  for the  two 
pieces  are displayed  in  the centre and rightmost columns, respectively. 

As expected, some parameters  seem to be more effective than others for 
distinguishing  differences in  amplitude,  blockiness,  and frequency of  detail. 
Several  parameter  graphs display  scale-dependent  cusps  referred  to earlier 

Formulation of rulcr 

in  the chapter,  identifying levels of  resolution  where geometry  of  the lines 
changes suddenly. Other line files may  display geometric characteristics not 
considered here.  For example, one could  study periodicity of  details along 
the coastline of  Cape Hatteras and North Carolina, or variations in sinuosity 
along  the  British  Columbia  coastline.  This  underscores  the  need  for 
refinement of  the signature parameters and for the possible incorporation of 
additional  parameters.  The parameters  presented  here  are not  intended  to 
be  encyclopaedic. Development  of  additional parameters and refinement of 
those presented  in  this chapter form a  topic for further research. 

It  is  possible  to  identify  several  distinctions  in  each  of  the  structure 
signature  examples (Figs  9.5-9.7),  using some but  not  all  of  the signature 
parameters.  In  Fig.  9.5,  for  example,  the  bandwidth  parameter  provides 
good distinction for variations in  amplitude of  detail.  For the right  piece of 
BISUKAID,  notice that  the  maximum  negative  deviation at level 4 is of  a 
greater  magnitude  than  at  level  3.  This  is  unusual,  as one  would  expect 
smaller amplitude  details to  be  resolved  with  finer resolution.  Probably the 
larger deviation has to do with the closed shape apparent in the right piece; 
this geometry is obscured in  the signature of  the whole file, however. 

In the segmentation graphs, one can see that for the line taken as a whole, 
there is an initial relocation of  the maximum deviation, followed by  a series 
of  subdivisions occurring roughly about half-way along the anchor line. This 
implies longitudinal self-similarity, which  is not  borne out  by  signatures for 
the  two  pieces  of  the  line  file,  both  of  whose  subdivisions drift  along the 
anchor line for this range of  resolutions.  It is apparent that non-uniformity 
of  geometric  character  can  be  obscured  when  treating  large  sections  of  a 
cartographic  file as a single item. 

The  cusp  in  error variance  at  level  6  for  the  left  piece  of  BISUKAID 
indicates an increase in  the sum of  the squared deviations of  the coordinate 
string from its anchor line. The small amplitude crenulations evident in  the 
left piece appear to be about the same size and of a constant  frequency, and 
level  6  identifies  a  scale  at  which  they  are  first  becoming  resolved.  To 
simplify BISUKAID to this scale, a tolerance value should be chosen that is 
sensitive to this amplitude of detail. Suitable values for a tolerance threshold 
can  be  determined from the  y-axis of  the bandwidth graph, which  displays 
the average maximum deviation (roughly 0.4-0.6  inch (10-15  rnrn) on either 
side of  the  anchor line)  found  at  this level.  Additional  information  can  be 
computed  using  the  Richardson  line  length  parameters,  to  determine  a 
resolution  (average anchor line length) which will  produce a given total tine 
length. 

Concurrence  has  been  defined  as a  ratio between  the  actual  number  of 
anchor line crossings and the number  of  coordinates in  the strip.  The ratio 
can  rise  even  if  the  number  of  crossings  stays  the  same,  since  fewer 
coordinates  will  be  contained  as  the  subdivision  process  isolates  smaller 
pieces of  the line.  It is the level at which sudden slope changes occur that is 
of interest in this parameter.  A  cusp from positive to negative slope always 
indicates a drop in  the number  of  anchor line crossings. At fine resolutions, 

A  ride for  describing  line feature  geometry 

CWATROUS 

Line RIe 

0 5  I 

Left Piece 

Right Piece 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

Level d R d u t i a n  

Fig. 9.6  Structure signatures showing differences in angularity of detail 

this implies  that details in  the coordinate  string have been largely  resolved. 
For  BISUKAID, this occurs at level 7 for the line taken as a whole,  but  at 
level  5  for  the  left  piece  (smaller  amplitude details)  and  at  level 6  for  the 
large amplitude details of  the  right  piece. 

For CWATROUS (Fig. 9.6), the line  pieces d o  not differ in amplitude of 
detail so much as in angularity. Bandwidth  for the line taken as a whole and 
for the right piece display a similar steep drop during early subdivisions, and 
the smaller  magnitude deviations evident in  the graph for the left piece 'are 
masked  by 
the  most  distinctive 
parameters.  For  the line  as a whole,  the horizontal  slope across levels 4-6 
indicates that segmentation is occurring  at roughly  the same location along 
the  anchor  line,  implying  statistical  if  not  precise  self-similarity  for  the 
parameter in this range of resolution. Segmentation for the right piece of the 

this  pattern.  Segmentation  provides 

Formulorion of  rules 

SODUSBAY 

Left Piece 

Right Piem 

4.4 

0.1 
0.25 

0.00 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 ' 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  

Level d Resolution 

Level d M u t i o n  

kvel d Rosolutim 

FIg. 9.7  Structure signature showing differences in frequency or density of detail 

line  displays  self-similarity  for  two  of  these  levels.  Map  representations 
generated  within  this  range  may  appear  nearly  identical.  The  pattern  of 
segmentation for the left piece is distinct, and oscillates back and forth along 
the anchor line. This characteristic is masked completely in the signature for 
the entire line. 

Neither  the  error  variance  nor  the  concurrence  graphs  display  clear 
differences,  and this is logical, as the pieces of  CWATROUS differ neither 
in  the overall  amount of  deviation  nor  in  the frequency  of  deviation  from 
their anchor lines.  Angularity is not so well described by these parameters as 
by  segmentation.  Kelley  (1977) demonstrated  that  the  Douglas-Peucker 
algorithm  will  tend  to  select  coordinate  locations  of  maximum  angular 
change  and will  also control  the  selection  of  the  segmentation  point.  One 
should  expect  that  the  pattern  of  segmentation  will  reflect  substantial 
variations  in  angularity accordingly. 

A  rule for  describing line feature  geometry 

While differences can be seen for several parameters graphed in  Fig.  9.7. 
differences in  frequency of detail are expected to be most apparent in graphs 
of  the concurrence parameter.  The drop in concurrence at finer resolutions 
is  apparent here  as in  Fig.  9.5 and  9.6, and  again  the cusp of  change from 
positive  to  negative  slope  occurs  at  different  levels.  As  a  ratio  of  actual 
anchor line crossings to potential  for crossings,  concurrence  is a  probability 
measure.  The  left piece  displays  a  high  density  of  high-frequency  details, 
and the cusp at  level 4 where the positive slope suddenly increases indicates 
a rise in the number of crossings coupled with  a drop in the average number 
of  coordinates.  For  the  right  piece  and  line taken  as a  whole,  the cusp  at 
level  4  indicates an  initial drop in  concurrence; the  lower  frequency  details 
display  a  periodic character  whose  phase  may  be synchronized  with  anchor 
line length  at this  resolution  to fonn piems of  the line that are like arcs of 
circles. 

Structure signatures for  the  pieces of  the  line can  be  seen to differ  from 
the  signatures  for  the  lines  taken  as  a  whole.  For  some  parameters,  the 
differences  are  quite  marked.  Parameters  for  Richardson  line  length, 
bandwidth,  and  error  variance  appear  best  to  distinguish  differences  in 
amplitude  of  detail.  Angularity  seems  to be  most  clearly  distinguished  by 
segmentation,  although  this  may  be  dependent  upon  subdivision  by  the 
Douglas-Peucker  algorithm.  If  another subdivision  procedure were  applied, 
for  example  simply  dividing  the  line  pieces  in  half,  the  segmentation 
parameter  would  display  a  very  different  pattern,  obscuring  the angularity 
differences.  Frequency  of  detail  seems  best  distinguished  by  concurrence. 
Other  parameters  may  improve  the  discriminating  ability  of  the  structure 
signature  rule,  or contribute to  the  distinction  of  other  types of  geometric 
characterist~n. 

As proposed  in beginning this experiment, a robust rule describing feature 
geometry  should  take  on  unique  values  to  indicate  different  geometric 
characteristics.  This  has  been  demonstrated.  The counter-proposition,  that 
descriptions  of  similar geometric  characteristics  should  appear  similar,  has 
only  been  alluded  to here.  A  more comprehensive calibration  will  require 
demonstration that the same feature collected from different data sources or 
by  different  methods  (e.g.  scanning  and  vector  digitizing)  will  produce 
similar structure signatures. This is beyond the scope of  the current chapter. 

Implications for m a p  generalization 

One interesting  aspect of  the  examination  of  line  geometry  using structure 
signatures is that  geometric differences evident  in  signatures generated  for 
pieces  of  a line are often masked when  parameters are averaged for the line 
as a whole.  This argues for generating structure signatures for line features 
of  uniform  geometry 
to  ensure  the  parameters  are  not  biased  by 
heterogeneous amounts and types of detail. This begs the question of how to 

I 

I 

I I 
1 

I 

Formulation of  rules 

determine portions of  a  digital file containing uniform  detail.  It  would  be 
unfortunate  if  the  generation  of  structure  signatures  required  plotting the 
entire  digital  file  and  marking  it  manually,  for  of  course  this  is  the  very 
obstacle one is trying to avoid by  generating the signatures in the first place. 
There  are  at  present  no  formalized  rules  that  may  be  used  to  delineate 
sections of  a  file containing uniform detail. 

Full  implementation of  such  rules will  require  a  certain  amount  of  data 
exploration.  For  example,  the  determination  of  what  is  homogeneous 
geometry will  probably differ  for cultural features and  naturally  occurring 
features.  Examples  include  highways,  whose  radii  of  curvature  are 
constrained, and railroads, whose path across terrain is often constrained by 
gradient.  For  line  features  particularly,  determination  of  serial  trend  may 
depend as much on  map purpose  or the map audience,  as on geomrphol- 
ogy.  Actual  determination  of  geometric distinctions for a particular feature 
type  will  probably  require  some  form  of  empiric evaluation  or perceptual 
testing  to  preserve consistency  in  implementation.  For  now,  its utility  for 
automating map simplification  must  remain  speculative. 

The structure signature rule presented  in this chapter can be implemented 
now, providing knowledge to automate cartographic line simplification. The 
structure signature's purpose is to determine scales at which the geometry of 
a  line feature  changes.  Implementation  requires that information be stored 
with  the digital data on the amount and type of  details that occur  along the 
extent of  the line. That is, line files should be tagged (as one tags coordinate 
strings with  feature  codes,  for example)  with  the geometric characteristics 
that  must  be  preserved  within  that  string  a':  particular  map  scales.  This 
method can be applied when coordinate  files are entered into a database, or 
as a form of  preprocessing.  Feature headers could take on form of  a look-up 
table of  mean  and  variance  pairs  for  given  parameters,  where  the look-up 
table values provide knowledge for selection of  tolerance values to preserve 
specific  geometric  characteristics.  It  must  be  recognized  that  current 
simplification algorithms do not  look  for  knowledge of  this sort  within the 
data  files  on  which  they  operate,  and  thus  full  implementation  of  a 
knowledge-based simplification system will require more than simply adding 
information to file headers. 

The work  described in  this chapter is intended to demonstrate that  rules 
can  be  formalized  to  describe  geometry  that  changes  with  scale,  and  to 
provide  information  about  geometric characteristics that  might  be  retained 
or eliminated during  map  simplification tasks.  Procedures  for generating a 
structure signature have  been  described  and  applied  to small  cartographic 
examples to demonstrate its utility for feature descriptions. Indications from 
this  research  have  been  discussed  as  to how  the  rule  might  be  refined  by 
modifying  parameters.  New  geometric  parameters  may  be  developed  to 
improve  overall  discriminating  ability  of  the  signatures.  The  structure 
signatures  are  presented  as  an  example  of  a  rule  by  which  line  feature 
geometry may be formalized, and applied to break digital lines automatically 
into pieces that are homogeneous in geometric character. Implementation of 

A  rule for  describing  line feature  geometry 

this  concept  has  major  implications for  reduction  of  production costs  and 
preservation of  quality control in  using  a  single  digital line  file  to  general 
maps  at  multiple scales. 

Acknowledgements 

This chapter reports research  that  is  part  of  NCGIA  Initiative 3, Multiple 
Representations and  is  supported  in  part  by  a  grant  from  the  National 
Science  Foundation  (SES 88-10917). Support  by  USGS  National  Mapping 
Division  is  also gratefully  acknowledged.  Comments  by  reviewers  and  by 
the Syracuse Symposium participants have  clarified the writing. 

References 

- I  

. l$q 
i 

Anderson J R, Hardy  E E,  Roach J T, Witmer  R E 1976 A  Lurid Use  and  LMd 
Cover  Closs@alion System for  Use  with R m t c  Sensor Dma Geological Stwe$ 
Professional  Paper  964,  United  States Government  Printing O h ,  W 
DC 

Appk  Computer  1987 Human Iruerfme  Guidelincc:  The Apple  Dcrkwp lnterfqcc 

9 

Apple Computer,  Inc,  Cupertino,  California 

Armstrong M P 1991 Knowledge classification and organization.  In Buttenfield B P, 
McMaster R B (eds)  Map Generalization:  Making Rules for  Knowledge Represent- 
ation Longman,  London  pp 86-102 

Armstrong M P, Bennett D A 1990a A  bit-mapped  classifier for groundwater quality 

assessment.  Computers and  Geoscienca  l(1):  811-32 

Armstrong M P,  B e ~ e t t  D A 1990b A knowledge  based object-oriented  approach to 
cartographic  generalization.  Proceedings  GISILIS  '90  Anaheim,  California 
PP 48-57 

Armstrong  M P,  De  S,  Densham  P,  Lolonis  P,  Rushton  C, Tewari  V  1990 A 
knowledge-based  approach  for  supporting  locational  decision-making.  Environ- 
ment and Planning B:  Phnning and Design 17: 341-64 

Armstrong  M P, Lolonis  P 1989 Interactive  analytical  displays  for  spatial  decision 
support systems.  Proceedings AUTO-CART0 9,  Ninth  International Symposium 
on Computer-Assbted Cartography  Baltimore, Maryland  March  1989 pp 171-80 
Attneave  F  1954 Some  informational  aspects  of  visual  perception.  Psychological 

Review  61:  183-93 

Backus  J  1978 Can 'programming  be  liberated  from  the  Von  Neumann  style?  A 
functional  style  and  its algebra of  programs.  Communications of  the Association 
for  Computing Machinery 21(8): 6 1 M 1  

Ballard D 1981 Strip-trees: a hierarchical representation  for curves.  Communications 

of  the Association for  Computing Machinery  14: 31CL21 

Ballard D, Brown  C  1982 Computer  Vision Prentice-Hall.  New  York 
Barr A,  Feigenbaum E A 1981 The Handbook  of  Art$ciaI  InteII~gence vol 1 William 

Kaufmann, Inc,  Los  Altos,  California 

Bartsch H J  1974 Handbook of  Mathematical Formulas Academic Press,  New  York 
Beard  M  K  1987 How to survive on a single detailed database.  Proceedings AUTO- 
CART0 8, Eighth  International Symposium on  Computer-Assisted Cartography, 
Baltimore,  Maryland  March  1987 pp 211-20 

References 

Beard  M  K  1988 Multiple  Representations  from  a  detailed  database:  a  scheme  for 
automated  generalization.  Unpublished  PhD  thesis,  University  of  Wisconsin, 
Madison,  Wisconsin 322 pp. 

B d  M K  1991 Constraints on rule  formation. In  Buttenfield  B P,  McMaster  R B 
(eds) Map  Generalization: Makrng Rules for  Knowledge  Representation  Longman. 
London pp 121-35 

Bemion  M  1980 The Science  of  Food  John  Wiley  and  Sons, New  York 
Berry  J K  1987  Fundamental  operations  in  computer-assisted  map  analysis. 

International JoumaI of  Geographical Information System 1:  119-36 

Be*  J 1973 Skmiologie graphique  2nd  edn  Gauthier-Villas,  Paris 
Bertin  J  1983 Semiology  of  Graphics  University  of  Wisconsin  Press,  Madison, 

Wisconsin 

Bitton  D,  Barcrl H,  DeWitt  D J,  Wilkinson  K  W  1983 Parallel  algorithms  for  the 
execution of  relational  database operations. Association for  Computing Machinery 
T r o ~ l s a c t i o ~  on Database  Systems  S(3):  324-53 

Board C 1984 Higher order mapusing tasks: geographical lessons in danger of being 

forgotten.  Cartographia 21(1):  8S97 

Booker  L  B,  Gddberg  D E,  Holland  J H  1989 Classifier  systems  and  genetic 

algorithms.  Artr@5d  Intelligence 40:  25-82 

Boyle  A R 1970 The quantised  line.  The  Cartographic Journal  7(2):  91-4 
Brachman R J 1979 On the epistemological status of semantic networks.  In  Findler 
N  V  (ed)  Associative  Networks:  Representation  and  Use  of  Knowledge  by 
Coinp~te~s A'- 

RCS, NiW  Yrh't pp 3-50 

Brassel  K E  1975  Neighborhood  computations  for  large  sets  of  data  points. 
Proceedings  A UTO-CA R TO  2,  Second  Internationa[ Symposrum  on  Computer- 
Assisted  Cartography Reston, Virginia  Sept  1975 pp 337-45 

-  -+.<,i 

 K E  1985 Strategies  and  data  models  for  computer-aided  generalization. 

.- 

d

- 

,'l 

r 

B

s 

Inrem'onal Yearbook of  Cartography  25:  11-29 

Br-l 

K E 1990 Kartographisches generalisieren  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir 

Kartographie  Publikationen,  Zurich,  Switzerland 

Brassel  K E, Weibel  R 1987 Map  generalization.  In  Anderson  K  E, Douglas  A V 
(eds)  Report  on  Inrernational  Research  and  Development  in  Advanced  Cano- 
graphic  Technology, 1984-1987 International Cartographic  Association, pp  12CL37 
Brassel K E, Weibel R  1988 A  review and conceptual framework of  automated map 
generalization.  International  Journal  of  Geogkphical  Information  System  243): 
22944 

Brodle M 1984 On  the  development of  data  models.  In  Brodie  M,  Mylopoulos  J ,  
Schmidt J  (eds)  On Conceptual Modeling:  Perspectives Jrom Artificial InteIIigence, 
Database  and  Programming Languages  Springer-Verlag,  New  York  pp 1948 

Brophy D M  1972 Automated linear generalization in thematic cartography. Master's 
thesis,  Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Wisconsin, Madison,  Wisconsin 
Brown J H  1987a Development of  prototype procedure  1 : 250 000 project.  Internal 
report,  Surveys  and  Mapping  Branch,  Energy,  Mines  and  Resources,  Qttawa, 
Canada Jan  1987 

Brown  J H  1987b Final  report  1  : 250 000 project.  Internal  report,  Surveys  and 

Mapping Branch,  Energy,  Mines  and  Resources, Ottawa,  Canada  March  1987 

Brownston  L,  FarreU  R,  Kant  E,  Martin  N  1985 Programming  Expert  Systems  in 
OPSS: An  Introduction  to  Rule-Based  Programming  Addison-Wesley,  Reading, 
Massachusetts 

Burrough A 1986 Principles of Geographical Information Systems for  Land Resource 

Assessment  Oxford  University  Press,  Oxford 

Buttenfield  B P  1984 Line  stnrclure in  graphic and  geographic space.  Unpublished 
PhD dissertation, Department of  Geography,  University  of  Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 

Buttenfield  B P  1985 Treatment  of  the  cartographic line.  Cartographica 22(2):  1-26 

& 

..  1 Z. 

% 

References 

Buttenfield B P 1991 A rule for describing line feature geometry. In Buttenfield B  P, 
McMaster  R B (eds) Map Generalization:  Making Rules for  Knowledge Represent- 
ation  Longman,  London  pp 150-71 

Buttenfield  B P  1987 Automating  the  identification  of  cartographic  lines.  The 

Buttenfield  B P  1989 Scale  dependence  and  self-similarity  of  cartographic  lines. 

American  Cartographer 14(1): 7-20 

Cartographica M(1): 79-100 

Buttenfield B P  1991 A rule for describing line feature geometry. In Buttenfield  B P, 
McMaster  R B (eds) Map Generalization:  Making Rules for  Knowkdge Represmt- 
ation  Longman, London  pp  150-71 

Buttenfield  B P,  DeLotto J S  1989 Multiple Repraentafio~~~: Repoti on the Specialist 
Meeting NCGIA  Report  89-3, National  Center  for  Geographic Information  and 
Analysis,  Santa Barbara, California 

Butten6eld  B P,  Mark  D M 1991 Expert  systems in  cartographic design.  In  Taylor 
D  R F (ed)  Geographic Information  Systems:  l l t e  Computer Md  Ccmmnpmmy 
Cartography Pergamon  Press.  Oxford  pp 129-50 

CaldweU  D R,  Zoraster  S,  Hugus  M 1984 Automating generalization  and  displace- 
AmcricPn 
ment  lessons  from  manual  methods.  Technical  Papers,  44th  An& 
Congress on  Surveying  and  Mapping  (ACSM)  Meeting  Washington, DC March 
1984 pp 254-63 

Carlsoa W W 1985 Algorithmic performance of  dataflow multiprocessors.  Computer 

Dec:  30-40 

Carpenter L C  1981 Computer rendering of  fractal curves and surfaces. lbce&ng, 
Association for  Computing  Machinery  (ACM)  SIGGRAPH  Conference  Seattle, 
Washington,  14(3):  190 (abstract  only).  Text  in  Computer  Graphics July  1980: 
9-15 

Catlow D,  Du  D 1984 The structuring and cartographic generalization of digital river 
data.  Technical  Papers,  44th  Annual  American  Congress  on  Surveying  and 
Mapping  (ACSM) Meeting Washington,  DC March  1984 pp 511-20 

Child  J  1984 A  semiotic  approach  to  cartographic  structure  and  map  meaning. 
Unpublished  PhD dissertation, Department of  Geography, University of Washing- 
ton,  Seattle, Washington 

Chrisman  N  R  1983 Epsilon  filtering:  a  technique  for  automated  scale  changing. 
Technical  Papers,  43rd  Annual  American  Congress  on  Surveying and  Mapping 
(ACSM) Meeting Washington,  DC March  1983 pp 322-31 

Christ  F  1978 A program  for  the  fully  automated  displacement  of  point  and  line 
features  in  cartographic  generalization.  Nachrichten  aus  dem  Karten-  und 
Vermessungswesen Series 2,  35: 5-30 

Clarke  K  C  1990 Computer and  Analytical  Cartography  Prentice-Hall,  Englewood 

Cliffs,  New  Jersey 

Daniels  J  1986 Cognitive  models  in  information  retrieval  - an  evaluative  review. 

Journal of  Documentation 42:  272-304 

Dayal  U,  Smith  J M  1986 PROBE:  a  knowledge-oriented  database  management 
system.  In  Brodie  M L,  Mylopoulos  J  (eds)  On  Knowledge  Bme  Management 
Systems Springer-Verlag,  New  York  pp 227-57 

De  S 1988 Knowledge  representation  in  manufacturing systems.  In  Kusiak  A  (ed), 
Expert  Systems:  Strategies and  Solutions  in  Manufacturing  Design  and  Planning 
Michigan  Society of  Manufacturing Engineers,  Dearborn  pp 79-107 

DeLucia  A,  Black  T  1987  A  comprehensive  approach  to  automatic  feature 
generalization.  Proceedings,  13th International  Cartographic  Association  Confer- 
ence  Morelia, Mexico  12-21 Oct  1987 4  pp 168-91 

Dennis J B  1980 Data  flow supercomputers. Computer Nov:  48-56 
Dent  B  1990 Cartography:  Thematic Map  Design  2nd  edn  W C  Brown  Publishers. 

Dubuque,  Iowa 

Dettori  C, Falcidieno  B  1982 An  algorithm  for  selecting  main  points  on  a  line. 

References 

Computers and  Geosciences 8( 1) : 3-10 

Deveau  T J  1985 Reducing  the  number  of  points  in  a  plane  curve  representation. 
Proceedings AUTO-CART0  7, Seventh  Intenratio~l Symposium  on  Computer- 
Assisted  Cartography Baltimore,  Maryland Marcb 1985 pp  152-60 

DMA  (Defense  Mapping  Agency)  1986  Product  Specificatiom for  Digital  Feature 
Analysk  Data  (DFAD), Level  I  and  Level  2 2nd  edn Missouri  DMA  Aerospace 
Center,  St  Louis,  April  1986 

Doerschler J S, Freeman H  1989 An  expert  system for dense-map name  placement. 
Proceedings  AUTO-CART0  9,  Ninth  I n t e m t i o ~ l  Symposium  on  Computer- 
Assisted  Cartography Baltimore,  Maryland March  1989 pp 215-24 

Dolylpp  D H,  Peucker  T K  1973 Algorithms for  the  reduction  of  the  number  of 
points  required  to  represent  a  line  or its caricature.  The Canadian  Cartographer 
lO(2):  112-23 

Duecker  K J,  Kjerm  D  1987  Application  of  the  object-oriented  paradigm  to 
in  geographic  information  systems.  Roceedings,  Internaabnol  G e e  
probl- 
graphic Information Systems (IGIS) Symposium: m e  Research  Agenda  Arlington, 
Virgina  Nov  1987 2 pp 79-87 

Eddman G M  1989 Topobiology.  Scientific American  260(5):  44-53 
Egedder  M,  F

 A  1989 Object-oriented  modeling  for  GIS: inheritance  and 
propagation.  Proceedings  AUTO-CART0 9,  Ninth  International Symposium  on 
Computer-Asskted Cartography Baltimore, Maryland  March  1989 pp 588-98 

Energy, Mint$, and Kesources Canada)  1W4 'Iopognrphic Mapping Mmuol 
uf  '&bmpUa#o~) Sj&x@cohns and Imtruuhs  3rd  edn  Topographic  Mapping 
Division.  Surveys and  Mapping Branch,  Dept of  Energy, Mines, and  Resources, 
Ottawa 

EMR  1989 Derivation  Guide Canada  Centre  for Mapping,  Dept  of  Energy,  Mines 

d

and  Resources, Ottawa,  Canada 

Engelbart D C 1962 Augmenting  Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework  Stanford 
Research  Institute,  Summary  Report  for  Contract  AF 49(638)-1024 (also  NTIS 
microfiche  AD 289  565),  Menlo Park,  California 

Feigenbaum E A  1977 The art of  artificial intelligence: 1. themes and case studies of 
knowledge  engineering.  Proceedings,  5th  Inremtioml  Joint  Conference  on 
Artificial  Intelligence, IJCA I-77 Cam bridge,  Massachusetts 2 pp 1014-29 

Fikes  R,  Kehler  T  1985  The  role  of  trame-based  representat~on in  reasoning. 

Communicatiom of  the Association for  Computing Machinery  28: 904-20 

Fisher  P,  Mackaness  W  A  1987  Are  cartographic  expert  systems  possible? 
Proceedings  AUTO-CART0  8,  Eighth  Internatio~l Symposium  on  Computer- 
Assisted  Cartography  Baltimore,  Maryland  March  1987 pp 530-4 

Flym  M J  1972 Some  computer  organizations and  their  effectiveness.  Industrial, 
Electronic and  Electrical  Engineering  Tranroctions in Computing C33(7): 592-603 
Freeman  H R,  Ahn  J  1984  AUTONAP  - an  expert  system  for  automatic  name 
placement.  Proceedings,  1st  Internatio~l Symposium  on  Spatial  Data  Handling 
Zurich,  Switzerland Aug  1984 pp 544-69 

Frey  W  1986 A  bit-mapped classifier. BYTE Magazine  11:  161-72 
GaUaire H,  Minker J, Nicolas J M 1984 Logic and databases: a deductive approach. 

Computing Surveys  16:  153-85 

Gardiner V  1982 Stream networks and digital cartography.  Cartographica 19: 38-44 
Gelernter D 1987 Programming for advanced computing. Scientific American 257(10): 

91-8 

Goldberg  D E  1989  Generic  Algorithms  in  Search,  Optimization  and  Machine 

Learning  Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Massachusetts 

Goodchild  M F  1980 Fractals and  the  accuracy of  geographical measures.  Interm- 

t i o ~ l  Journal  of  Mathematical  Geology  12:  85-98 

Goodchild  M F  1987 Towards  an  enumeration  and  classification of  GIs functions. 
Proceedings,  Intenonnononnl Geographic  Information  Systems  (IGIS) Symposium: 

References 

The Research Agenda Arlington,  Virgina  Nov  1987 2 pp 67-77 

GottschPUr  H J 1973  The  derivation  of  a  measure  for  the  diminished  content  of 
information of  cartographic Line smoothed by  means of a gliding arithmetic mean. 
Information  Relative to Cartography and  Geodesy.  Tranrlations 30:  11-16 
Craklanoff  C J 1985  Expert  system  technology  applied  to  cartographic  process  - 
considerations and possibilities.  Technical Papers, 45th Annual American  Congress 
on  Surveying  and  Mapping  (ACSM)  Meeting  Washington,  D C   March  1985 
pp 613-24 

Green  J, S i h n  Robert  1979  Computing  Dirichlet  tesselations  in  the  plane.  The 

Computer Journal 21(2):  168-73 

Gregory K J, Walling D E 1973 Drainage  Basin Form and Process Edward  Arnold, 

Grunreich  D 1985  Computet-assisted  generalization.  Papers;  Cerco  Cartography 

Guptill  S C  1990 An Enhanced  Digital  Line  Graph Design US  Geological  Survey 

London 

Course Frankfurt,  Gennany 

Circular  1048,  Reston,  Virginia 

Guptill S,  Fegeas R  1988 Feature based  spatial data models - the choice  for  global 
databases in the 1990's.  In Mounsey  H, Tomlinson  R F  (eds) Building Databases 
for  Global Science Taylor  & Francis,  London  pp 27?-95 

Hake G  1975 Zum Begriffssystem der Generalisierung. Nachrichten aus dem Karten- 

und  Vermessungswcsen Special Issue:  53-62 

Harmon  H,  King D 1985  Expert Systems John Wdey,  New  Yo* 
Hart A  1986 Knowledge Acqaition for  Expert Systems McGraw-Hill,  New  York 
Hayes-Roth  F, Waterman  D A, Lenat  D B  1983  Building  Expert  System Addison- 

Wesley,  Reading,  Massachusetts 

Hillis W D 1985  The Connection Machine MIT Press,  Cambridge, Massachusetts 
Hillis  W D, Steele  C  L 1986  Data  parallel  algorithms.  Communications  of 

the 

Association for  Compuring Machinery  29(12):  1170-83 

Hillsman  E L   19&4  The  P-median  structure  as  a  unified 

liner  model  for 

location-allocation  analysis.  Environment and  Plannin~ A  16: 30S18 

Holland J H  1986 Escaping  brittleness:  the  possibilities  of  general-purpose  learning 
algorithms  applied  to  parallel  rule-based  systems.  In  Michalski  R  S, Carbonell 
J G ,  Mitchell  T M  (eds)  Machine  Learning:  An  Artificial  Intelligence Approach 
Morgan  Kaufman, Los Altos pp 593423 

. 'olland  J H,  Holyoak  K J,  Nisbett  R E, Thagard  R  1986  Induction:  Processes  of 

Inference,  Learning and  Discovery MIT Press,  Cambridge, Massachusetts 

Hu  D  1989  CIC++  for  Expert  Systems  Management  Information  Sciences,  inc, 

Portland.  Oregon 

Hudson  D L  1990 Autonomous  view  states:  materialized  support  for  view  update 
propagation.  Unpublished  PhD  thesis,  Department  of  Surveying  Engineering, 
University  of  Maine,  Orono,  Maine 

Hwang  K, Chowkwanyao R,  Ghosh  J  1989  Parallel  architectures for  implementing 
artificial intelligence systems.  In  Hwang  K,  DeGroot  D  (tds) Parallel  Processing 
for  Silpercompurers and Artificial  Intelligence McGraw-Hill,  New  York 

lmhof E 1962 Die Anordnung der Namen  auf  der Karte.  Internationol  Yearbook of 
Car~ography 2:  93-128.  English  translation  Imhof  E  1975  Positioning  names  on 
maps.  The American  Carrographer 2(2):  128-44 

Irnhof  E 1965  Kartographuche  Gelandedarstellung  Walter  de  Gruyter,  Berlin, 

Germany 

Massachusetts 

Imhof E  1982 Cartogrophic Relief  Presenrafion Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, Germany 
Jackson  M  1986 
to  Expert  System  Addison-Wesley.  Reading, 

Introducrion 

Jasinski  M J  1990  The Comparison of  Complexity  Measures for  Cartographic Lines 
NCGIA  Report  90-1. National  Center  for  Geographic Information  and  Analysis, 
Santa  Barbara.  California 

4 

References 

Jenks George F 1981 Lines, computers and human frailties. Annals of  the Association 

of  Americun Geographers 71(1):  1-10 

Jenks George F  1985 Linear simplification: how  far can  we  go? Paper  presented  to 
the 10th Annual  Meeting of  the Canadian Cartographic Assodation,  Fredericton, 
New  Bmnswick June  1985 

Jenks C F  1989 Geographic  logic in  map  design.  Cartographica 26:  27-42 
Johrurnsen  T  1973 A  program  for  editing  and for some generalizing  operations for 
derivation of a small scale map from digitized data in  1 : 50 000 scale. Nachrichten 
aus  &m  Karten- und  Vennessungswesen series 2 30:  17-22 

JOIKS C B 1989 Cartographic name placement with  Prolog.  Industrial Electronic and 

Electrical Engineering Society  Computer  Graphics & Applications 9: 36-47 

Joacs  C B,  Abraham  I M 1986 Design  considerations  for  a  scale-independent 
cartographic data base.  Proceedings, 2nd International Symposium on Spatial Data 
Handling Seattle,  Washington  Aug  1986 pp 384-98 

KProsclr A J 1980 Artistic elements in map dcsip. Cartographic J o d  17(2):  l24-7 
Kestea J S 1973 Cartographic Design and  Production John Wiley,  New  York 
Kestea J S 1989 Cartographic Design and  Production Longman, London 
KeUcy  S  1977 Information  and  generalization  in  cartographic  communication. 
Unpublished  PhD dissertation, Department of Geography, Univenity of Washing- 
ton,  Seattle, Washington 

Kim  W,  LachovsLy  F (eds)  1989  Object-oriented  Concepts,  Databasu,  and 
Appli- 
KbgR 1989 My caf'h object-oriented. In ~in;W, Lo&ovsky F (h) 0 b f a c i d d  
Concepts, Databases,  and Applicatiom  Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Massachusetts 
PP 23-30 

Addifaa- Wdey,, Rcadi~k M-s~, 

Kowabki R A 1979 Logic for  Problem Solving North-Holland,  New  York 
Kuipers B  1978 Modeling spatial  knowledge.  Cognitive Science 2:  129-53 
Lakoff  C  1987 Women,  Fire,  and  Dangerour  Things University  of  Chicago  Press, 

Lang T 1%Q  Rules  for  the  robot  draughtsmen.  The Geographical  Magazine 42(1): 

Chicago,  Illinois 

50-1 

Langran  C E  1991 Generalizahon  and  parallel  computation.  In  Buttenfield  B P, 
McMaster  R D  (eds)  Map  Generalization: Making  Rules for  Knowledge  Repre- 
sentation Longman,  London  pp 205-17 

Langran C E, Poiker T K  1986 Integration  of  name  selection and  name placement. 
Proceedings,  2nd  International  Symposium  on  Spatial  Data  Handling  Seattle, 
Washington  July  1986 pp 3344 
Leberl  F L,  Olson D,  Lkhtwr W  1985 ASTRA  - a  system  for  automated  scale 
transition.  Technic01 Papers,  45th  Annual  American  Congress  on  Surveying  and 
Mapping (ACSM) Meeting Washington,  DC March  1985 1 pp  1-13 

Leopold  L B,  Wdman  M C,  Miller J  P  1%4  Fluvial  Processes in  Geomorphology 

W H  Freeman,  San Franc~sco, California 

Lihtner W  1978 Locational  characteristics  and  the  sequence of  computer assisted 
processes  of  cartographic  generalization.  Nachrichten  nus  dem  Karten-  und 
Vennessungwegen series 35: 65-75 

Lichher  W 1979 Computer-assisted  processes  of  cartographic  generalization  in 

topographic maps.  Geo-Processing 1 : 183-99 

Mackaness  W A  1991  Integration  and  evaluation  of  map  generalization.  In 
Buttenfield  B P,  McMaster  R  B  (eds)  Map  Generalization:  Making  Rules  for 
Knowledge Representation  Longman.  London  pp 218-27 

Mackaness  W A, Fisher  P  1987 Automatic  recognition  and  resolution  of  spatial 
conflicts  in  cartographic  symbolization.  Proceedings  AUTO-CART0  8,  Eighth 
International Symposium on Computer-Assisted Cartography Baltimore,  Maryland 
March  1987 pp 709-18 

Mackaness W A,  F i e r  R  F,  W i h n  C C  1986 Towards  a  cartographic  expert 

3 

References 

system.  Proceedings  AUTO-CART0  LONDON,  International  Symposium  on 
Computer-Assisted Cartography  London,  UK Sept  1986 pp 57887 

McMIstv R B  1983 Mathematical measures for the evaluation of simplilied  lines on 
maps.  Unpublished  PhD  dissertation,  Department of  Geography  and  Meteorol- 
ogy,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  Kansas 

McMPstcr  R B  1986  A  statistical  analysis  of  mathematical  measures  for  linear 

simplification.  The American  Cartographer  13(2):  10S16 

McMaster  R B  1987 Automated  line generalization  Cartographica 24(2):  74-111 
McMrpter  R B  1989a  Introduction  to  'numerical  generalization  in  cartography'. 

Cartographica %(I):  1-6 

McM.ster  R B  1989b The integration  of  simplification  and smoothing algorithms in 

line generalization.  Cartographica %(I):  101-21 

McMaster  R B  1991  Conceptual  frameworks  for  geographical  knowledge.  In 
Buttenfield  B P,  McMaster  R  B  (4s) Map  Generalization: Making  Rules  for 
Knowkdge  Representation Longman,  London pp 21-39 

McMaster R B,  Monmonler M S 1989 A  conceptual framework for quantitative and 
qualitative  raster-mode generalization.  Proceedings GISILIS '89  Orlando, Florida 
2 pp 3!M403 

McM8ster R B, Sbtr K S 1988 Cartographic generalization in a digital environment: 
a framework  for implementation  in a geographic information system.  Proceedings 
GISILIS '88  San Antonio Texas 1 pp 240-9 

MaUng  D H 1968 How  long is a  piece  of  string? Cartographic J
Mnnddbrot B B  1%7  How long is the coast of Britain? Statistical self-similarity  and 

5:  147-56 

d

 

fractal dimension. Science 1%: 636-8 

MaDddbrot B B  1986 Self-affine fractal sets. In Pietram L, Tossato E (4s) FroctaLF 

in Physics Elsevier,  Amsterdam 

Manola  F,  Brodie  M L  1986 On  knowledge-based  system  architectures.  In  Brodie 
M L,  Mylopoulos  J  (eds)  On  Knowledge  Base  Management  Systems  Springer- 
Verlag,  New  York  pp 34-54 

Marino J S  1979 Identification of  characteristics  along naturally  occurring  lines:  an 

empirical study.  The Canadian Cartographer  16(1): 70-80 

Mark  D M  1979 Phenomenon-based  data  structuring and  digital  terrain  modeling. 

Geo-Processing 1: 27-36 

Mark D M  1983 Relations between field surveyed  channel networks and map-based 
in  small  baslns  near  Inez,  Kentucky.  Annals, 

geomorphometric  measures 
Association of  American  Geographers 73: 358-72 

Mark  D M  1989 Conceptual  basis  for  geographic  line  generalization.  Proceedings 
AUTO-CART0  9,  Ninth  International Symposium on  Computer-Assisted Carto- 
graphy  Baltimore, Maryland  March  1989 pp 68-77 

Mark  D M  1991  Object  modelling  and  phenomenon-based  generalization.  In 
Buttenfield  B P,  McMaster  R  B  (eds)  Map  Generalization: Making  Rules  for 
Knowledge Representation Longman,  London  pp 103-18 

Mark  D M,  Aronson  P B  1984 Scale-dependent fraaal  dimensions  of  topographic 
surfaces:  an  empirical  investigation,  with  applications  in  geomorphology  and 
computer  mapping.  International Journal of  Mathematical Geology  16(7): 671-83 

Marr D  1982 Vision W H  Freeman,  San  Francisco 
Meyer  B  1988 Object-oriented Software  Construction Prentice-Hall,  New  York 
hleyer  U  1986  Software  developments  for  computer-assisted  generalization.  Pro- 

ceedings AUTO-CART0 LONDON, London  UK Sept  1986 vol2 pp 247-56 

Meyer  U  1987  Computer-assisted  gene~alizat~on of  building  for  digital  landscape 
models  by  classification  methods.  Nachrichten aus dem  Karten- und  Vermessungs- 
wesen  Monograph 2(46) 

Michaelsen  R H,  Michie  D,  Boulanger  A  1985 The  technology  of expert  systems. 

BYTE  Magazine  10: 303-12 

Minsky M  1975 A  framework  for representing knowledge.  In Winston  P H  (ed)  The 

Psychology of  Computer Vision McGraw-Hill,  New  York  pp 21 1-77 

References 

Monmonkr  M  1976 Statistical  maps,  algorithms,  and generable behavior.  Technical 
Papers,  36th  Annual  American  Congress on  Surveying  and  Mapping  (ACSM) 
Meeting  Washington,  D C  March  1976 pp 407-12 

Moamonkr  M  1982  Computer-arsirrrd  &rtogrophy:  Principlu  and  Prospecu 

Prentice-Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs,  New J e m y  

Monmonkr  M  1983 Raster-mode  area  generalization  for  land  use  and  land  cover 

maps.  Cartographica 20(4):  65-91 

Monmonkr  M  1986  Toward  a  practicable  model  of  cartographic  generalization. 
Proceedings  AUTO-CART0  LONDON, International  Symposium  on Computer- 
Assisted  Cartography, London,  UK  Sept  1986 2 pp 257-66 

Monmonier  M  1987  Displacement  in  vector-  and  raster-mode  graphics.  Carto- 

graphic~ 24(4):  25-36 

Monlnorrkr  M  1989a  Caricature-weighted  and caricature-screened  h e  simplifica- 
tion:  expert-guided  approaches to cartographic Line  generalization.  Journal of  the 
Pennsylvania Academy  of  Science 63: 105-12 
guided  feature displacement. Cortogmphiccr Wl): 4 M 4  

Monmonkr  M  1989b  Interpolated  generalization:  autographic  theory  for  expert- 

Monmonkr  M  1989c  Regionalizing  and  matching  features  for  interpolated 
displacement  in  the  automated  generalization of  digital  cartographic  databases. 
Cartographica 26(2):  21-39 

l?@& 

3:  65-71 

Monmonier  M  1990  Graphically  encoded  knowledge  bases  for  expert-guided 
J o d  of 
, 

feature  eaeralization  in  cartographic -9 sysems.  In&-& 

Monmonier  M  1991  Role  of  interpolation  in  feature  displacement.  In  Buttenfield 
B P.  McMaster  R  B  (eds)  Map  Generalization:  Makrng  Rules  for  Knowledge 
Repmenrotion  Longman,  London pp  189-204 

Monmoakr  M,  McMsstrr  R B  1990 Tbe sequential  effects of  geometric operators 
in  cartographic  line  generalization.  In&rnatio~I Yearbook  of  Cartography 
(forthcoming) 

-I*,  .*: 

Monmonier  M,  McMaster  R  B  1991 Geometric  operators and  sequential  effects  in 
cartographic  llne  generalization  Internatio~l Yearbook  of  Cartography (forth- 
coming) 

Morrison  J  L  1974  A  theoretical  framework  for  cartographic  generalization  with 
emphasis on the process of  symbolization. International  Yearbook of  Cartography 
14:  115-27 

Muehrcke  P C  1986  Map  Use:  Reading  Analysis,  and  Interpretation  2nd  edn  J P  

*$*R 

t-  a%.%: 

.. - 

lb 4,., 

Publications.  Madison,  Wisconsin 

Muller J C  1989 Theoretical considerations for automated map generalization.  ITC 

J o u r ~ I  314:  2004,  Enschede,  The Netherlands 

Mulkr  J C  1990 Rule-based  generalization:  potentials  and  impediments.  Proceed- 
ings, 4th  International  Symposium  on Spatial Data  Handling  Zurich,  Switzerland 
Aug  1990 1 pp 317-34 

Muller  J C,  Johnson  R D,  V ~ w l l a  L R  1986 A  knowledge-based  approach  for 
developing  cartographic expertise.  Proceedings, Second  International Symposium 
on  Spatial Data  Handling  Seattle, Washington July  1986 pp 557-71 

Mylopoulas  J  1980 An  overview  of  knowledge  representation.  Proceedings  of  the 

Workshop on Data  Abstraction,  Databascr, and Conceptual Modeling  pp 5-12 

NCDCDS  (National  Committee for Digital  Cartographic Data Standards)  1988 The 
proposed standard for digital cartographic data.  The American Curtographer 15(1): 
9-140 

Nickerson  B C  1988a  Automated  cartographic  generalization  for  linear  features. 

Cartographica 25(3):  15-66 

Nickerson  B C  1988b  Data  structure  requirements  for  automated  cartographic 
generalization.  Proceedings  of  the  Third  International  Seminor  on  Trends  and 
Concerns of  Spatial Sciences Lava1 University,  Quebec  City,  Canada June  1988 

Nickerson  B C 1W1 Knowledge  engineering  for generalization.  In  Buttenfield B P, 

References 

McMaster  R B  (eds)  Map  Generalization:  Making  Rules for  Knowledge  Repre- 
sentation Longman,  London  pp 40-56 

Nickerson B G, Fmman H 1986 Development of  a r u l e - b a d  system for automatic 
map generalization. Proceedings, Second International Symposium on Spatial Data 
Handling Seattle, Washington July  1986 pp 537-56 

Niersttasz 0 1989 A survey of  object-oriented  concepts.  In Kim W, Lochovsky F H 
(eds)  Object-oriented  Concepts,  Databases,  and  Applications  Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, Massachusetts  pp 3-21 

Nyerges  T L  1980  Representing  spatial  properties  in  cartographic  databases. 
Technical  Papers,  40th  Annual  American  Congress  on  Surveying  and  Mapping 
(ACSM) Meeting St  Louis,  Missouri Sept  1980 pp 29-41 

Nyerges  T L  1987  G I s   research  issues  identified  during  a  cartographic  standards 
process: spatial data exchange.  Proceedings, International  Geographic Information 
System (IG;IS  Symposium:  The Research Agenda  Arlington,  Virginia  Nov  1987 
1 pp 3 1 M 9  

Nyerges  T L  1991a Analytical  map  use.  Cartography  and  Geographic  Information 

system 18(1):  11-22 

Nyerges  T L  1991b  Geographic  information  abstractions:  conceptual  clarity  for 

geographic modeling.  Environment Md  Planning A ,  in  praas 

Nyerges  T L  1991c  Representing  geographical  meaning.  In  Buttenfield  B P. 
McMaster  R B  (eds)  Map  Generalization:  Making  Rules for  Knowledge  Repre- 
senlotion Longman,  London pp 59-85 

O'Brlen  D 1988 Generalization of map area data through raster processing.  Internal 
report,  Surveys  and  Mapping  Branch,  Energy,  Mines,  and  Resources,  Ottawa. 
Canada 

Opheim  H 1982 Fast  data reduction  of  a  digitized  curve.  Geo-Processing 2:  33-40 
Osgood  C E,  Suci  G,  Tannenbaum  P H 1957  771e  Measurement  of  Meaning 

University  of  Illinois Press,  Urbana,  Illinois 

Palmer  B L,  Frank  A  U  1988 Spatial  languages.  Proceedings,  Third  International 

Symposium on Spatial  Data Handling Sydney,  Australia  July  1988 pp 201 -10 

Pannekoek  A  J  1%2  Generalization  of  coastlines  and  contours.  lnternational 

Yearbook  of  Cartography  2: 55-74 

Parsaye  K,  Chignell M,  Khoshafian S,  Wong  H  1989 Intelligent  Databases:  Object- 

oriented,  Deductive  Hypermedia  Technologies John  Wiley,  New  York. 

Peckham  J,  Maryanski  E  1988 Semantic  data  models.  Association  for  Computing 

Machinery  Computing Surveys 20(3):  153-89 

Perkal  J  1966  An  attempt  at  objective  generalization.  Trans.  W  Jackowski.  In 
Nystuen  J  (ed)  Discussion  Paper  10, Michigan  Inter-University  Community  of 
Mathematical  Geographers.  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan 

Petchenik  B B  1974  A  verbal  approach  to  characterizing  the  look  of  maps.  The 

American  Cartographer  l(1):  6S71 

Peucker T K  1975 A theory  of  the cartographic  line.  Proceedings A UTO-CART0 2, 
Second  International  Symposium  on  Computer-Assisted  Cartography  Reston. 
Virginia  Sept  1975 pp 508-18 

Peuquet  D J  1988a  Representations  of  geographic  space:  toward  a  conceptual 

synthesis. Annak  of  the American Association  of  Geographers 78(3): 375-94 

Peuquet  D J  1988b Towards  the  definition  and  use  of  complex  spatial  relation- 
ships.  Proceedings,  Third  International  Symposium  on  Spatial  Data  Handling 
Sydney,  Australia  July  1988 pp 211-23 

Pfefferkorn C, Burr D,  Harrison D, Heckman B, Oresky C, Rothermai J  1985 ACES: 
a  cartographic  expert  system.  Proceedings,  A UTO-CART0  7,  Seventh  Interna- 
tional Symposium on Computer-Assisted Cartography  Baltimore, Maryland  March 
1985 pp 399-407 

Pike  R J  1988  Toward  geometric  signatures  for  geographic  information  systems 
Proceedings,  International  Geographic  Information  System  (IGIS)  Symposium: 

References 

The Research Agenda Arlington, Virginia  Nov  1987 vol  3 pp  15-26 

Powitz B M 1989 Computer-assisted generalization of  traffic networks and buildings. 
Proceedings,  14th  International  Cartographic  Association  Conference  Budapest, 
Hungary Aug  1989 p 112 (abstract only) 
QuillIan  M R  1968  Semantic  memory.  In  Minsky  M  (ed)  Semantic  information 

Processing  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 

Raisz  E  1962 Principles of  Cartography John  Wiley, New  York 
Ramcr  U 1972 An  interactive procedure for  the  polygonal  approximation of  plane 

curves.  Computer Graphics and Image Processing  1: 244-56 

RatqjsLI L 1967 Phtnomtnes des points de gtntralization. International Yearbook of 

Corlography 7: 143-51 

Rcumann  K, WitL.m  A  K  P  1974  Optimizing  curve  segmentation  in  computer 
graphics.  Proceedings,  International  Computing Symposium  North-Holland  Pub- 
lishing Company, Amsterdam pp 467-72 

RBisd  D  1973  Generalization  and  realism  within  automated  cartography.  The 

Chadian Cartographer 10(1): 51-62 

RMnd  D 1988  A  GIS  research  agenda.  International  Journal  of  Geographical 

Riehrdson D E 1988 Database  design  considerations for  rule-based  map  feature 

Information  System 2(1):  2 3 4  

selection. ITC Journal 2:  165-71 

Ricbudson  D E  1989  Rule  based  generalization  for  base  map  production. 

Pmceedings, Challenge for  the 1W's: Geographic Infonaotion  Systuns C o n e  
Canadian Institute for Sumying and Mapping, Ottawa. Canada, pp 718-39 

Richardson D E,  Muller J C  1991 Rule selection for small-scale map generalization. 
In  Buttenfield  B P,  McMaster  R  B (eds)  Map  Generahzation:  Making Rules for 
Knowledge Representation Longman.  London pp 136-49 

Riebudsoa  L F 1961 The  problem  of  contiguity;  an  appendix  to  the  statistics of 

' 

deadly quarrels. General System  Yearbook 6: 139-87 

Ripple  W,  Ulshoefer  V  1987 Expert  systems and  spatial  data  models  for efficient 
geographic data  handling.  Photogrammetric  Engineering and  Remote Sensilg  53: 
1431-3 

Ritter D F 1986 Process  Geomorphology  Wrn  C Brown, Dubuque,  Iowa 
Robertson P K  1988 Choosing data  representations for  the effective visualization of 
spatial  data.  Proceedings,  Third  International  Symposium  on  Spatial  Data 
Handling  Sydney, Australia July  1988 pp 243-52 

Robinson A  H  1960 Elements of  Cartography  2nd  edn  John  Wiley, New  York 
Robinson  A  H,  Sale  R D  1969 Elemena  of  Cartography 3rd  edn  John  Wiley,  New 

York 

Wiley, New  York 

Robinson A  H, Sale R D, Morrison J L 1978 Elements of  Cartography 4th edn John 

Robinson  A  H,  Sale  R D, Morrison  J L, Muehrcke  P C  1984  Elements  of 

Cartography 5th edn John Wiley,  New  York 

RobInson  G, Jackson  M  1985  Expert  systems  in  map  design.  Proceedings 
AUTOICARTO  7,  Seventh  lnternational  Symposium  on  Computer-Assisted 
Cartography Baltimore, Maryland  March  1985 pp 4-9 

Robinson  G J,  ZPltash  A 1989 Application of  expert  systems  to  topographic map 
generalisation.  Proceedings, Association for  Geographic Information  Conference 
(AGI 89) A3  1-A3  6 

Robinson V  B,  Thongs D,  Frank A  U, Blaze  M 1986 Expert systems and geographic 
information  systems:  critical review  and  research  needs.  Geographic I n f o r d o n  
System in Government US Army  Engineer Topographic Laboratories Reports 2: 
851-69 

S d e l d  A  1988 Conflation:  automated  map  compilation. lnternational  J o u r d  of 

Geographical Information  System 2:  217-28 

Saya A  1984 Method  in socid science Hutchinson, London 

References 

Schllctmann H 1984 Discussion of  C.  Grant Head 'The  map as a natural language:  a 

paradigm  for understanding'.  Cartographia  21(1):  3S4 

Schorr  H 1988  Expert  systems:  an IBM  perspective.  Proceedings,  Eighth  Interna- 
tional Workshop on Expert Systems and their Applications Avignon,  France May 
1988 vol  1 pp 3 9 4 0  (abstract only) 

Schrdl M,  Tjm  A,  Wagner R  1984 Comparison  criteria  for semantic data  models. 
Proceedings,  Industrial  Electronic  and  Electric  Engineering  Society  Conference on 
Data  Engineering  Los Angeles  pp  120-5 

Scott A J 1971 Combinatorial programming,  spatial analysis and planning.  Methuen, 

London,  UK 

Shea  K  S  1991  Design  considerations  for  an  artificially  intelligent  system.  In 
Buttenfield  B P,  McMaster  R B  (eds)  Map  Generalization:  Making  Rules  for 
Knowledge  Represenration  h n g m a n ,   London  pp 3-20 

Shea K S, McMaster  R B 1989 Cartographic generalization  in a digital environment: 
when  and  bow  to generalize.  Proceedings  A U T O - C A R T 0  9,  Ninth  International 
Symposium  on Computer-Assisted  Cartography  Baltimore, Maryland  March  1989 
PP 56-67 

Shokakky  U M  1930  Dlina  glavneyshikh  rek  aziatarskoy  chosti  SSSR  I  sposob 
izmreniya  dlin  rek  po  kartam  Rechtransizdat,  Moscow  (as  discussed in  Maling 
D H  1968 How  long  is a  piece  of  string?  Cartographic Journal  S(2):  147-56.) 

Sinton  D  1978  The  inherent  structure  of  information  as  a  constraint  to  analysis: 
mapped  thematic data as a casc study.  In  Dutton G  (ed) Hmard Papers on G I s  
Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Massachusetts  7 pp 1-17 

Smith J M, Smith D C P 1977 Database abstractions; aggregation and generalization. 
Association for  Computing Machinery  Transactions, Databose Systems 2(2):  105-33 
Smitb T R  1984 Artificial  intelligence  and its applicability to geographical  problem 

solving.  The Professional  Geographer 36(2):  147-58 

Smith T R,  Pellegrino J W,  Gdledge R  G  1982 Computational process  modeling  of 

spatial  cognition  and  behavior.  Geographical Analysis  14: 305-25 

Sowa  J  1984  Conceptual  Structures:  Information  Processing  in  Mind  and  Machine 

Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Massachusetts 

Spiess  E  1990  Remerkungen  zu  wissensbasierten  Systemem  fiir  die  Kartographie. 

Vermessung, Photogrammetrie  und  Kulrurtechnik  2(90): 75-81 

Sprague  R,  Carlson  E  1982  Building  Effective  Decision  Support  Systems  Prentice- 

Hall, Englewood  Cliffs,  New  Jersey 

Steinbaus H  1954  Length,  shape  and area.  Colloquium  Mathemtica  3 
Steinhaus H  1%0  Mathematid  S n a p s h o ~  Oxford  University  Press 
Sterling L, Shapiro E 1986 The Art of Prolog  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
Steward  H J  1974  Cartographic  generalization:  some  concepts  and  explanations. 

Cartographica  Monograph  10,  University  of  Toronto  Press, Toronto 

Stormark  E,  Bie  S W  1980  Interactive  map  editing  - a  first  or  a  last  resort?  In 
Opheim  H  (ed)  Contributions  to  Map  Generalization  Norwegian  Computing 
Centre  Publication  679 Trondheim,  Norway  pp 5 9 4 6  

Teitz  M B,  Bart  M  1968  Heuristic  methods  for  estimating  the  generalized  vertex 

median  of  a  weighted  graph.  Operations Research  16: 955-61 

Thapa  K  1988  Automatic  line  generalization  using  zerocrossing.  Photogrammerric 

Engineering  and  Remote  Sensing  54(4):  51 1-17 

Thompson M M 1979 Maps for  America  USGS,  Reston.  Virginia 
Tilghman  B  R  1984  But  is  it  ON? Blackwell.  London 
Tobler  W  R  1%4  An  Experiment  in  the  Computer Generalization of  Maps Technical 
Report  1.  Office  of  Naval  Research,  ASAD  Contract  459953,  Dec  1964. 
Washington,  DC 

Tobler  W R  1%6  Numerical  Map  Generalization  Michigan  Inter-University  Com- 
munity  of  Mathematical  Geographers  Discussion  Paper  NO 8.  Ann  Arbor. 
Michigan 

References 

Tomlln,  C D  1983  Digital  cartographic  modeling  techniques  in  environmental 
planning.  Unpublished  PhD  thesis,  School  of  Landscape  Architecture,  Yale 
University 

TMfer F,  Pilkwlztr  W  1966 The principles of  selection, a  means  of  cartographic 

generalization. The Cartographic Journal y l ) :  10-16 

Tuftc  E R  1983  The  Visual  Display  of  Quantitative  Information  Graphic  Press, 

Cheshire, Connecticut 

Ullman  S 1985  Visual  routines.  In  Pinker  S  (ed)  Visual  Cognition  MIT  Press, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts pp 97-159 

USCS (US  Geological  Survey)  1964  lnstmrions  for  Stereocompilarion  of  Map 
Manuscripts  Scribed  at  1 : 24 000  Topographic  Division,  USGS  March  1964, 
Reston, Virginia 

USGS 1 W  Digital  Line  Graphs  from  I  : 1OO000  scale  maps  USGS  National 

Mapping Division,  Reston,  Virginia 

Van  IEorr E K  1985  Generalizing  aumgmp&c  databases.  Prwcdtrgt  AUTO- 

CART0 7,  Seventh International  Symposium on Computer-Assirted ~ o g r a p h y  
Baltimore, Maryland March  1985 pp 532-40 

V a d u k  P,  Wooloough  D F  1975 Reduction  of  linear  cartographic data  based  on 

generalization of  pseudo-hyperbolae.  The Cortogrophic J o u d  ly2):  112-19 

Veen  A H   1986  Dataflow  machine  architecture.  Assochfhn 

for  Computing 

Machinery  Computing Swveys  18(4): 365% 

V ~ J , T n r o v F J , W e i m L B , W ~ C , F y I e W S l W O T h e E o r t l k A n  

to Physical Gdogy Holt, Riaahvt & Wia&toa, New York 

I-n 

Vokov N  M  1949 Novyy  sposob ismereniya dlin rek  po kartam. Izvestia AN  SSSR, 
Seriya  Geografiya  i  Geofizicheskaya T  13(2).  As  discussed  in  Maling  D H  1989 
Measurements from  Maps: Principles and Methods of  Cartometry Pergamon Press, 
Oxford 

Wnh  B W,  Li  G 1989 Design  issues of  multiprocessors for artificial  intelligence.  In 
Hwang K, DeGroot  D (eds) Parallel Processing for  Supercomputers and  Artificial 
intelligence  McGraw-Hill. New  York 

Waterman  D  A  1986  A  Guide  to  Expert  Systems  Addison-Wesley,  Reading, 

Massachusetts 

Weibel R  1989a Concepts and  Experiments for  the Automation of  Relief  Generaliza- 
tion PhD Dissertation (in  German), Geo-Processing Series No  15, Department of 
Geography, University of  Zurich,  Switzerland 

Weibel  R  1989b Design  and  implementation  of  a  strategy  for  adaptive computer- 
assisted  terrain  generalization.  Proceedings,  14th  l n t e r ~ t i o ~ I  Cartographic 
Association  Conference Budapest,  Hungary Aug  1989 pp 10-11 (abstract only) 

Wdbel  R  1991 Amplified intelligence and  rule-based systems.  In  Buttenfield  B P, 
McMaster R B (eds) Map  Generalization: Making  Rules for  Knowledge Represen- 
tation Longman, London  pp  172-86 

Weibel  R,  Buttenfield  B P  1988  Map  design  for  geographic  information  Systems. 

Proceedings, GISILIS  '88 San  Antonio, Texas vol  1 pp 350-9 

Weiss  S M,  Kulikowski  C A  1984 A  Practical  Guide  to  Designing  Expert  Systems 

Rowman  and  Allenheld, Totowa,  New  Jersey 

White  E R  1985  Assessment  of  line  generalization  algorithms  using  characteristic 

points.  The American  Cartographer  12(1): 17-28 

White M  1984 Technical requirements and standards for a multipurpose geographic 

data  system.  The American  Cartographer ll(1):  15-26 

Wiederhold  G  1986 Knowledge versus data. In Brodie M L, Mylopoulos J (eds) On 

Knowledge  Bare  Management Springer-Verlag , New  York  pp 77-82 

Wilson  S 1981  Cartographic  generalization  of  linear  information  in  raster  mode. 
Master's  thesis,  Department  of  Geography,  Syracuse University,  Syracuse, New 
York 

Winograd  T,  Flores  F  1987  Understanding  Computers  and  Cognition:  A  New 

Foundation for  Design  Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts 

References 
W i  P H 1984  Artificial  Intelligence  2nd  edn  Addison-Wesley.  Reading, 

Massachusetts 

WitLin A  P 1986 Scale-space filtering. In Pentland A  P (ed) From PixeLF  to Predicates 

Ablex  Publishing Corp, Norwood,  New  Jersey pp 5-19 

Wu C V, Buttenfield B P 1990 Reconsidering rules for point feature name placement. 

Zorastcr S 1986 Integer  programming applied to the map label  placement  problem. 

Cartographia 27(4)  (forthcoming) 

Cartographica 23(3):  16-27 

Zoraster S,  Davis D, Hugus M 1984 Manual  and Automated  Line  Generalization and 
Feature  Dirplaceme~ US Army  Engineering and Topographic Laboratory Report 
ETL-0359 Fort  Belvoir,  Virginia 

