TOPOLOGICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
 FOR GEOGRAPHIC REPRESENTATION

Nicholas R. Chrisman 
 Harvard University

INTRODUCTION
 The development of geographic information processing has occurred at such an 

explosive rate that we risk losing sight of our basic mission to understand spatial
 distributions and processes. Decisions originally made by adopting specific tactics 
 in the organization of information now threaten to split our efforts into widely
 divergent streams. On one hand, grid systems may originally stem from programming
 expediency, but they are now reinforced by a supporting technology of satellites,
 raster scanners and special purpose computers.

The alternative to grid processing has also developed, but in radically differ 
 ent directions. Originally characterized as polygon or line and vertex systems, the 
 new development has created a family of geographic information systems based on 
 topology. The division between these two approaches transcends the technical argu
 ments of efficiency and practicality. For, each approach imposes different attitudes 
 with regard to the nature of space.

I cannot pretend to present both sides of a balanced debate between grid and 
 topologic philosophies. Grid systems have many successful and perceptive proponents,
 plus large public financing for their hardware requirements. I wish to concentrate 
 here entirely on the topological approach, presenting first the underlying ideas and 
 an evaluation of the main weaknesses of existing attempts to implement them. Second,
 I will review the organizing principles and present status of the GEOGRAF project now 
 under way at the Laboratory for Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis.

I believe that topological systems will offer more effective geographic repre
 sentation than that available through the grid approach. But I also hope that the 
 gulf between the two philosophies does not become so wide that dialogue becomes 
 impossible between their supporters. The final product of spatial analysis should 
 take precedence over the transitory exigencies of data processing.

ASSUMPTIONS OF THE TOPOLOGICAL APPROACH
 The first task of any project should be to define the eventual goals of inquiry.

Developing a system to represent geographic entities requires the acceptance of some 
 assumptions about the nature of space. Unless these assumptions are clearly stated,
 there will be a gap between expected and actual capabilities. Many systems fail not


because they operate incorrectly, but because they do not provide as complete a 
 spatial tool as required.

ENTITIES, CLASSES AND ATTRIBUTES
 Dealing with space at the human level of experience, we are always dealing with 

aggregation and generalization. For different purposes we identify objects at differ 
 ent scales. A metropolitan area is a useful unit for analysis at the national scale. 
 Each community must be distinguished inside the metropolis as analysis becomes finer. 
 Eventually individual blocks or land parcels become the important spatial unit. The 
 unifying factor in the progression parcel-community-metropolis is that some spatial
 aggregation is appropriate at any given scale. While the spatial unit has internal 
 structure, our level of analysis allows it to be considered indivisible and rela 
 tively homogeneous in its attributes.

Thus for a given purpose, we naturally tend to distinguish a given set of 
 discrete geographic entities. The criteria used to determine these entities usually
 form generic classes based upon specific attributes. For instance, the land use 
 class consists uf industrial, residential, agricultural, and other zones. By impli
 cation these uses are mutually exclusive, and so is their geographic expression.
 Similarly, linear objects such as roads can form a class which has network structure. 
 In either case, the class is a set of geographic entities derived from a common set 
 of attributes, thus sharing spatial character and structure.

Every entity has internal consistency at a particular level of analysis, and 
 shares properties with similar, disjoint entities. But the entity need not have a 
 specific size, shape, or orientation. It need not and should not be broken down to 
 fit smaller cells, nor should it become mixed with others if it crosses some arbi 
 trary gridding. The integrity of each geographic entity should be preserved.

NEIGHBORHOOD RELATIONSHIPS
 Because they are located in a particular manner on the surface of the earth, all 

geographic entities are related to one another. The relative location of entities,
 in fact, describes the armature for spatial interaction and the overall structure of 
 a class. Within the class of countries of the world, the contiguity, for example,
 of France and Germany is a significant fact. Within the class of land use, the prox
 imity of residences to pollution generating facilities is similarly critical. Analy
 sis of geographical information must take into account the basic connectedness and 
 interdependence of all geographic entities. If an artificial unit such as a grid is 
 used, the relationships are not those of the underlying geographic entities.

TOPOLOGY
 A simple, concise means to maintain the integrity of entities, and to represent

neighborhood relationships exists in the flexible science of topology and its deal 
 ings with the manipulation of networks. In our linguistic description of places we 
 find the essential units of topological representation. In the case of France, we 
 recognize that it is an area bounded by a set of frontiers with other countries and 
 with the oceans. These frontiers are another sort of entity, dependent on the coun 
 tries for definition, but serving a linear, not an areal function. The French-German 
 frontier cuts across the Lorraine plateau, then follows the Rhine, terminating at 
 Basel. This terminal point is also the terminal point of other frontiers. The 
 relationships of areas, lines, and points in this example could be formalized by
 using a topological structure of polygons (''^cles), boundaries (edges), and nodes.


Topological notation emphasizes the generic structure of geographic entities by
 stripping down to essentials. When dealing with complex problems where classes of 
 zones overlap, the topological principles force us to recognize that only one net 
 work, the combined intersection set need be defined.

EXISTING SYSTEMS
 The growing family of topological systems attests to the relevance of these 

concepts in a broad range of fields. Unquestionably, the original impetus can be 
 found in the rapid creation of the DIME files for the 1970 Census. (Maxfield and 
 Cooke, 1967). These concepts have been refined in the POLYVRT (Laboratory for Computer
 Graphics, 197*0 and BZIS systems (Blumberg, 197*0 among others. Also, the NRIS and 
 LUDA systems demonstrate a parallel development without direct links to DIME.

Reviews of development and comparisons of relative efficiency of some of these 
 systems have appeared and do not require repetition (Chrisman, 197^1 Peucker and 
 Chrisman, 1975)» I wish instead to focus on the future of topological systems by
 describing first their main weaknesses and finally some attempts to solve them.

WEAKNESSES

Although topology offers a natural and effective means to formalize geographic
 information, there are a number of important needs that are poorly served at present.
 In general the weaknesses are not conceptual, they represent gaps between theory and 
 reality to be filled by programming effort.

LEAST COMMON GEOGRAPHIC UNIT
 The most important difficulty involves what has been called the "polygon over 

lay" problem. Most of the development of topological systems has centered on city
 street networks and administrative zones. In these applications the nature of the 
 network frequently can be known from the start. The city block is a very reasonable 
 choice of indivisible unit for the DIME files. A topological structure can be based 
 entirely on hierarchical groupings of this unit with very little distortion. However,
 topological systems must seek applications with substantially different ground rules. 
 In environmental situations, particularly, there is no unit which can be identified 
 from the start as the common denominator. Attempts to do so are doomed to answer 
 only limited questions (viz. James River Project).

Typically environmental data is composed of a series of classes of polygons
 which must be intersected and stored in an integrated system. To perform this task 
 without recourse to the simplicity of a uniform grid is a great challenge, although
 the conceptual process is understandable. Taken together all the polygonal classes 
 form a single network of zones which are the intersection set of all the classes. 
 These zones may not bear direct relationship to any single class, so they need a new 
 name: Least Common Geographic Units (LCGU's). Before the topological systems can 
 claim generality of application, a procedure to effectively create the network of 
 LCGU's from a complex set of polygonal and linear classes must be built. I do not 
 think the existing, rather tradeworn answers to polygon intersection are capable of 
 processing complex networks at a reasonable cost. The computational complexity must 
 be lowered, and also the ability to recognize equivalent but slightly differently
 coded features must be enhanced.

3^8


DIRECTORIES
 The second main weakness in existing approaches concerns the relative importance

of information and methods to manipulate it. Too much emphasis is now put on data 
 banks, and too little on software to use them. The relationship should be symbiotic;
 new software should allow refinement of information structure. At present, the DIME 
 file is the main product of the DIME development. Beyond the maintenance modules and 
 the address-matching capabilities, very little DIME software exists. I believe this 
 lack is caused by the rigid external structure of the DIME file which seriously
 inhibits the design of an efficient internal data structure. There is only one type
 of record, the two point segment, in the DIME file. There are no directories that 
 allow other information to be easily extracted. The topological relationships
 between geographic entities should not be merely theoretically possible, but also 
 practically available. For instance, to use the DIME file to extract the outline of 
 a zone, one should have an easier way than duplicating all records, sorting the whole 
 file, and then linking segments. While the present DIME system allows for concise,
 compact external storage, there should also be a concern for internal processing
 requirements. It seems a waste to recreate directories from scratch for each pro
 gram run.

GEOGRAF

Fulfilling the potential of the topological concepts is a challenge that has 
 already attracted a number of researchers. Because most of the other projects are 
 incomplete, the focus of this paper is the GEOGRAF project at the Laboratory for 
 Computer Graphics. I will summarize the basic principles which underlie GEOGRAF and 
 describe some of our early decisions in the system design. The audacity of our 
 undertakings prompted a colleague to call the project MEGALOMANE I. But, in spite of 
 high goals, I believe the project is reasonable and its goal attainable.

COMPLETE TOPOLOGY
 The initial assumption behind GEOGRAF is an unqualified acceptance of topological

analysis applied to geographic representation. Each class of geographic entities is 
 taken to be a network of a known basic structure. A complex system of many classes 
 is reduced to a single underlying intersection network. This lowest level has the 
 structure of polygon, chain, and node developed for POLYVRT. The external data 
 structure for POLYVRT which uses a multi-segment chain as the basic unit will provide
 the startling point. Above the lowest level, each entity is described in terms of 
 components at the lowest level. A GEOGRAF representation should be a faithful 
 translation of all spatial relationships into the data base.

STORE DIRECTORIES
 Not only will all relationships be entered, they will be readily accessible 

through a software-generated internal data structure. Tables recording the chains 
 incident at a node, the chains around a polygon, the lower level chains forming upper
 level boundaries, and more will all be constructed once and stored in the basic 
 GEOGRAF data structure. The ease of access to this information should promote gener
 ality of application, flexibility of use, and efficiency of operation. The basic 
 file structure required to operate these directories should be working by January
 1976.

3^9


NEW PROCEDURES
 In particular, many operations which now place large demands on computer

resources can be restructured because of easy access to full topological information. 
 If GEOGRAF is to work, the first priority must be the ability to combine diverse net 
 works into the structure of LCGU's. In a previous paper (Chrisman, 197*0 I have 
 presented a method which, given access to full topological information on two networks,
 performs the work of intersection. The method presented operates at or near a linear 
 order of complexity, because there is no need to compare every entity with every
 entity if the network connectivity is used. This procedure will require considerable 
 experimentation, but the prototype should be working by October 1976.
 A GEOGRAPHIC OPERATING SYSTEM

The mechanical programming problems of building a large and complete software 
 system are monumental. The design of software for this project has been made sub 
 servient to a very demanding list of criteria. GEOGRAF should address the broadest 
 range of applications and should be applicable to very large data files. The pack
 age should be built to foster transfer of geographic data and software without impos
 ing arbitrary standards.

To implement these requirements GEOGRAF is being developed in a subset of FOR 
 TRAN amenable to transfer to all large and medium scale computer systems. Also the 
 more restricted memory sizes of mini-computers have not been ruled out. In order to 
 accomodate almost unlimited numbers of geographic entities and to operate with 
 reasonable efficiency, a virtual memory system will allow constant interaction 
 between software and storage. The resulting GEOGRAF package will consist of a set 
 of subroutines that provide a basic geographic operating system. Requests will be 
 made in a natural geographic manner without concern for the precise method of storage,
 internal or external. ¥e plan to develop a number of complete programs using this 
 environment, but the operating system should be useful for other projects. While 
 such a system may expand indefinitely, the target for first release is in 1977-
SUMMARY
 By offering a complete topological data management system in a flexible computer

environment, new avenues for spatial analysis can be opened. The connected structure 
 of geographical entities should foster the development of analytical procedures sensi 
 tive to spatial interdependence, rather than statistical independence. Spatial data 
 collected for mapping can provide the base for more rigorous spatial understanding.
 GEOGRAF and similar systems should significantly enhance the ability to manipulate
 urban and environmental information.

350


REFERENCES
 1.  Blumberg, M., and L. van de Velde, "Developing a Computerized Impact Zoning

System," Urban and Regional Information Systems; Resources and Results,
 Volume II, Papers from the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Urban and Regional
 Information Systems Association, August 197^> Montreal, PQ, Canada (Pomona,
 N.J.: Stockton State College, 1975), pp. 3^0-352.
 2.  Chrisman, N., "The Impact of Data Structure on Geographic Information Process 
 ing," as discussed in Panel on Cartographic Data Structures, Proceedings of 
 International Conference on Automation in Cartography, Reston, Virginia,
 December 197^>(Washington, D.C.:American Congress on Surveying and Mapping,
 1976), pp. 165-181.
 3.  Cooke, Donald F., and William Maxfield, "The Development of a Geographic Base 
 File and Its Use in Mapping," Urban and Regional Information Systems for Social 
 Programs, Papers from the Fifth Annual Conference of the Urban and Regional
 Information Systems Association, Garden City, N.Y., September 1967? (Kent, Ohio;
 Center for Urban Regionalism, Kent State University, n.d.) pp. 207-218.
 ^.  Laboratory for Computer Graphics, POLYVRT, A Program to Convert Geographic Base 
 Files, (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University, 197^)·
 5.  Peucker, T. and N. Chrisman, "Cartographic Data Structures," The American 
 Cartographer, volume 2, number 1 (April 1975)> PP« 55-69-
351


