A keyboard prototype offers one-handed operation, small size, low cost of manufacture, and permits the touch typing of large alphabets.

Nathaniel Rochester IBM Corporation and MIT
Frank C. Bequaert IBM Corporation Elmer M. Sharp IBM Corporation

The chord keyboard is a miniature keyboard that
is operated with one hand and is suitable for typing large amounts of data at high speed. It can handle a much larger alphabet than any reasonably sized conventional keyboard. Because it requires only one hand, it makes new computer applications possible. Because it is so small and mechanically simple, it costs less to manufacture than a conventional keyboard.
Keyboard layout and operation The right-handed chord keyboard is shown in
Figures 1 and 2. It has a five-by-two array of square keys operated by the fingers and a row of four rectangular keys operated by the thumb. The finger keys have rounded depressions, called "dimples." When a finger presses a dimple, the corresponding character is formed. If the "D" dimple is pressed, one key goes down and a "D" is typed. If the "E" dimple is pressed, two keys go down and a "B" is typed. If the "W"' dimple is pressed, four keys go down and a "W" is typed. There are 27 dimples on the keyboard, providing space for the entire alphabet.
The operator may press up to three finger dimples at once, producing a string of letters in one stroke-hence the term "chord," since this is analogous to playing a chord on the piano. Typical examples of chords are "the" and "fro," which are common strings in English. Since the ring finger and little finger do not function well independently, only three fingers are used to form chords. Finger assignment for chord formation is shown in Figure 2.
The thumb keyboard has troughs instead of dimples, and by pressing a trough it is possible to

depress either one thumb key or two adjacent thumb keys as a part of a chord. Since there are seven troughs and since not pressing a trough is a valid action when forming a chord, there are eight thumb positions. The commonest character in the English language is the space, so it is given special treatment. If the-SPACE trough is pressed as a part of a chord, a space is inserted ahead of the string of characters specified by the finger dimples. Thus, it is possible to type " the" as a single chord. The thumb can also be used to reverse the normal left-toright sequence of letters in a chord, with or without a space. Thus " and" and "ing" can be typed as single chords using the SPACE-REVERSE and REVERSE troughs. By using the UPPER trough it is possible to type "THE", and by using the SPACEUPPER-LOW trough, it is possible to type " The", as single chords. There are also troughs for a SPECIAL character case and for a NUMBER case. There is also the equivalent of the case lock of a conventional typewriter, which permits the keyboard to be locked in a particular case. A detailed description of the full architecture of the chord keyboard is available.'
Chords. Using the keyboard and the conventions described above, one would type a typical sentence as follows:
lI/n/ thius! se/g/ime/nt/ off te/xt/ the/ cho/rd/ bo/und/ar/i/es/ ha/ve/ be/en/ s/ho/wn/ by! li/ne/s/. A simulation program was used to segment large
samples of text in this manner. It was found that this keyboard allows about 2.2 characters per chord on average English text. The fact that a person produces several characters for each chord makes it
possible to type rapidly on the chord keyboard. In the design of the keyboard, the letters were laid out

December 1978

0018-9162/78/1200-0057$00.75 ( 1978 IEEE

57

.W7.
Figure 1. The chord keyboard. Keys contain dimples, placed so that one, two, or four keys are depressed, depending on which dimple is touched. Plate containing thumbkey controls can be moved to the right side of the keyboard for left-handed users.
on the dimples to optimize the average number of characters produced per chord for English text.
The design of the chord keyboard permits a very
large number of unique chords to be formed. An analysis of these possible chords gives the following breakdown by different chord types:

Chords available for typing text Chords useful in typing special characters Chords useful in typing numbers Chords reserved for abbreviations, controls, etc. Unused number and specialcharacter chords Thumb controls

2750 79 299
544 720 15

Total chords possible

4407

This total of 4407 represents the number of unique key combinations that can be made with the chord keyboard. It contrasts with the 94 unique combinations possible on a conventional keyboard.
The "reserved" chords rarely or never occur in English. They provide a very large number of chords that are available to be used for controls, editing commands, program functions, and abbreviations. This set of chords makes the keyboard suitable for use as a computer terminal on which all functions can be accessed while touch typing, as contrasted with many conventional terminal keyboards, on which special function switches cannot be typed by touch.
In using these reserved chords for abbreviations, a common or awkward word or phrase can be typed with a single chord. Some abbreviations are language specific. In English, for example, the word "you" should be abbreviated from three chords to one. The design of the chord keyboard provides some built-in chords of this sort and allows the user to define others. A user noting a repeated word or

Figure 2. Full-size layout of the chord keyboard. The chord "the", one of the most common in English, is formed by pressing dimples that depress both keys in the first, third, and fifth columns.

I INDEX FINGER

DIMPLES PRESSED WITH
I MIDDLE I
I FINGER I

1F TS N

RING FINGER

I I

P,-V

C0D:

<~~~m~ U~J~cc~~LJ ~i= )Lu

CL) =:

Lg

-

<

LL )

J/
:U

58 COMPUTER~~~~~~~~; CL C I(X

58 COMPUTER

phrase that is frequently used or difficult to type used frequently when typing numeric data are also

can establish that word or phrase as a defined chord

the first time he types it. Subsequently, he can pro-

duce the word or phrase with a single chord.

While the layout of the alphabet on the chord key-

tbhoaatrdt,heh'asavbeereangeopntuimmbiezerdoffocrhEanrgalcitsehr,s

tests indicate produced per

chord is almost as high for other languages. More-

over, the efficiency of chording can be further en-

hanced for a specific language by defining single

included on the number keyboard. The number keyboard is designed to permit the typing of single numbers or chords that will produce two or more numbers (or numbers and special characters) for each keystroke. Single numbers or number chords are produced when one or more finger dimples are pressed together with the NUMBER thumb trough. Table 1 shows the chords that can be made using
the number keyboard.

chords to represent the commonest strings of letters

that otherwise could not be typed as single chords. Special characters. The special characters
available on the keyboard are shown with the letters in Figure 3. A special character is produced when the SPECIAL thumb trough is pressed together with a finger dimple. The special characters have been laid out on the keyboard to provide a mnemonic association between the alphabet and the characters. Thus "." (period) is on the same dimple as "p", .," (comma) is on the "C" dimple, and so on. This layout makes it easy to learn the positions of the special characters on the keyboard once the positions of the letters have been learned.
Numbers. The layout of the numbers on the keyboard is shown in Figure 4. Special characters

Size of keyboard. The design described above has drastically reduced keyboard size while greatly expanding the number of available functions. This reduction has been achieved by cutting down the physical number of keys and by using the dimples spanning two and four keys in addition to individual keys. This has a distinct advantage over the miniature buttons used on hand calculators, since such buttons produce too great a pressure on the skin to permit them to be used in continuous, high-speed data entry. The design of the dimples provides a comfortable feel for the fingers while minimizing the number of erroneous key depressions caused by incorrect finger positioning. Figure 5 gives the dimen-
sions of the keyboard.

I INDEX I
FINGER I

Table 1.
The number keyboard. MIDDLE FINGER UP (THE CHORD IS WHAT SHOWS ON THE ENGRAVED KEYTOPS.)

Figure 3. keyboard.

Layout of special characters on the chord User presses both the dimple carrying the

special character and the SPECIAL trough on the thumb

keyboard.

I

FIINNDGEEXR

III

MIDDLE FINGER

I
I

RING FINGER

*

INDEX FINGER POSITIONS

Cl) UP 1 2 3 4

56

78 9

UP

D
u2

1
E2

1 2

'-' ETC.

- .00 -.00 000 +

$

.1 -.1 - 1 .001 - .001 0001 +1 ,1 $1

.2 -.2 - 2 .002 -.002 0002 +2 ,2 $2

cs-

MIDDLE FINGER ON 00 (THE LEFT 9 DIMPLES REPLICATE THE RIGHT 9.)

INDEX FINGER POSITIONS

CD) UP 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
UP 00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 CD 1 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91
2 02 12 22 32 42 52 62 72 82 92, ETC.

MVIDDLE FINGER ON 0 KEY (A 0 IS INSERTED IN THE CHORD PRODUCED.)

INDEX FINGER POSITIONS

UP 1 2 3 4

56

78 9

UP 0 .0 -.0 -0 .000 -.000 0000 +0 ,0 $0

1 001 .01 -.01 -01 .0001 -.0001 00001 + 01 ,01 $01

2 002 .02 - .02 - 02 .0002 - .0002 00002 + 02 02 $02

Figure 4. dIe finger

Layout of numbers on the controls interpretation of

chord keyboard. numbe'r chords.

Mid~ cZ
With-

ETC.

middle finger With middle

up, chord finger on

0is0,whiantdeixs-feinnggrearveddimopnletshemkieryrso.r

those for ring finger. Middle finger on 0 inserts 0 in chord

produded by index and ring fingers-e.g., pressing - .00

with index finger and 1 with ring finger produces

-.0001.

This table FiguIre 4.

indicates the chords that The chords are arranged

can be made with the number in three arrays, one for each

keyboard shown possible position

in of

ttfisiihnoeagnr4smec)rio,dlddauulnpmedlnifcafiaontrgreeoerwa,tchfwheohrikineecdyahebcxohcaofnrirtdinrngogellrasfypiotonuhsgteietroiifonpntonesr(uiiptmnribeottenha.retsiTaoihnfroeroorfptoothshneietaricniohnyngoronfdnui.enmgbIoenfer.rensiancehfofrairntrghaeeyr

there posiindex

December 1978

59

5/16"-

Note: Each surface is a part of a plane or of a cylinder or sphere with radius of curvature 1/4".

a) Overall dimensions of the dimples and troughs.

Rh_121"

-4-518"_-N

0 518"
I

_ 518"_-4 518"_ l-W-* 518"_

1W3/32"

-o. o3/32"

I3II/32'"

g 20 g g g 2 1 ; 3~~~~~~~~~~~2/2"

2-25/32"

5/32"; 40-3/8"

Note: The four are 3/8" lower

tthhaunmbthkeetyesn

finger keys.

+ 3/32'

3/32" s

15!8"-1 15/8"-_1 1~5/8-"1

3/32"I 5/8";

b) Assembly dimensions of the keyboard.

Figure 5. Overall cylinder having a

dimensions of the radius of curvature

chord of 1/4

keyboard, of an inch.

shown full size. The four thumb

Each dimple and keys are 3/8 of an

trough is part of a inch lower than the

sphere or ten finger

keys. Scale for figure is actual size.

60 COM PUTEPs

Experimental implementations
The initial model of the chord keyboard was implemented by modifying a Stenotype keyboard. An IBM Model 1130 computer was modified to accept input from the keyboard and to drive special peripheral devices, including a three-line CRT display and a telephone-line interface. Support software was written for the 1130 computer to generate the correct characters for keyboard key depressions, to display these characters, and to provide communication over the telephone-line interface. A number of application programs were developed to permit the use of the keyboard as a computer terminal, to provide rudimentary editing and file manipulation, and to automate the teaching of touch typing on the keyboard. The keyboard and the system were in use for over two years.
A second experimental keyboard has been completed. It provides a keyboard that is plug compatible with the standard keyboard of the IBM Type 3277 display station. This unit utilizes standard keyboard switches and a microprocessor to duplicate all of the functions of the 78-key 3277 keyboard. This model of the keyboard also provides a simple-to-use, user-defined chord facility whereby the user can define single chords to produce strings of characters as output.
A patent2 has been issued on a hardware embodi-
ment of the chord keyboard.
Typing with the chord keyboard
The typing speed for an experienced typist using the chord keyboard can be estimated by observing the performance of skilled stenotypists. The action required of the right hand in stenotyping is quite similar to that required in chord-keyboard typing. A good stenotypist can type three chords per second. If it is assumed that a chord-keyboard typist can type at that rate, and using the previously discussed factor of 2.2 characters per chord, a chordkeyboard typist should be able to reach a speed of 79 gross words per minute. Here it is assumed that a word consists of five characters including spaces. Use of defined chords for common words and phrases would further increase typing speed. A simulation has indicated that the use of defined chords for six of the more common English words and syllables would increase typing speed by 10 percent.
There are as yet no expert chord-keyboard typists. A number of students have learned to type at a gross typing speed of over 40 words per minute with low error rates. The initial experience of three programmer-engineers using the chord keyboard connected to a 3277 display station to access the VM/370 system indicates that the user-definedchord facility is extremely valuable to an on-line computer user and speeds up his work significantly.

Learning to type. One can type either visually (hunt and peck) or by touch on the chord keyboard. The keys are labeled for visual typing. A visual typing manual is provided with the keyboard. This manual contains a short initial section that describes everything a typist needs to know in order to type anything that can be typed on the keyboard. After spending about an hour reading this information and trying out the keyboard, a person is able to use the complete keyboard facilities visually. An additional section of the manual explains details of the operation of the keyboard for the user interested in
increased proficiency.
An automated system has been developed on the 1130 system for teaching people to touch-type on the chord keyboard. With this system, material is displayed on a screen for the student to copy. The text typed by the student is also displayed on the screen, together with an indication of the errors he has made. The lessons are given in three stages. Initially, the user is instructed in the basics of keying and chord formation while he learns the chord alphabet. He is then given instruction in capitalization, punctuation, and other special characters. Finally, he is given drills on text to improve his basic typing speed. This system provides prompting cursors that indicate the chords a student should be typing and the rate at which he should be typing a line. Immediately after a line is typed, the teaching system displays the speed at which the line was typed.
Two sets of students have been given training in typing on the chord keyboard using this system. The initial training sessions yielded little firm evidence of the speeds of chord keyboard typing that might typically be reached. It did yield a large amount of data on how one should touch-type on the chord keyboard and how this typing should be taught.
A second class ran from September 1976 through May 1977, with each student using the system for four to five hours a week. Of the four students in the class, three reached gross typing speeds of more than 40 words per minute; the fourth reached a speed of approximately 25 words per minute. These typing speeds were achieved when the students were typing new material with no more than two errors per minute. If the time spent learning to type for these students is compared with the time spent by high school students learning to touch-type on a conventional keyboard, the learning rates of our students are generally above the average of the high school students. It should be noted, however, that a very powerful automated teaching system was used to teach the chord keyboard, and all of our students were of above average intelligence and highly motivated to.learn. Thus the evidence so far indicates that for typing speeds of up to 40 words per minute, learning times on the chord keyboard and on a conventional keyboard are the same. A full report of this teaching experiment is available.3
Right-hand or left-hand typing. The current prototype of the keyboard permits the user to type with

December 1978

61

either the right or the left hand. The thumb keys are mounted on an adjustable holder that can be positioned either to the right or to the left of the finger keys and then locked in place. The thumb keys may also be adjusted so they a,re positioned at an angle to the finger keys, so they fall more under the natural position of the thumb when the fingers are positioned on the finger keys. The left-hand keyboard is a mirror-reversed image of the right-hand keyboard.
One student who had learned to type on the righthand keyboard was retrained to type on the lefthand keyboard. This student reached close to his right-hand typing speed in less than one third the time he spent learning right-handed typing. An interesting possibility for future work will be to train someone to type using two keyboards-one with each hand. It is possible that such a typist might, with suitable training, be able to reach typing speeds of upwards of 150 words per minute, thus being able to transcribe speech as fast as a person normally talks.
Applications The chord keyboard offers advantages over a con-
ventional keyboard in its one-handed operation, its small size, its low cost, and its facility for touchtyping large alphabets. The chord keyboard should supplant conventional keyboards in cases where one or more of these advantages makes it a sufficiently better choice.
One-handed operation. There are a number of applications in which a person communicating with a computer requires a hand free to perform other operations. An operator of a machine or measuring instrument may wish to communicate instructions to a computer system while keeping one hand on the machine controls. A user may wish to use a CRT display light pen, turn the pages of a book, or leaf through papers while entering data into the computer. The operator of a vehicle would be able to use the chord keyboard for data entry while controlling the vehicle with the other hand.
Small size. The keyboard's small size makes possible a portable, battery-operated microtypewriter containing the keyboard, associated electronics, and a small display. Such a device would fit easily in a briefcase and permit the user to take notes during lectures or while traveling. The microtypewriter could also be equipped to function as a microterminal for remote communication with a central computer.
Low cost. Since the chord keyboard has only 14 keys, it should require roughly one third of the mechanical parts of a conventional keyboard. With the cost of electronics plummeting, the chord keyboard should be significantly less expensive to manufacture than a conventional keyboard. It

therefore may find application in devices in areas such as the home computer market, where the cost of mechanical hardware must be kept to a minimum.
Handling large alphabets. In certain applications-such as systems for typing Japanese or Arabic-large, ungainly keyboards have been constructed. The chord keyboard could be used to permit the touch-typing of all symbols in systems requiring large alphabets. Current computer terminal keyboards have large alphabets, typically including 30 keys that cannot be reached while touch typing. Adding even more functions to such keyboards could turn them into unwieldly monsters. The chord keyboard, on the other hand, can easily handle enormous extension of function.
Handicapped people. One-handed people can use the chord keyboard to compensate for this disability. Blind people could read braille with one hand and type with the other. Mute people might use the keyboard as an input device to a speech-synthesis device.
Prior work
The Stenotype machine,4 stenotyping schools, and the stenotyping profession serve courts and governmental bodies by recording proceedings in mechanical shorthand. The shorthand is later transcribed, usually by the person who recorded it, on a typewriter. The Stenotype's chord keyboard served as a model for some mechanical aspects of our chord keyboard.
Prior to our development work on the chord keyboard, which began in August 1973, it had been established by experiments that a chord keyboard usable for the rapid typing of text was technically feasible, but no practical design had been evolved. E. T. Klemmer, under the direction of one of the authors, investigated a chord keyboard intended to serve as a typewriter keyboard. While this work did not lead to a practical product, the publication5 stimulated other research, which was summarized by R. Seibel,6 whose chapter of a book provides references to and a summary of this and other work on chord keyboards. This line of research concluded with the work of a number of experimental psychologists, who noted that the chord keyboard was a very promising device. D. C. Engelbart developed a successful rudimentary one-hand chord keyboard7 as part of a terminal; his objective was to make one hand free to operate a cursor that performs the function of the light pen discussed above. The US Post Office also developed and tested a rudimentary 10-key keyboard as a part of a system for controlling the flow of mail.6
Our design, therefore, continues and expands this work and provides a working prototype. The chord keyboard's unique capabilities and features encourage the exploration of its use as a computer input device. *

62 COMPUTER

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to acknowledge the substantial contributions of the 12 MIT students who participated at various times in the chord keyboard development work and without whose help the work would not yet have been completed. In particular, we wish to recognize the significant technical contributions made to the project by Roger J. Bamford and James W. Leth.
References
1. N. Rochester, F. C. Bequaert, and E. M. Sharp, Chord Keyboard Architecture, IBM Poughkeepsie Laboratory Tech. Report, to be issued. (Available from the authors at IBM Cambridge Scientific Center, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139.)
2. F. C. Bequaert and N. Rochester, "One-Handed Keyboard and Its Control Means," US Patent 4,042,777, issued Aug. 16, 1977.
3. F. C. Bequaert and N. Rochester, Teaching Typing on a Chord Keyboard, IBM Poughkeepsie Laboratory Tech. Report TR 00.2918, Dec. 26, 1977. (Available from the authors; see reference 1.)
4. H. H. Hill, Machine Touch Shorthand Theory, Touch Shorthand Academy, Inc., Boston, 1959.
5. G. R. Lockhead and E. T. Klemmer, An Evaluation of an 8-Key Word-Writing Typewnrter, IBM Research Report RC-180, IBM Research Center, Yorktown Heights, New York, Nov. 1959.
6. R. Seibel, "Data Entry Devices and Procedures," in Human Engineering Guide to Equipment Design, H. P. Van Cott and R. G. Kinkade, eds., McGraw-Hill, 1963. (Also available from US Government Printing Office.)
7. D. C. Engelbart and W. K. English, "A Research Center for Augmenting Human Intellect," AFIPS
Conf. Proc., Vol. 33, 1968 FJCC, pp. 395-410.

A

Nathaniel Rochester Fellow, a Fellow of the

is an IBM IEEE, and at

present a visiting scientist at MIT. He

was responsible for the architecture of

IBM's first general-purpose electronic
computer, the 701, and wrote the first

assembly program (IRE Trans. Elec-

tronic Computers, March 1953). He
has served on many IRE, IEEE, and AFIPS committees, published 16 papers, and holds 20 US patents. His interests are computer architecture, programming, and the man-machine interface.

w,Frank C. Bequaert is a staff member
with the IBM Cambridge Scientific
Center. He has worked on the develop-
ment of the chord keyboard and the design of computer-based systems for

teaching typing. From 1959 to 1966 he was with the Mitre Corporation. He holds an AB from Harvard College and

S

an MS in electrical engineering from
Stanford University.

Elmer M. Sharp is with the System Products Division of IBM Corp. in

Poughkeepsie, N.Y. He is a senior
engineer on Mr. Rochester's staff and has most recently concentrated on the application of microprocessors to complex control situations. His previous work with IBM has included advanced systems design, timesharing system

special

systems

design,
work on

graphic
large-scale,

I/rOeald-etvimiecesa,ppliacnad-,

tions. Prior to joining IBM, he worked for the National

Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (now NASA) on

automatic data recording and analysis.

Sharp received AB and MS degrees in physics from Cor-

nell University.

CaonmdpuPtuelrmsonian rCyriMtiecdailciCnaere
announce
AN
INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM
May 24-26, 1979 at
NoYrawlaelUkniHvoNesorpsriitwtaayll,SkcCHhooonsonpleictotafilcMuetdi0c6i8n5e6

tttdsbampaerieoeetreacnTITcietghinihhosrhnavtnnteeeoeliooeisqtrldskieuoppiotesdfersungy,sirgoyapnntppgrnoeabatoretddnotipssaehoedeembttemrnohrytetsfeoewhdaafiaFeitelpmtepiclapotomeboalchtnrercnilihhitnosusceatntaasreiosbmtrenniroiyestygisfiosewtninniit1ocgngonr5ieonti,dfeno,teotarifgrfocos1ynaa,9ncasblictrtssl7eiohwyit9taitoemri.lidnnoacplllaacadulalbtbpyltplsearypypetidflhdinrioleikyegelrcnvsnvpattoiotooastecttott.iwchaeigoeneehnedndnrsntthosttspopeloow.rferotechrgishoeccyaeesloonpipmmtasitrapptrroetseauusitttewtooieeinhnrnlrr-eys-l

Enrollment will be $150.00. For

be limited to 175 persons. Registration further information write to:

fee

will

SSryemepdohsairuNmairC,haMi.rDm.a,nF.A.C.P., NCYNaooolrrmewwpaauUlltnkkei,vrHesCorossinpinitnyteCacrSlittciihccoaulotlC0ao6rf8eM5e6&diPcuilnmeonary Medicine

December 1978

63

