Proceedings of AIS'2002 ­ International Conference on AI, Simulation and Planning in High Autonomy Systems, SCS publication, ISBN 1-56555-242-3, pp 27-36, Lisbon, Portugal, 7-10 Apr 2002.

MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS IN VIRTUAL ENTERPRISES
Luís M. Camarinha-Matos New University of Lisbon
Faculty of Sciences and Technology Quinta da Torre ­ 2829-516 Monte Caparica ­ Portugal
cam@uninova.pt

ABSTRACT Multi-agent systems represent a promising approach to both model and implement the complex supporting infrastructures required for virtual enterprises and related emerging organizations. The current status of application of this approach to industrial virtual enterprises, virtual communities, and remote supervision in the context of networked collaborative organizations is presented. Examples of relevant projects are provided and major challenges and open issues identified.

the manufacturing process is not carried on by a single enterprise anymore. Companies feel the need to focus on their core competencies and join efforts with others in order to fulfill the requirements of the new products / services demanded by the market. In a cooperative networked organization, every enterprise is just a node that adds some value to the process - a step in the manufacturing / supply chain.
This paper addresses the application of MAS approaches to such emerging new organizational forms, including the support to inter-enterprise cooperation, virtual communities and remote supervision.

1 INTRODUCTION Many current developments in multi-agent systems (MAS) are more and more focused on the production of robust development environments. Considerable efforts are also being put on standardization of architectures and communication languages, which are important requirements for the industrial application of the paradigm.
In parallel with these trends, during last years there have been progressive attempts to apply multi-agent approaches to several real-world problems. Demonstrating to be successful with complex applications, satisfying its long promised potential, is a required proof of the sought maturity of the technology. A large number of projects worldwide have been trying multi-agent solutions to complex problems that are difficult to handle with more "traditional" programming approaches. In particular there are several attempts to explore the flexibility and modularity provided by MAS in the context new organizational forms in industry [6] such as virtual enterprises.
The evolving market trends, and the emergence of the so-called "new economy" favoring intangible things (information, knowledge, ideas, relationships) bring new challenges to the industrial companies. Furthermore, requirements for highly flexible / reactive systems, with high quality standards, but constrained by environment friendly requirements, are leading companies to new forms of organizations, relying on privileged cooperation links with their business partners. In this scenario, most of

2 MAS AND VIRTUAL ENTERPRISE The virtual enterprise (VE) research, initially strongly technology-driven, is more and more integrating contributions from a number of disciplines such as organizational theory, sociology, management, law, economy, etc. Although it represents a growing and multidisciplinary area it still lacks a precise definition of the concepts and an agreement on the used terminology. So far, there is no unified definition for this paradigm and a number of terms are even competing in the literature while referring to different aspects and scopes of virtual enterprises [4], [5], [11]. Nevertheless a commonly used definition is [5]:
"A virtual enterprise is a temporary alliance of enterprises that come together to share skills or core competencies and resources in order to better respond to business opportunities, and whose cooperation is supported by computer networks."
Two key elements in this definition are the networking and cooperation. Clearly, there is a tendency to describe a virtual enterprise as a network of cooperating enterprises. A number of pre-existing enterprises or organizations with some common goals come together, forming an interoperable network that acts as a single (temporary) organization without forming a new legal entity nor establishing a physical headquarter. In other words, Virtual Enterprises materialize through the integration of skills and assets from different firms into a single business entity. Although a controversial issue among the socio-organizational community, the computer networks

represent, for the IT people, and essential part of the VE definition. This paradigm challenges the way companies are organized and managed. Companies, especially the Small and Medium size Enterprises (SMEs) must join skills and resources in order to survive and gain competitive advantage in a global market environment.
The term Virtual Organization (VO), which is nowadays becoming more popular, represents a generalization of the concept of VE as it comprises collaborative networks that are not limited to enterprises but can involve other types of organizations (e.g. governmental and nongovernmental entities).
There are a number of characteristics in the VE/VO domain that make it a suitable candidate for the application of multi-agent systems (MAS) approaches [6]. Examples of such characteristics include:
­ A VE is composed of an alliance of distributed, heterogeneous and autonomous components, a situation easily mapped into MAS.
­ Coordination and distributed problem solving also tackled by MAS are critical problems in VE management.
­ Decision making with incomplete information, and involvement of network members as autonomous entities, that although willing to cooperate in order to reach a common goal might be competitors regarding other business goals, is another common point.
­ The effective execution and supervision of distributed business processes requires quick reactions from enterprise members. Computer networks being the privileged media for communication, there is a need for each company continuously having a "representative" in (or "listening" to) the network. Agents can support this need.
­ Recent developments in VE are changing the focus from information modeling and exchange to role and social relationships / contracts modeling, addressing aspects of distribution of responsibilities, capabilities and knowledge, also common topics in MAS research.
­ The phase of VE formation in which it is necessary to select partners and distribute tasks, shows market characteristics and negotiation needs that have been research issues for years in the MAS community.
­ A VE consortium is a dynamic organization that might require re-configurations ­ e.g. replacement of partners, changes in partners' roles, etc., for which a flexible modeling paradigm is necessary. More flexibility than in a client-server model is required to support dynamic change of roles of the VE members.
­ VE supporting functionalities need to interact with the "local" environment (legacy applications and humans). Interaction with the environment is one of the defining attributes of agents.
­ The scalability property of MAS seems particularly adequate to support dynamic VEs in which different levels of cooperation with different sets of partners might be established at different phases. On the other hand, each enterprise might itself be seen as composed by a network of semi-autonomous entities (depart-

ments). ­ Continuous evolution of business models, technolo-
gies, organizational paradigms, and market conditions require effective support for evolution and a high level of modularity of the infrastructures. ­ New forms of teamwork, namely cooperative concurrent engineering, are emerging in the context of VEs. Agents can play an important role as "assistants" to the human actors in virtual communities. ­ There is a need to handle the requirements of autonomy vs. cooperative behavior for which federated MAS approaches may provide a balanced solution. ­ On the other hand, as the VE components are designed and developed independently, it is quite difficult to guarantee coordination unless common rules ("social laws") are adopted. Theoretical foundations on agents' sociability can be combined with current developments of a legal framework for VE/VOs. Life cycle. A VE/VO as a temporary organization evolves along a number of phases requiring different support functionalities, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

Partners search and selection Contract negotiation Definition of rights Join/Leave procedure Infrastructure configuration

Creation

Operation

Secure data exchange Sharing and visibility rights Orders management DBP planning & scheduling High level coordination Collaborative engineering ....
Dissolution

Add / remove partner Change roles ...

Evolution

Liabilities definition Access rights definition ...

Figure 1: Simplified VE life cycle and main support services

Most of the earlier works on VE/VO were mainly focused on the operation phase. More recently various projects started to address the creation and evolution phases. The dissolution is still mostly unexplored. In correspondence to this trend, MAS have been mostly applied to the creation and operation phases.

Agents in VE creation. A growing number of works are being published on the application of multi-agent systems and market-oriented negotiation mechanisms for the VE formation [6]. One such example can be found in [20]. This work assumes a virtual market place where enterprises, represented by agents that are geographically distributed and possibly not known in advance, can meet each other and cooperate in order to achieve a common business goal. A MAS architecture is proposed to model the electronic market to support the formation of the VE. In addition to the agents representing the enterprises, there is a market agent ­ coordinator or broker ­ that is created

and introduced in the MAS community when a business opportunity is found. A multi-round contract-net protocol is followed: the market agent sends invitations to the electronic market corresponding to each of the VE sub-goals; receives bids and evaluates them; the most favorable ones are selected based on a multi-criteria mechanism and constraint-based negotiation. Examples of considered criteria are lower-cost, higher quality, higher availability, etc. Utility values are associated to each of these criteria and a linear combination of attribute values weighted by their utility values is used. Multiple negotiation rounds can take place. At the end of each round bidders are notified whether their bids are wining or loosing and a rough qualitative justification is provided, allowing them to change the parameters of their proposals.
A similar work is found in [14] where a more detailed analysis of the problem of goal decomposition, leading to a hierarchy of VE goals, is suggested. In addition to the enterprise agents and VE coordinator agent (broker), an information server agent is introduced to keep public information related to common organizational and operational rules, market environment, enterprises and products / services provided, etc. The need for a common ontology to support the communication among agents is explicitly introduced and a multi-attribute, constraint-based negotiation / selection process is implemented.
In [10] there is a proposal to use mobile agents that are sent to potential suppliers to check their competencies. These agents make an on-site broad selection (rough qualitative analysis), while a fine evaluation with the information brought back by them is then performed at the sender's place. As part of the selection process, an assessment of the partnership performance of the candidates, based on their history of cooperation, is also made.
The work described in [23] identifies the need for yellow pages agents that are responsible to accept messages for registering services (similar to the information agent server mentioned above). They also consider the concept of Local Area, a quasi-physical division of the network that can be controlled by a local area coordinator. This is a similar concept to the Local Spreading center first introduced by the HOLOS system [18].
These proposals are however limited by a number of factors which affect their practical implantation including:
­ Lack of common standards and ontologies, a situation difficult to overcome in a general "open universe" of enterprises.
­ None of these proposals takes into account more subjective facets like trust, commitment, successful cooperation history, etc.
­ In general they pay little attention to the implantation aspects and the management of the yellow pages / market place.
­ Security issues in the negotiation process are not addressed, a critical point as the agents (representing enterprises) are only partially cooperative (they might be self-interested, competitive, and even exhibit antagonistic behavior).
­ The attempt to reach a fully automated decision-making process, although an interesting aca-

demic exercise, is quite unrealistic in this application domain. In practical terms, although electronic procurement and partners' search and selection is recognized as an important necessity, there is still a long way to go in terms of standardisation of directories of suppliers and brokers, offering common and more advanced representations of skills/competencies and additional information required for partners selection. The search engines associated to these directories need to also provide interfaces for access by remote applications or mobile agents. The current interfaces, basically oriented to human users via web browsers, are highly unstable and heterogeneous. With a few exceptions, the information present in such directories is also quite limited. Multi-step negotiation processes are part of the partners' selection; finding potential partners in a directory is just the first step of the process that might involve several interactions between the VE initiator and those potential partners in order to gather additional information and reach agreements on the forms and terms of co-operation. Understanding this process, modelling it and developing support tools, are open challenges. Initiatives such as UDDI or WSDL need to be considered in more practical MAS approaches. One important aspect to consider in VE/VO creation is that the agility and dynamism required for networked organizations in response to sudden business opportunities appears in "opposition" to the process of trust building. First of all, establishing an integrated IT infrastructure to support cooperation and coping with the legacy systems existing in the member enterprises still requires a large engineering effort. Even if flexible support infrastructures become widely available, the aspects of trust building and the required reorganization at the enterprise level are hard to cope with in cooperative business processes. "Trusting your partner" is a gradual and long process. The definition of "business rules", contracts for VE/VO or even common ontologies also take time, especially when different business cultures are involved. The creation of long term clusters of industry or service enterprises represent an approach to overcome these obstacles and can support the rapid formation of VE / VO according to the business opportunities [6] (Fig. 2). The concept of cluster of enterprises, which should not be confused with a VE, represents a group or pool of enterprises and related supporting institutions that have both the potential and the will to cooperate with each other through the establishment of a long-term cooperation agreement. Buyer-supplier relationships, common technologies, common markets or distribution channels, common resources, or even common labor pools are elements that typically bind the cluster together. For each business opportunity found by one of the cluster members, a subset of the cluster enterprises may be chosen to form a VE for that specific business opportunity. The cluster enterprises are normally "registered" in a directory, where their core competencies are "declared". Based on this information, the VE initiator / creator, which is usually a member of the cluster enterprises, can select partners when a new business opportunity is detected. A cluster represents a

long-term organization and therefore presents an adequate environment for the establishment of cooperation agreements, common infrastructures, common ontologies, and mutual trust, which are the facilitating elements when building a new VE.

"Open universe"

Market trends Competitiveness

"Controlled-borders universe" Cluster

·Partners search & selection ·Cooperation agreement ·Common infrastructure ·Sharing principles
Business oportunity

·Controlled partners selection ·Contract and cooperation details ·Infrastructure parametrization
VE

·Wide partners search & selection ·Common Infrastructure definition and parametrization · Sharing principles ·Contract and cooperation agreement
Figure 2: Two approaches to VE creation

An example of a MAS application to VE creation in the context of an industry cluster formed by twelve companies in the domain of moulds and die-casting can be found in the MASSYVE project [18]. The cluster is legally represented by a broker entity that supports a human expert responsible for getting and analyzing business opportunities. By means of a broker agent an opportunity is transformed into a distributed business process that is then distributed (through a contract-net protocol [19]) to the (potential) enterprises within the cluster. In the end of the whole process, a set of possible teams of enterprises ("potential" VEs) that can carry out the business opportunity is formed and the most suitable team is proposed (but the ultimate decision is made by the human expert). One of the distinctive aspects of the MASSYVE approach is its hybrid / semi-automatic philosophy in which agents are used as human assistants. The fact that the MASSYVE approach is focused on clusters of enterprises, i.e., a controlled multi-agent universe, makes it a feasible solution from the implantation point of view, since a common modeling framework can be agreed on and adopted by all members of the cluster (long-term alliance).
Current research efforts are devoted to modeling and planning different organizational forms, contracts and their enforcement mechanisms. Another important aspect in the VE creation is the specification of the tasks necessary to achieve a VE business goal. The activities carried out by a company are usually organized in groups of interrelated activities called processes (business processes) that can be seen as a set of activities, rules and constraints specifying the steps that must be taken, and conditions that must be satisfied, in order to accomplish a given goal. The composition of each process is designed in order to achieve a (partial) specific goal. When a Business Process (BP) is executed by a virtual enterprise, parts of the decomposition of this BP (i.e. sub-processes) are assigned to different enterprises (and thus different agents), what makes the BP a Distributed Business Process (DBP) [12] or a virtual business process in the WISE terminology [2]. When properly "orchestrated", a combination of various

processes taking place at different members of the VE will lead to the achievement of the global goal of the VE. The problem of the supervision or coordination of a DBP at its various levels of decomposition is quite important in this context where its definition and enactment is not limited to a single organization, but instead to a set of autonomous, distributed, and heterogeneous nodes that need to cooperate. Another related challenge is the integration of a standard process specification language (e.g. PSL [21], PIF [13]) with an Agent Communication Language.
Agents in VE operation. Regarding VE operation, many approaches assume that simple mechanisms of inter-agent cooperation are sufficient. One example is given by MIAMI [3] that developed a mobile agents platform for VEs supporting a virtual marketplace for VE creation and a monitoring service used during the operation of the VE to supervise processes and provide to partners that have the appropriate permissions with information about the state of partial processes. Global coordination is supported by a workflow management system. Another example is MetaMorph II [22] that developed a mediatorbased multi-agent architecture to support enterprise integration and supply chain management. With deeper studies of VE application domains however this paradigm reveals many specific aspects that cannot be simply supported by basic MAS approaches. In the VE community interoperation / cooperation:
- Cooperation agreements and contracts that establish a framework for the general operating conditions must be established;
- Distributed business process models and mechanisms that establish the allocation and sequence of tasks to be performed by the community must exist;
- Efficient data exchange and communication services, distributed service management functionalities, support for nodes autonomy / privacy, high level of service quality, auditability, and accountability, etc., have to be guaranteed. The decision-making is a hybrid process where it is
important to combine human decision with some automatic functionalities. It is even likely that the level of automatic decision-making will evolve as the trust of humans in the systems increases. But independently of the ultimate decision making center, there is a need to provide mechanisms to support process coordination, supervision, and controlled information exchange and sharing.
As an example, MASSYVE [17], [18] already mentioned, is focused on the support of agile scheduling functionalities for VE operation. The agent nodes represent either enterprises, when the scheduling problem is discussed at the VE level, or the internal manufacturing resources of the company when dealing with internal scheduling of tasks assigned within the company. The Contractnet Protocol coordination mechanism is used to support the task assignment among agents, and the Negotiation method is used to overcome conflicts taking place during planning or execution phases, both at intra-enterprise and inter-enterprise levels.
In the MASSYVE project an integration of MAS and

federated information management is proposed (Fig. 3). Each agent is enhanced with a Federated Information Management System (called FIMS), through which it seamlessly interoperates and exchanges information with other agents. However, considering the autonomy of agents, the access to information is strongly controlled by the information visibility rights defined among them that in turn preserve their autonomy. Therefore, a MASSYVE Agent is seen as a kind of tandem architecture composed of a "normal" agent and its FIMS. An essential concept introduced in this architecture is that the data are not sent from one agent to the other via a high-level protocol (e.g. ACL language), as in the traditional push strategy case, but rather through the pull strategy, via accessing to the respective agents' FIMSs. Thus, the high-level protocol is only used for the control/coordination purposes.
Figure 3 illustrates this approach. Consider an example case where a given agent (B) processes some information and generates some results (for example the "actual end of the production date for a part P") that are needed to be accessed by another agent (A), according to the predefined supervision clauses specified in the VE's contract. Following the contract, then B sends a message to A (represented by "1" in this Figure), communicating that the data item on "part P's actual end of the production date" is at this enterprise. This control message sent from B to A informs A that now this data item is available and can be accessed by A (through its FIMS' import schema). The access rights for the shared data among nodes are dynamically and bilaterally configured and preserved by their import/export schemas, a basic mechanism of the federated information management approach, according to agents' roles in the collaboration and their needs.

Enterprise A

Enterprise B

integrated schema import schema

25 FIMS-A

1 3 4

export schema FIMS-B

Figure 3: Exchange of data in a pull strategy. Once this message is received at A, (represented by "1"), whenever A wishes it can retrieve this updated information from B. In fact, this access goes as follows: Agent_A queries this information from its own integrated schema in FIMS (represented by "2") requesting for the actual end of production date on part P; an automatic access will occur from FIMS_A to FIMS_B (represented by "3") using the federated mechanisms for information access ­ that receives and returns this authorized information from B (represented by "4"). This information is in turn returned from FIMS_A to Agent_A for its internal processing (represented by "5"). Furthermore in the general case, the federated query mechanism of FIMSs allows agents, for instance

Agent_A, to query information from their integrated schema that might initiate several queries to different other enterprises, transparently collecting partial contributions that are finally assembled into a global answer from the FIMS to the agent.
HOLOS Agent FIMS API
Interoperation
Agent API FIMS
Figure 4: A VE/VO as a network of agents The actual information exchange among VE nodes may resort to a safe and secure communications layer as the PCI module developed in the PRODNET II project [5], [8]. The main advantages of this approach follow: - The inter-agent message's content becomes shorter and leaner; - Agents will always access the necessary up-to-date data from their sources, at the exact time the data are needed; - Transparent and controlled access to distributed data is provided over the agents' network in an integrated method. In this way, the agents can concentrate their tasks on the reasoning and processing of information instead of the management of information; - Data and control is totally separated from each other in the multi-agent interaction environment; - The information access rights and visibility levels among agents can be defined efficiently and evolve dynamically using the federated information management system functionalities; - VE agents can only access authorized data with respect to their current access right definitions so that agents' desirable autonomy is preserved in terms of their data.
3 VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES Once a basic infrastructure is established, new forms of advanced cooperation among VE members and the need for proper functional support will naturally emerge.
An example of a very demanding application in manufacturing is the Collaborative or distributed Concurrent Engineering. Product development needs the interdisciplinary contribution of design, process and manufacturing engineers, and other contributors with diversified expertise, each one contributing with a different skill. The efforts to shorten this development phase led to the overlap of activities and to the introduction of mechanisms to coordinate them. The concept of Concurrent Engineering (CE) is the result of the recognition of this need to integrate diversified expertise and to improve the flow of information among all phases and actors involved in the product life cycle.

Various projects have addressed the development of cooperative platforms to support CE and covering four areas: interoperable computational and communication infrastructures, common information models / ontologies, engineering information management, and process execution and supervision (coordination). In the context of a VE these (virtual) teams involve experts located in different geographical locations and belonging to different enterprises, what makes the need for an adequate support infrastructure more acute.
Various tools from the CSCW area can be useful in this domain but more specific tools are necessary. As the participants are not located in the same place and eventually the work is developed with different time schedules (asynchronous processes), it is very important to support:
(i) Sharing of information models and process models, describing the product model and its manufacturing process and the design/planning process itself. The requirement is not only for a bi-lateral exchange of information, but also for the establishment of shared work spaces.
(ii) Provision of adequate visibility and access rights definition and management.
(iii) Coordination of (asynchronous) activities performed in different places by different actors.
(iv) Provision of notification mechanisms regarding major events in the design / planning process (e.g. conclusion of a step by one actor).
The federated database paradigm represents a suitable approach to develop shared spaces with the appropriate mechanisms to specify and ensure the visibility levels and access rights as represented in the CIMIS.net project [1]. A flexible notification mechanism can also be implemented by combining the federated information management with a workflow-based coordination system [4]. But additional coordination mechanisms can be supported by the use of a multi-agent approach.
For instance in the CIM-FACE system [15], [16], the human experts use the enterprise Computer-Aided tools (e.g. CAD, CAPP, CAM, etc.) to perform their design and planning tasks. In order to facilitate the coordination among team members, the concept of process assistant agent is introduced (Fig. 13). One process assistant is created to assist each human member of the Concurrent Engineering team. This assistant is an agent that represents the human expert in the virtual collaborative community and provides the human with a "window" to the process model he/she is involved in. The coordination of activities among the team members is ensured by these special agents that are responsible for:
- Keeping track of the evolution of the collective design / planning process.
- Notifying other members of the team (via the corresponding assistant agents) of important events.
- Checking and ensuring the required precedence rules in the flow of activities.

Interaction with the virtual team

CAx Tool HYBRID AGENT
Process As sistan t

Engineer

Tool interface TOOL ASSISTANT BP
BP BP/EA
BP/EA BP/EA Process Assistant interface

Figure 5: Process assistant agent in Concurrent Engineering

Similar behaviors are emerging in all other business areas, where the concepts of Virtual Community, Virtual Team, and Community of Practice are converging. The fast emerging information and communication technologies have stimulated virtual communities to grow using the World Wide Web. Although in many cases such communities were formed around hobbies, and based on simple tools like chat, forum, or cheap videoconference, a growing number of virtual communities of professionals are emerging. The behavior of such communities is regulated by stronger social regulations and principles of ethics, which also require new support tools and represent potential applications for MAS.
When these communities are formed within the context of virtual organizations, which are regulated by cooperation agreements / contracts, and new knowledge is generated in collaboration, there is a need for new approaches to determine the added value contributed by each member of the community. Understanding the dependences between partners selection, during the VE creation, and the existing relationships among members of virtual communities of professionals is another open issue.

4 REMOTE SUPERVISION 4.4 Mobile agents supporting remote supervision
Advanced forms of cooperation namely in the area of manufacturing require mechanisms to support a controlled "intrusion" of a company, for instance the VE coordinator, into the "territory" of its partners. Consider the case that a company wishes to "open a window" over the shopfloor of its partner to monitor the manufacturing process of the ordered parts and even have an interference on, i.e. supervise from distance and in cooperation with the local people, the shop-floor processes (Fig. 6). Supervision represents a collection of inter-related activities including task dispatch and execution, execution monitoring, error diagnosis and recovery. When considered in a distributed environment like in a VE, the concept of remote supervision emerges. If the supervision process involves the collaboration of various actors, located at different remote places, we have collaborative remote supervision.

less of a problem; ii) new mobile agents can be built and sent for remote execution whenever needed, thus greater flexibility and scalability is achieved.
VE Coordinator

Network

Remote places

VE Member A

Figure 6: Remote shop-floor collaboration The design of a proper support system for collaborative remote supervision (CRS) can benefit from the contributions coming from a number of areas that, although conceptually close, are usually addressed by different communities of researchers with little interaction among them. The two main contributing areas to remote supervision are the Telerobotics and Virtual Laboratories. Furthermore, other areas of research and development contributing to CRS include the Virtual Reality, Virtual Organizations, and Computer Supported Cooperative Work. The remote operation of machinery has been addressed for many years, mainly for security related applications. However, the Internet has been opening new opportunities for remote operation due to low costs and widespread availability, what makes it very appealing as a basis for remote operation. In fact several examples of connection of robots, cameras, and other devices to the WEB were implemented during the last years. Remote operation in manufacturing via Internet suffers however, from several problems [24]: i) Internet is still characterized by long and irregular time-delays and very often, suffers from low levels of availability, raising new challenges in what concerns the reliability of the implemented system and its dependence on the characteristics of the network; ii) when practical application domains are considered, high levels of heterogeneity can be expected in terms of sensors and equipment at the remote places, which can degrade the flexibility and scalability of the system; and iii) the composition of the execution environments are potentially unstructured and unknown, which means that it is not adequate to resort to deterministically programmed systems. Complementarily, the increased use of wireless networking (mobile / ubiquitous computing) requires short connection periods. In order to cope with the mentioned difficulties, an approach based on adaptive mobile agents was developed by the Robotics and CIM group at the New University of Lisbon [9], [24]. The mobile agents paradigm shows important advantages when remote operation and supervision are considered, since: i) moving the code to the places where the machines and sensors are located, contributes to enable close to real-time response, and so, the availability, delays and reliability of the network become

Recognize local environment Adapt (refine) execution plan Execute refined plan

VE Member B

Figure 7: Mobile agents in a VE supervision environment

However, in order for the same mobile agent to be executed at several places, it must carry only a general action plan, which must be refined /adapted when the agent reaches every target place. Therefore, agents must be equipped with decision-making and plan refining capabilities, which allow them to, based on the abstract (hierarchical) plans they carry, build specific plans suitable for execution in the particular environment of each site they reach (Fig. 7).
Figure 8 shows the structure of the adopted mobile agents.

HTS of MA

tuple space

mobility coordination plan representation

interface to local resources

RTS of MA

Home Place of MA stationary agents

plan adaptation execution monitoring execution supervision

tuple space
interface to local resources

Mobile Agent MA

current Residence Place of MA

Figure 8: Mobile agent structure

When dealing with remote operation, the agents must run with a high degree of autonomy in uncertain environments. To achieve this goal, an approach based on general monitoring and recovery methods and on plans with annotations, intended to help the execution monitoring and error recovery, was adopted in the mentioned work. A hierarchical plan structure was considered, since, besides other advantages of hierarchical planning, it allows the specification of monitors at various levels of detail, which is quite appropriate for complex domains. Furthermore, the hierarchical approach is a powerful mean to structure interesting monitoring strategies that range over a set of low level actions.
In addition to the mentioned generic advantages of the mobile agents approach [9], the remote supervision application can also benefit from the autonomy of the agents in order to not require a synchronous availability of the participants in different nodes as these participants can

delegate to their agent representatives the actual realization of some task, which will be done when the necessary conditions are satisfied. 4.2 Remote supervision in elderly care The concept of virtual organization (VO) initially more focused on the industrial inter-enterprise cooperation, is now spreading to other less traditional domains such as the elderly care sector. An integrated elderly care system comprises a number of organizations such as social security institutions, care centers / day centers, health care institutions, etc. and involves the cooperation of a number of different human actors e.g. social care assistants, health care professionals, the elderly people and their relatives. If supported by computer networks and adequate supporting tools such systems may evolve towards operating as a long-term virtual organization and the various involved actors become part of a virtual community (VC).
In the IST TeleCARE project [7], an open infrastructure supporting the cooperation of various cooperative entities is planned (see example in Fig. 9). Different classes of software agents are designed to perform a large number of activities. Such activities include: (1) local and remote supervision tasks: such as sensorial data collection, health conditions monitoring, and alarm notification; (2) intelligent assistance: such as agenda assistance, and leisure activities assistance; and (3) integration/federation and provision of necessary data from distributed sources in the network: such as collection and preparation of health related data for elderly.

Emergency mobile site

Relative's monitoring site 1

Mobility for elderly

Virtual shop 2

Elderly home sites

Police Station Special doctor site

Care center 1 Care center 3 Care center 2
Leisure site

Virtual shop 1
Relative's monitoring site 2

Figure 9: TeleCARE target distributed scenario
Fig. 10 shows the architecture of the proposed platform to be installed in each node of the TeleCARE network [7].
The fundamental elements of the basic TeleCARE platform include:
· External Enabler Level: Supports the communication and interfacing to the external devices. a. Safe communications infrastructure that provides safe communications. b. Device abstraction adaptor, interfaces to the sensors and monitoring devices and other hardware (home appliances, environment controllers, etc.).

These interfaces represent the bridge to any "intelligent home" or "local domotics1 network" hiding aspects such as low-level protocols, wire-based or wireless communications, etc.

Specialized Components

Services Level

Care providers and relatives

Elderly end users

Vertical
Service 1

Vertical
Service 2

Vertical Service
3

Vertical Service
4

Specialized Interfaces for elderly

Core MAS Platform Level

Agent reception and registration

Agent Factory

Platform Manager

Resources Manager

Federated information Manager

Basic Platform

Inter-platform Mobility

Inter-agent communication

Basic Multi Agent P- latform

Ontology Manager

External Enabler Level

Inference engine

Safe Communications infrastructure

Devices abstraction layer

Figure 10: Main components of TeleCARE platform

· Core MAS Platform Level: It is the main component of the basic platform. It supports the creation, launching, reception (authentication and rights verification), and execution of stationary and mobile agents as well as their interactions. As intelligent agents are envisaged, an inference engine (e.g. JESS or Prolog interpreter) is included. A neutral registry (catalog) of all available services / resources is a key element to support a flexible infrastructure. Main modules in this layer are:
a) Basic multi-agent platform (e.g. JADE or AGLETS). b) Inference engine (e.g. JESS or Prolog interpreter). c) Inter-platform mobility ­ Extension to the basic
MAS platform to support generalized mobility of agents. d) Inter-agent communication ­ Extension to the basic MAS platform to support communication between / coordination of agents independently of their current location. e) Agent factory ­ module that supports the creation / specification and launching of new agents. It can be based on a catalog of agent types (agent skeletons). f) Platform manager ­ To configure and specify the operating conditions of the platform in each site, recover from errors, monitor operation, etc. g) Federated information manager, to support the necessary local information management while preserving the information privacy and careful control of access rights to local data for external users. h) Agent reception and registration ­ To accept incoming mobile agents and grant them with the authorized

1 Domotics ("domus" + electronics) is a concept that represents the combination of building architecture and technology.

permissions (generation of a local passport). i) Resource manager ­ To manage the catalogue of re-
sources including the specification (and access proxies) of all services available at the current site. · Services Level: Consists of two sets of specialized services. a. Specialized interfaces for elderly ­ In the case of home sites, specialized interfaces are required for elderly that are not familiar with the use of computers. Intelligent interface agents resorting to multimedia services will be of invaluable importance to the system, since elderly people may present some physical and/or cultural limitations that inhibit their interaction with automatic devices such as computers, and home appliances. The ultimate goal is therefore to build the infrastructure "invisible" to the elderly. Specialized interfaces for mobile computing devices (e.g. PDAs, mobile phones) are considered. b. Care providers and relatives support services ­ A set of specialized vertical services can be implemented on top of the horizontal infrastructure defined in the previous levels. Some examples include: o Health monitoring service and social alarm ser-
vice; o Medication program reminder; o Home appliances operation assistant, o Health-related data gathering for elderly (from
distributed sources), o National statistics support, o Intelligent leisure assistant. The services can be
divided in two major groups: Services for care providers and elderly relatives (that are assumed to be able to interact with normal computer interfaces), and services for elderly (which might require specialized user interfaces). These services can be implemented by combining the stationary and intelligent mobile agents with advanced federated information management mechanisms. Furthermore, in order to support the creation and operation of virtual communities, specific Virtual Community management services can be developed, e.g. VC creation, membership rules and joining procedure, communication tools (chat, tele-conference, notice boards), or advanced collaboration tools e.g. distributed events management, distributed (social) project management, support for elderly work (networks of retired e-lancers). Within the TeleCARE project, the "External Enabler Level" and the "Core MAS Platform Level" will be installed at each site (e.g. Care center, Health center, Home). Additionally, for each site, a few specific sets of vertical services will be installed and made available. Mobile and/or stationary agents will implement vertical services. Services implemented by mobile agents may be running on mobile devices (PDAs, Mobile phones, etc), although always "linked" to a specific site. For mobile devices with limited computational power a light version of the "External Enabler Level" and the "Core MAS Platform Level" shall be developed. Figure 11 shows a scenario where the flexibility introduced by the mobile agents approach is illustrated.

Let's suppose there is a mobile agent that has as its mission providing personal agenda and reminding services to a specific elderly. When the elderly is at home the agent will run at the home's computational infrastructure. If the elderly goes out (for a walk in the garden or to visit a day center, for instance), his assistant agent can move as well and be executed in different platforms.
Figure 11: Inter-platform agent mobility 5 CONCLUSIONS The virtual enterprises / virtual organizations areas represent a fast evolving research domain and a promising application field for multi-agent approaches. In fact several recent projects have addressed the application of the MAS paradigm and related market-based negotiation mechanisms for the partners selection and task allocation during VE creation. Also some attempts to develop MAS-based infrastructures to support the operational phase of the VE have been made. Nevertheless several challenges remain open for MAS requiring further research, such as:
- Support for the full life cycle of the VE. - Adoption of contract-based coordination models. - Necessary integration of MAS with several other
paradigms. - Interoperation with legacy systems and enterprise
applications. - Inclusion of specialized protocols and standards. - Support of robust safety mechanisms. The emergence of new organizational forms and new cooperation paradigms provides an appropriate ground for the development and validation of advanced MAS organizations. The issue of safety is of paramount importance in this domain. Therefore, there is a need to integrate ACL with mechanisms for safe communications (cryptography, digital signature, certification, etc.) that have been developed for virtual enterprises and e-commerce. Furthermore, the development of advanced simulation tools to support planning, optimization, and assessment of operation of VEs and distributed business processes is another open challenge that can benefit from a MAS approach. Finally it is important to stress that in order to be accepted by the industrial community, MAS applications need to be successfully demonstrated in complex real

world pilot systems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author acknowledges the partial support to this work from the European Commission through the IST programme and the contributions of his partners of the IST THINKcreative, VOSTER, and TeleCARE projects.

REFERENCES

1. Afsarmanesh, H.; Wiedijk, W.; Ferreira, A.C.; Moreira, N.P. - Distributed Database Support for a Concurrent Engineering Environment. Journal of Studies in Informatics and Control, Vol. 3, Nos. 2-3, pages 135-143. IC Publications, Romania, Sept 1994.

2. Alonso, G.; Lascano, A.; Schuldt, H.; Schuler, C. - The WISE approach to Electronic Commerce, http://www.inf.ethz.ch/department/IS/iks/research/wise.html, Feb 15, 1999.

3. Broos, R.; Dillenseger, B.; Guther, A.; Leith, M. ­ MIAMI:

Mobile intelligent agents for managing the information in-

frastructure,

www.infowin.org/

ACTS/ANALYSYS/PRODUCTS/THEMATIC/AGENTS/c

h3/miami.htm, 2000.

4. Camarinha-Matos, L.M; Afsarmanesh, H.; Garita, C.; Lima, C. - Towards an architecture for virtual enterprises, Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, Vol. 9, Issue 2, Apr 1998.

5. Camarinha-Matos, L. M.; Afsarmanesh, H. - Infrastructures for Virtual Enterprises - Networking Industrial Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 0-7923-8639-6, Oct 1999.

6. Camarinha-Matos, L. M.; Afsarmanesh, H. -Virtual Enterprise Modeling and Support Infrastructures: Applying MultiAgent Systems Approaches, in Multi-Agent Systems and Applications, M. Luck, V. Marik, O. Stpankova, R. Trappl (eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence LNAI 2086, pp.335-364, Springer, ISBN 3-540-42312-5, July 2001.

7. Camarinha-Matos, L. M.; Afsarmanesh, H. ­ Design of a virtual community for elderly support, in Collaborative business ecosystems and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, May 2002.

8. Camarinha-Matos, L. M.; Afsarmanesh, H.; Osorio, A.L. Flexibility and safety in a web-base infrastructure for virtual enterprises, L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh, A. L. Osório, International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing (Taylor & Francis), Vol. 14, N. 1, Jan 2001.

9. Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; Vieira, W. - Intelligent mobile agents in elderly care, Journal of Robotics and Autonomous Systems (Elsevier), Vol. 27, N. 1-2, ISSN 0921-8890, Apr 1999.

10. Davidrajuh, R.; Deng, Z. Q. ­ Identifying potential supplier for formation of virtual manufacturing systems, Proceedings of 16th IFIP World Computer Congress 2000, Vol. ITBM, Beijing, China, 21-25 Aug 2000.

11. Goranson, H.T.­ The Agile Virtual Enterprise ­ Cases, metrics, tools. Quorum Books, ISBN 1-56720-264-0, 1999.

12. Klen, A.; Rabelo, R.; Spinosa, M.; Ferreira, A. ­ Distributed business process management, in [9], 1999.

13. Lee, J.; Yost, G. - The PIF Process Interchange Format and Framework, Version 1.0, http://ccs.mit.edu/pifmain.html, Dec22, 1994.

14. Li, Y.; Huang, B.Q.; Liu, W. H.; Wu, C.; Gou, H.M. ­

Multi-agent system for partner selection of virtual enterprises, Proceedings of 16th IFIP World Computer Congress 2000, Vol. ITBM, Beijing, China, 21-25 Aug 2000. 15. Osorio, A.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. ­ A federated multiagent infrastructure for concurrent engineering (CIMFACE), Studies in Informatics and Control, Vol. 5, N. 2, June 1996. 16. Osorio, A.L.; Oliveira, N.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. - Concurrent Engineering in Virtual Enterprises: The extended CIM-FACE architecture, Proc. Of BASYS'98 ­ 3rd IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. On Balanced Automation Systems, Intelligent Systems for Manufacturing (Kluwer Academic), ISBN 0-412-84670-5, Prague, Czech Republic, Aug 1998. 17. Rabelo, R.; Afsarmanesh, H.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. Federated multi-agent scheduling in virtual enterprises, in Ebusiness and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 0-7923-7205-0, Oct 2000. 18. Rabelo, R.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; Afsarmanesh, H. Multi-agent-based agile scheduling, Journal of Robotics and Autonomous Systems (Elsevier), Vol. 27, N. 1-2, ISSN 0921-8890, Apr 1999. 19. Rabelo, R.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; Vallejos, R. - Agentbased brokerage for virtual enterprise creation in the moulds industry, in E-business and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 0-7923-7205-0, pp.281-290, Oct 2000. 20. Rocha, A.; Oliveira, E. ­ An electronic market architecture for the formation of virtual enterprises, in [9], 1999. 21. Schlenoff, C.; Gruninger, M.; Tissot, F.; Valois, J.; Lubell, J. Lee, J. - The Process Specification Language (PSL) - Overview and Version 1.0 Specification, NIST Internal Report (NISTIR) 6459, http://www.mel.nist.gov/psl/, 1998. 22. Shen, W. ­ Agent.based cooperative manufacturing scheduling: an overview, COVE News N. 2, www.uninova.pt/~cove/newsletter.htm, Mar 2001. 23. Shen W. & Norrie, D.H. - An agent-based approach for distributed manufacturing and supply chain management, in Globalization of Manufacturing in the Digital Communications Era of the 21st Century: Innovation, Agility, and the Virtual Enterprise, Jacucci, G. (ed.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998. 24. Vieira, W.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. - Adaptive mobile agents: Enhanced flexibility in Internet-based remote operation, in Advances in Networked Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 0-7923-7958-6, Sept 2000.

