PRACTICE REPORTS Prescribing authority

Provision of pain management by a pharmacist with prescribing authority

ERNEST J. DOLE, MATTHEW M. MURAWSKI, ALLEN B. ADOLPHE, FRANCES D. ARAGON, AND BARRY HOCHSTADT

Considering the crucial importance of clinical pharmacy services to the profession of pharmacy and its core role in pharmaceutical care, the lack of wholesale adoption of clinical pharmacy services is surprising. One explanation for this may be that clinical pharmacy services

Purpose. The clinical and financial outcomes of a pain clinic managed by a pharmacist with prescribing authority are described. Summary. Pharmacist clinicians in a forprofit, integrated health system recently received permission to bill for their services in certain ambulatory clinics. A pharma-

by a medical billing system, and clinical outcomes were tracked using the clinic's database for patients' individual visual analogue scale (VAS) pain scores. Between June 2004 and June 2005, an average of 18 patients were seen by the pharmacist clinician each day. The clinic generated $107,550 of actual revenue and saved the health plan over

are more expensive on a patientby-patient basis than the cost of dispensing functions of pharmacists. Therefore, the existence of clinical pharmacy services must be justifiable in most institutional settings. These services are almost exclusively justi-

cist clinician, who had an individual Drug Enforcement Administration number and whose services are billable under New Mexico law, was chosen to assume the medication management responsibilities in a clinic where 90% of the patient population is treated for chronic non-cancerrelated pain. No additional personnel were

$450,000. There was a consistent decrease in mean VAS pain scores with continued visits. Conclusion. Patients with chronic noncancer-related pain were managed effectively by a pharmacist with prescribing authority and refill authorization in a pain management clinic. The favorable clinical outcomes, revenue generated, and cost

fied by the cost savings they generate for an institution and the resultant clinical outcomes of hospitalized patients.1-13
Lovelace Medical Group (LMG) is a for-profit, integrated health system, which includes a health plan, 5

needed, and no additional space was required, eliminating overhead for the space and utilities needed for operating a new clinic. With the ability to bill for the pharmacist clinician's services, a new model for justification of clinical pharmacy services was developed for the ambulatory care clinics. The revenue generated was tracked

savings achieved justified the pharmacist clinician's services in this health system.
Index terms: Ambulatory care; Clinical pharmacists; Economics; Interventions; Outcomes; Pain; Pharmaceutical services; Prescribing; Reimbursement Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2007; 64:85-9

hospitals, and 14 ambulatory clin-

ics, located in Albuquerque, New

Mexico. In April 1993, the legislature to pharmacists designated as phar- in the areas of physical assessment

of New Mexico enacted the Phar- macist clinicians. In New Mexico, a and pharmacotherapy who is eligible

macist Prescriptive Authority Act, pharmacist clinician is a registered for prescriptive authority and enters

which granted prescriptive authority pharmacist with advanced training into a collaborative practice agree-

ERNEST J. DOLE, PHARM.D., FASHP, BCPS, PHC, CDE, is Pharmaceutical Care Coordinator, Internal Medicine, Gibson, Lovelace Medical Group (LMG), Albuquerque, NM, and Clinical Associate Professor, College of Pharmacy and School of Medicine, Family Practice, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center (UNMHSC), Albuquerque. MATTHEW M. MURAWSKI, PH.D., is Associate Professor of Pharmacy Administration, Department of Pharmacy Practice, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. ALLEN B. ADOLPHE, M.D., PH.D., is Chair, Internal Medicine, Gibson, LMG, and Clinical Assistant Professor, School of Medicine, UNMHSC. FRANCES D. ARAGON, PHARM.D., is Clinical Education Manager, Pfizer, Inc., Albuquerque, NM; at the time of writing she was Drug Utilization Evaluation Pharmacist, Lovelace Health Plan, Albuquerque, and

Clinical Assistant Professor, College of Pharmacy, UNMHSC. BARRY HOCHSTADT, M.D., is Associate Medical Director of Primary Care, Internal Medicine, LMG.
Address correspondence to Dr. Dole at Lovelace Medical Group, 5400 Gibson SE, Albuquerque, NM 87108 (ernest. dole@lovelacesandia.com).
Ashley Gudgel, Dawn Tuschhoff, Joyce A. Brunk, and Nancy San Martin are acknowledged for their assistance during manuscript preparation.
Copyright © 2007, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All rights reserved. 1079-2082/07/0101-0085$06.00.
DOI 10.2146/ajhp060056

Am J Health-Syst Pharm--Vol 64 Jan 1, 2007

85

PRACTICE REPORTS Prescribing authority

ment with a supervising physician. A pharmacist clinician with prescriptive authority can prescribe, modify, and monitor drug therapy in accordance with a written protocol registered with the New Mexico State Board of Pharmacy.14-16 The pharmacist clinicians in our health system recently received permission to bill health insurances for the services rendered in our ambulatory clinics. Because our clinic is hospital based, we cannot bill "incident to" charges but only evaluation and management (E&M) code 99211 (technical level).
In 2004, a telemanaged lipid clinic and an anticoagulation clinic were being managed by our clinical pharmacy service. The anticoagulation clinic successfully made the transition from a cost-saving to a revenuegenerating service; the telemanaged lipid clinic did not.
In response to the Drug Enforcement Administration's (DEA's) investigation of providers who prescribe high amounts of opiate medications,16 our health care system evaluated the internal medicine clinic's controlled substance prescribing and determined that a structure was required to track controlled substance prescribing in the clinics.
The pharmacist clinician clinic was developed in conjunction with LMG's pain and spine clinic. The primary mission of the clinic was to provide high-quality clinical pharmacy services to patients with chronic non-cancer-related pain and chronic diseases, such as dyslipidemia, and to provide medicationsafety expertise to identify potential problems while triaging the medicine refills in the clinic.
The effectiveness of the clinic was evaluated using a multidimensional assessment process. Specifically, four outcomes were measured: (1) clinical outcomes, measured by the change in patients' self-rated pain scores on the visual analogue scale (VAS), (2) effectiveness of the medication-safety program, measured by the number

of near-miss medication errors and the development of a controlledsubstance monitoring program, (3) revenue generated by the clinic, and (4) costs avoided by the provision of care by pharmacist clinicians.
Description of the program
The clinic has 1 pharmacist clinician, 10 physicians, 1 nurse practitioner, and a patient base of 21,000. Approximately 48% of clinic patients are non-Hispanic white, 48% Hispanic, 2% African American, and 2% other ethnicities. The average age of clinic patients is 60 years, and 80% are insured by LMG's health plan. Any provider may refer patients to the clinic. The pharmacist clinician averages 18 patient visits daily, and 90% of patients are being treated for chronic pain. Initial patient visits last for 20 minutes, and follow-up visits last 10 minutes. The pharmacist clinician sees patients for five hours a day, with remaining hours dedicated to triaging the clinic's refill requests.
The collaborative practice protocols were developed using National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Program (NCEP ATP III) guidelines for cholesterol treatment.17 Veteran Affairs/Department of Defense's guidelines and the World Health Organization's pain ladder were used to develop the collaborative practice protocols for chronic pain.18,19 The New Mexico State Board of Pharmacy and the New Mexico Board of Medical Examiners approved the protocols.
Under the collaborative practice agreement, the pharmacist clinician writes his own prescriptions, including those for controlled substances, and signs his own clinic notes; no cosignatures are required. State law requires the supervising physician to review 20% of the pharmacist clinician's notes every two weeks.15 The pharmacist clinician has his own DEA number and institutional provider number and is a board-certified pharmacotherapy specialist. With the

ability to bill for the pharmacist clinician's services, a revenue-generating service was developed to justify clinical pharmacy services in the internal medicine clinic.
The clinic was approved and fully operational within one month from the decision to move from a cost-saving to a revenue-generating operation, and from the decision to move from the traditional pharmacy clinic of dyslipidemia, diabetes, and hypertension to that of chronic pain. The clinic had only two months to prove that it could be viable.
The clinic faced two immediate obstacles: finalizing and implementing the billing procedures for the pharmacist clinician and gathering support for the clinic from LMG's pain and spine clinic and quality department. The clinic had actively sought billing privileges for the pharmacist clinician for the past two years without success. Once the chief operating officer recognized the magnitude of the potential revenue lost, a corporate officer was selected as an advocate. Opposition to the pharmacist clinician's billing ended immediately.
Because the pain and spine clinic and quality department had little experience with a pharmacist clinician, there were numerous questions regarding the quality and the viability of the clinic. Weekly meetings that included both departments resolved these questions. The outcomes of these meetings helped shape the prescribing guidelines for controlled substances for the whole health system, not just the clinic. The pharmacist clinician attends the weekly staff conference of the pain and spine clinic and actively participates by presenting cases and providing medication therapy monitoring advice and information.
Resistance to the clinic waned as the pain and spine clinic and quality department became more comfortable with the pharmacist clinician's clinical abilities and the provision of

86 Am J Health-Syst Pharm--Vol 64 Jan 1, 2007

PRACTICE REPORTS Prescribing authority

quality care. The clinic began receiving referrals from each of the satellite clinics in LMG's system and from the departments of rheumatology and orthopedic surgery.
One minor obstacle was obtaining a DEA provider number for the pharmacist clinician. Pharmacists are defined as midlevel providers by DEA.20 While pharmacists can apply for a DEA number at the federal level, collaborative practice privileges and the ability to secure a DEA number are regulated at the state level. The only steps required in New Mexico were to submit an application to DEA and to pay the normal fees. The pharmacist clinician had a DEA number within four weeks of submitting the paperwork.
To standardize the refill process and to ensure medication safety, a medication-refill protocol was developed by the pharmacist clinician, the clinic's nurse clinical coordinator, the supervising physician, and two licensed practical nurses (LPNs). The pharmacist clinician authorizes refill requests for three hours each day. The LPNs obtain laboratory test values based on medication-specific protocols and when the primary provider last saw the patient.
Measuring outcomes of the pain clinic
Clinical outcomes for patients with chronic non-cancer-related pain were tracked using patients' individual VAS pain scores,21 which were stored in the clinic's database. The patient index case was defined as each patient's first appointment with the pharmacist clinician. The data analyzed covered the period from June 2004 to June 2005. The patientcompleted VAS used a 1 to 10 rating system, with 1 being the least severe pain and 10 being the most severe pain. Patients were asked to rate their pain at every visit. Additional information gathered at every visit included quality and quantity of sleep, any adverse reactions to medications,

medication review, and patient's satisfaction with pain control. Patient data were entered into an Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA) database after every visit and included the patient's name, medical record number, date of birth, referring provider, diagnosis, medication, strength of medication, quantity of medication, days supply of medication, and VAS pain score. Before receiving any controlled substance from the pharmacist clinician, the patient's pharmacy profile and data in the database were checked for irregularities. Changes in VAS scores were tracked and analyzed for the first year of the clinic's operation.
Data analysis was performed using SPSS version 12.1 (SSPS Inc., Chicago, IL). The distribution of VAS pain scores across all visits was examined and appeared to be normally distributed. Initial analysis assumed that the VAS pain data represented interval data and that parametric analysis was suitable.
Patient VAS pain scores were entered into the analysis by visit number. A two-tailed paired t test was performed for the change in VAS pain score between the 1st visit and all subsequent visits up to the 10th visit.
Outcome measures for the medication-safety program included the number of refills processed daily, number of refills processed per provider per day, number of patients who had not been seen in over one year, and number of patients with monitoring tests that needed to be obtained or rechecked (i.e., near miss events).
Outcomes of the clinic
Pain management. The analysis examined patient-level data from a data set that included 4782 rows of data. The data set was cleaned, recoded, and collated into specific cases, producing a total of 671 individual cases. Of these, 104 had no pain score recorded and were removed from the data set, and 3 cases were dropped due

to data-entry errors. The remaining 564 cases were then imported into SPSS for statistical analysis.
The number of patients seen during each visit, mean ± S.D. pain scores by visit, and mean ± S.D. difference in pain scores from the preceding visit are shown in Table 1. The number of patients in each visit decreased sharply in later visits. Analysis was restricted to the first 10 visits.
One-tailed paired t tests were conducted to explore changes in VAS pain scores between visits. When the paired t tests between visit 1 and subsequent visits were examined, the reduction in pain scores was highly significant in all cases (p < 0.0001, two-tailed t test).
Medication safety and refill authorization protocol. An average of 150 refill requests were processed per day. A mean of 10 patients daily had not seen their provider in over a year or had abnormal laboratory test results not identified by the patient's primary care provider. The most common laboratory test with an abnormal result that required follow-up was for thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Utilizing a pharmacist clinician to triage and approve medicationrefill requests has helped streamline the medication-refill process and increase consistency of authorizations. In addition, a large number of patients who were lost to follow-up have been brought back to the clinic for evaluation.
In addition to positive clinical outcomes for patients, this clinic also resulted in positive clinical outcomes for providers. For very busy providers with full panels, the implementation of this clinic cleared their schedules of patients' requiring medication management to make room for more acute appointments, improved providers' quality of life by decreasing their workload for medication refills, and decreased non-revenue-generating physician time.

Am J Health-Syst Pharm--Vol 64 Jan 1, 2007

87

PRACTICE REPORTS Prescribing authority

Table 1. Mean ± S.D. VAS Pain Scores by Visita

Mean ± S.D.

No.

VAS Pain

Mean ± S.D.

Visit Patients

Score

Differenceb

p

1 564 6.8 ± 2.5 . . .c . . .

2

444

5.7 ± 2.5

1.1 ± 2.6

0.0001

3

347

5.6 ± 2.4

0.26 ± 2.3

0.02

4

286

5.6 ± 2.3

0.13 ± 2.3

0.18

5

231

5.9 ± 2.5

­0.19 ± 2.1

0.09

6

185

5.7 ± 2.5

0.29 ± 2.3

0.04

7

136

5.4 ± 2.4

0.44 ± 2.0

0.13

8

96 5.4 ± 2.6

NR . . .

9

60

5.6 ± 2.3

0.35 ± 2.3

0.12

10

36

5.5 ± 2.3

0.69 ± 2.0

0.02

11 22 5.4 ± 1.9 NR . . .

12 14 4.7 ± 2.0 NR . . .

13 7 5.0 ± 1.6 NR . . .

14 4 6.3 ± 2.9 NR . . .

15 1 4.0 NR . . .

aPain scores are patient-reported estimates of the intensity of pain, with 1 indicating low pain and 10 indicating extreme, unbearable pain. VAS = visual analogue scale, NR = not reported.
bMean ± S.D. difference in pain score was compared with the preceding visit. A positive value indicates pain reduction.
cData not applicable.

Financial outcomes and business case. Both actual revenue generation and cost savings to the system were tracked. The revenue and profit generated by the clinic is derived via billed charges for E&M code 99211. The E&M code 99211 generated an average of $25.00 of actual revenue (130% of Medicare reimbursement), as defined by our institution's contracts and payer mix. The cost savings to the health plan was determined from an Access (Microsoft Corp.) database developed internally by our clinical pharmacy service, incorporating average wholesale prices and our institution's contract prices for medications. The cost savings were based on the assumption that one month of cost savings will be annualized to one year of cost savings.
The pharmacist clinician averaged 18 patient visits per day. Based on this average of 18 patient visits/day × $25.00 actual revenue/patient visit × 239 workdays (accounting for time off for continuing education, vacation, and holidays), the pharmacist clinician realized a true annual rev-

enue of $107,550. The cost of operating the clinic was the pharmacist clinician's annual salary ($98,851); he generated in true revenue a 9% return on investment. In the beginning, the clinic was fully staffed, with no additional personnel required. In addition, no new space was needed for the pharmacist clinician; therefore, overhead for space and utilities was not considered a cost of operating the clinic.
A review of the cost-savings data from July 2004 to July 2005 demonstrated a savings of $455,238 to all the health plans served by the clinic. Eighty percent of the patients the clinic serves are from LMG's health plan. When the cost to the health plan for the pharmacy service (i.e., the pharmacist clinician service charge to the health plan) is subtracted from the cost savings to the health plan, there is a net saving of $278,150 yearly to the health plan ($455,238 × 0.8 × $107,550 × 0.8 = $278,150).
Discussion
This clinic has been innovative

in several aspects. The pharmacist clinician works in a clinical setting, and his primary patients are being treated for chronic non-cancerrelated pain; this is in contrast to more conventional settings, such as diabetes, lipid, and anticoagulation clinics. The pharmacist clinician has his own DEA number and institutional provider number and is considered a midlevel provider. While the supervising physician reviews 20% of all the pharmacist clinician's charts every two weeks, no cosignatures are required for prescriptions. The pharmacist clinician dictates and signs his own notes and has his own scheduling template. By having the pharmacist clinician assume medication management duties for the clinic, patients have received better clinical care, evidenced by the fact that all patients' baseline VAS pain scores decreased.
The use of a pharmacist clinician as a medication-safety expert to screen, triage, and process medication-refill requests has not been thoroughly reported in the medical literature. These activities have standardized our clinic's medication-refill policies and prevented an average of 10 near-miss medication misadventures daily. Most importantly, this clinic has been able to improve the care of patient while establishing its viability as a revenue-generating service. As part of the medication-safety program, there is now a mechanism in place that monitors controlled-substance prescribing for the clinic.
We have been successful in blending business and clinical outcomes in a for-profit corporate culture. In a short time, under strong pressure to quickly succeed, the clinic has not only achieved its goals but also performed beyond anyone's expectations.
This model has shown that a pharmacist clinician in the nontraditional setting of chronic noncancer-pain management can have significant positive clinical outcomes,

88 Am J Health-Syst Pharm--Vol 64 Jan 1, 2007

PRACTICE REPORTS Prescribing authority

that a pharmacist clinician can be recognized as a midlevel provider who possesses his or her own DEA and provider numbers, and that a pharmacist clinician-run clinic can justify itself based on revenue rather than cost savings and succeed in a for-profit culture instead of the more protected settings of primarily teaching institutions.
Future directions for the clinic include contracting with other colleges and schools of pharmacy as a teaching site, spilt-funding the program between the health plan and the drug delivery system to more equitably reflect compensation for the pharmacist clinician's dual activity of generating revenue and achieving cost savings, and expanding this model to other disease management clinics.
This report provides as much evidence as is available to demonstrate the clinical effectiveness of the model. The more rigorous two-tailed t test was used to detect changes in pain scores over the long-term and revealed significant reductions in those scores for every comparison. For between-visit changes, however, the assumption was made that the direction of change in pain scores between subsequent visit pairs would be to show improvement, and a one-tailed t test was used for those comparisons.
The results presented here were collected in a real clinic setting and not in the context of a rigorous experimental design. As such, the data are subject to significant limitations, including no randomization and the lack of a control group. However, the clinical outcomes data are presented to illustrate that the cost savings and revenue generation did not come at the expense of patient outcomes.

Conclusion Patients with chronic non-cancer-
related pain were managed effectively by a pharmacist with prescribing authority and refill authorization in a pain management clinic. The favorable clinical outcomes, revenue generated, and cost savings achieved justified the pharmacist clinician's services in this health system.
References
1. Merenich JA, Lousberg TR, Brennan SH et al. Optimizing treatment of dyslipidemia in patients with coronary artery disease in a managed-care environment (the Rocky Mountain Kaiser Permanente experience). Am J Cardiol. 2000; 85:36A42A.
2. Leape LL, Cullen DJ, Clapp MD et al. Pharmacist participation on physician rounds and adverse drug events in the intensive care unit. JAMA. 1999; 282:26770. [Erratum, JAMA. 2000; 283:1293.]
3. Bond CA, Monson R. Sustained improvement in drug documentation, compliance, and disease control. A four-year analysis of an ambulatory care model. Arch Intern Med. 1984; 144:1159-62.
4. Jameson J, VanNoord G, Vanderwoud K. The impact of a pharmacotherapy consultation on the cost and outcome of medical therapy. J Fam Pract. 1995; 41:469-72.
5. McMullin ST, Hennenfent JA, Ritchie DJ et al. A prospective, randomized trial to assess the cost impact of pharmacistinitiated interventions. Arch Intern Med. 1999; 159:2306-9.
6. Hanlon JT, Weinberger M, Samsa GP et al. A randomized, controlled trial of a clinical pharmacist intervention to improve inappropriate prescribing in elderly outpatients with polypharmacy. Am J Med. 1996; 100:428-37.
7. Gattis WA, Hasselblad V, Whellan DJ et al. Reduction in heart failure events by the addition of a clinical pharmacist to the heart failure management team: results of the Pharmacist in Heart Failure Assessment Recommendation and Monitoring (PHARM) Study. Arch Intern Med. 1999; 159:1939-45.
8. Johnson JA, Bootman JL. Drug-related morbidity and mortality. A cost-of-illness model. Arch Intern Med. 1995; 155:194956.
9. Bond CA, Raehl CL, Franke T. Interrelationships among mortality rates, drug

costs, total cost of care and length of stay in United States hospitals: summary and recommendations for clinical pharmacy services and staffing. Pharmacotherapy. 2001; 21:129-41. 10. Carmichael JM, O'Connell MB, Devine B et al. Collaborative drug therapy management by pharmacists. Pharmacotherapy. 1997; 17:1050-61. 11. Schumock GT, Butler MG, Meek PD et al. Evidence of the economic benefit of clinical pharmacy services: 1996­2000. Pharmacotherapy. 2003; 23:113-32. 12. Lipton HL, Bird JA. The impact of clinical pharmacists' consultations on geriatric patients' compliance and medical care use: a randomized controlled trial. Gerontologist. 1994; 34:307-15. 13. Rupp MT. Performing and billing for cognitive services: implications for the US. Ann Pharmacother. 2000; 34:401-2. 14. Keely JL, for the American College of Physicians­American Society of Internal Medicine. Pharmacist scope of practice. Ann Intern Med. 2002; 136:79-85. 15. Hammond RW, Dole EJ. The pharmacist clinician: prescriptive authority in New Mexico. J Manag Care Pharm. 1996; 2:594-6. 16. Dole EJ. Profession of second lieutenants. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2002; 59:55860. 17. National Cholesterol Education Program Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). Third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). www.nhlbi. nih.gov/guidelines/cholesterol/atp3full. pdf (accessed 2006 Mar 15). 18. VHA/DoD clinical practice guidelines for the management of medically unexplained symptoms: chronic pain and fatigue. www.guidelines.gov/summary/ summary.aspx?doc_id=3415&nbr=2641 (accessed 2006 Mar 15). 19. World Health Organization. WHO's pain ladder. www.who.int/cancer/palliative/ painladder/en/ (accessed 2006 Mar 15). 20. Drug Enforcement Administration. Midlevel practitioners authorization by state. www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/drugreg/ practioners/index.html (accessed 2006 Oct 10). 21. McCaffery M, Beebe A. Pain: clinical manual for nursing practice. St. Louis: Mosby; 1989.

Am J Health-Syst Pharm--Vol 64 Jan 1, 2007

89

