http://acs.ist.psu.edu/papers/ritterAC02.pdf 
In Proceedings of the 11th Computer-Generated Forces and Behavior Representation Conference 
pp. 29-40, 02-CGF-002. Orlando, FL: U. of Central Florida. 
 

 

 

 

Validating Changes to a Cognitive Architecture to More Accurately Model the 

Effects of Two Example Behavior Moderators 

Frank E. Ritter 

School of Information Sciences and Technology 

ritter@ist.psu.edu 

 

Marios N. Avraamides 

Department of Psychology 

marios@psu.edu 

 

Isaac G. Councill 

igc2@psu.edu 

 
 

The Pennsylvania State University 

University Park, PA16802 

USA 

 
 

Keywords: 

Behavior moderators, cognitive architectures, cognitive models 

 
 
ABSTRACT: The success of simulation environments will depend partly on how realistically the models mimic human 
behavior.    While  human  behavior  is  affected  by  various  moderators  (see  Pew  and  Mavor  [28],  for  an  initial  list), 
cognitive models typically do not take into account the effects of many of these moderators.  We propose that cognitive 
models  can  be  augmented  to  account  for  such  effects  by  modifying  either  their  knowledge  or  the  parameters  of  the 
architecture that they are built with.  To provide an example of the two ways in which cognitive models can be modified 
to capture the effects of behavior moderators, we present an ACT-R model that performs a cognitive task while being 
affected by the moderators of as anxiety and pre-task appraisal.  These changes are validated in a preliminary way by 
comparison with human data, which shows us where these models can be improved and provides lessons for further 
work.    Most  importantly,  we  argue  that  more  realistic  models  of  human  behavior  reflecting  these  moderators  and 
individual  differences  can  be  achieved  by  implementing  similar  modifications  within  other  cognitive  models  and  by 
reusing these modifications for an existing architecture as an overlay. 
 

1. Introduction 

In  the  1950’s  Alan  Turing  suggested  that  intelligent 
machines  could  be  built  by  modeling  the  human  brain. 
Years  later,  a  fair  number  of  computational  models  have 
been  built  to  either  answer  psychological  questions  or 
replace  humans  in  various  tasks.  Despite  their  successes 
at  predicting  human  behavior  in  a  variety  of  tasks, 
cognitive models have almost totally ignored the fact that 
cognitive  activity  is  often  moderated  by  factors  that  are 
not  directly  related  to  the  ongoing  task.  As  a  result, 
cognitive  models  have  rarely  included  the  effects  of 
behavior-moderating  factors  such  as  noise,  temperature, 
stress, excitement and so on. Even more rarely have these 
models been validated or tested. 

How  to  include  behavior  moderators  into  models  of 
cognition  is  a  crucial  issue  if  the  goal  is  to  build  high-
fidelity cognitive models. Building such models might not 
be  very  important  for  some  types  of  psychological 
research.  After  all,  it  is  a  common  practice  for empirical 
researchers, who are not interested in behavior moderators 
per  se,  to  average  data  across  subjects  to  avoid  the 
contaminating  effects  of  such  extraneous  variables. 
Indeed, 
for  most  cognitive  psychologists,  behavior 
moderators  are  nothing  but  confounds  that  need  to  be 
controlled.  Similarly, cognitive models aimed to be used 
as surrogate users in some situations need not include the 
effects  of  behavior  moderators.  In  some  cases  it  even 
seems  more  desirable  to  avoid  the  effects  of  moderators. 
A  model-tutor  [1],  for  example,  does  not  need  to  get 
impatient or angry just like a human tutor might get. 

 

However,  models  that  account  for  the effects of behavior 
moderators  are  essential  when  the  situation  requires  that 
the  models  be  so  realistic  that they, optimally, cannot be 
distinguished  from  humans  performing  the  same  task.  
Such situations include military simulations. While in the 
past,  a  military  exercise  would  require  an  extensive 
amount  of  human  resources,  nowadays  training  can  take 
place  with  synthetic  environments.  Cognitive models can 
populate  these  environments  representing  some  or  all  of 
the  entities  involved  in  real  combats.  Using  cognitive 
models  as  intelligent  agents  enables  the  use  of  realistic 
environments for training purposes [28, 34]. 

Using  synthetic  environments  to  train  military  personnel 
requires that the cognitive models driving the friendly and 
enemy  entities  engage  in  actions  that  are  expected  by 
human  pilots  in  comparable  combat  situations.  However, 
until  now,  the  behavior  of  such  agents is not affected by 
many factors that  are very  likely to affect the behavior of 
humans.  Factors  such  as  stress,  time  of  day,  level  of 
training  and  so  on,  influence  human  behavior  in  the 
battlefield [28] and should be built-in any cognitive model 
that  is  aimed  to  be  realistic  enough  to  provide  high-
quality training. 

2. Cognitive Architectures and CGF’s 

Newell  [26]  defined  cognitive  architectures  as  those 
aspects  of  cognition 
task-independent  and 
relatively  constant.  That 
is,  cognitive  architectures 
represent the set of fixed mechanisms that mediate human 
cognition. 

that  are 

In  response  to Newell’s [26, 27] call for unified theories 
of  cognition,  a  number  of  cognitive  architectures  have 
emerged.  Soar  [19],  ACT-R  [2],  and  EPIC  [18]  are  the 
ones  used  more  often  to  guide  the  construction  of 
cognitive  models.    JACK  is  also  being  increasingly  used 
[6]. 

In  some  cases,  models  based  on  cognitive  architectures 
were  built  for  use  for  training  purposes  in  military 
simulations.  The  TacAir-Soar  system  [35]  is  a  notable 
example.  In  TacAir-Soar,  cognitive  models  developed 
with the Soar cognitive architecture [22, 17] simulate the 
behavior  of  military  personnel  in  fixed-wing  aircraft 
missions.    TacAir-Soar  was  successfully  used  in  Stow 
’97, a large-scale simulation exercise in which up to 3,700 
computer-generated  forces were involved as both friendly 
and  enemy  entities  [14].    A  next  step  for  all  of  these 
models is to include more aspects of human behavior. 

3. Behavior Moderators 

and 

external 

for  distinguishing 

taxonomy 
into 

task.  Furthermore,  we  adopt  Pew  and  Mavor’s  ([28] 
chapter  9) 
types  of 
moderators 
internal.  External 
moderators are inputs from the environment that influence 
how  the  person  performs  the  task.  These  moderators 
originate  outside  the  person  and  include  physiological 
stressors  (i.e., environmental factors such as temperature, 
noise, etc), physical and cognitive workload,  and fatigue. 
Internal  moderators  are  those  originating  inside  the 
person.  Examples  of 
the 
intelligence, expertise levels, expectancies, etc.  

internal  moderators  are 

It should be noted, however, that dividing moderators into 
external  and  internal  is  not  always  easy.  While,  for 
example,  noise  and  altitude  can  be  easily  identified  as 
environmental  stressors  and  therefore  placed  in  the 
external  moderator  category,  deciding  where  to  place 
dehydration is not as obvious. Although dehydration is an 
internal  state  of  a  person,  it  is also the result of  external 
factors such heat and water shortage. 

Behavior  moderators  that  affect  human  behavior  in  the 
battlefield are discussed in detail by Pew and Mavor ([28] 
chapter 9).  Therefore, we only present a few examples of 
moderators 
empirically 
(Appendix). 

studied 

been 

have 

that 

4.  Modeling  Behavior  Moderators 
Cognitive Architectures 

in 

The  effects  of  behavior  moderators  can  be  included  in 
cognitive models in two ways.  One way is by modifying 
the  content  of  the  model  itself  and  the  other  by 
augmenting  the  cognitive  architecture  that  was  used  to 
build  the  model.  The  two  options  exist  because  models 
rely on both the specific knowledge that are provided with 
and  the  fixed  mechanisms  contained  in  the  cognitive 
architecture that are built with [11, 34]. 

We will briefly discuss the two options and then we will 
present work that illustrates both approaches.  

4.1 Modifying the cognitive model 

individual-difference 

A  number  of 
factors  can  be 
simulated by varying the amount of knowledge that is put 
into  the  model.  This  represents  varying  the  level  of 
expertise,  typically  representing  the  level  of  education or 
training.  This change can be done either directly (i.e., by 
providing  the  model  with  fewer  or  different  rules)  or 
indirectly by training the model with life-time simulations 
of  different  length  and  type.  This  approach  is  mostly 
applicable for factors that are based on content.  

We  are  using  the  term  behavior  moderators  to  refer  to 
those  variables  that  affect  human  performance  in a given 

Jones,  Ritter,  and  Wood  [15]  provide  an  illustrative 
example  of  modifying  the  model.    They  were  attempting 

 

to  classify  the  differences  between  adult  and  children’s 
performance on a task.  One of the approaches considered 
was  simply  to  reduce  the  knowledge  available  to  the 
model by removing production rules.  Another way was to 
reduce  the  number  of  memory  elements  that  could  be 
processed  simultaneously  by  deleting  and  splitting  the 
production rules that contained a great number of memory 
elements. 

The first change is direct, and models directly differences 
in  knowledge.    The  second  change  relates  to  how 
information is represented  across  and within rules.  Both 
of  these  types  of  changes  can  reflect  the  effects  of 
moderators as well as individual differences. 

4.2 Modifying the Cognitive Architecture 

Other  moderators  can  be  implemented  by  producing 
overlays  to  the  architecture.  That  is,  the  effect  of  the 
factors can be modeled by adjusting the architecture itself.  
For  example,  moderators  that  affect  the  processing speed 
of working memory can be simulated by simply adjusting 
the  value  of  the  architectural  parameter  that  corresponds 
to working memory processing speed.  

Jones et al.  [15] tried out two such  architectural changes 
to  simulate  the  performance  of  children  on  the  Tower  of 
Nottingham  task.  One  such  change  was  to  limit  the 
number  of  elements  that  were  active  in  working  memory 
by  increasing  the  retrieval  threshold  parameter  of  the 
ACT-R  architecture.  Alternatively,  they  increased  the 
value  of  the  expected  gain  noise  parameter  to  influence 
the  strategy  choice  procedure  and  therefore  increase  the 
stochasticity  of 
latter  manipulation 
produced  the  best  match  to  empirically  collected  data 
from children. 

the  model.  The 

There are numerous, interesting behavior moderators that 
can be  implemented this way that are of interest  to those 
modeling  synthetic  forces  (see  the  Appendix  for  a  few 
examples). 

5. An Example Implementation of these Two 
Approaches 

We  now  turn  into  an  example  of  how  the  two  ways  of 
including  behavior  moderators  into  models  of  cognition 
can be  applied and tested.  We present a cognitive model 
of  serial  subtraction  that  performs  the  task  under  the 
effects of task-appraisal and worry1.   

                                                         
1 In fact, the model also includes the effects of caffeine on 
performance. However, caffeine will not be discussed 
here.  The interested reader is directed to [33] 

The  serial  subtraction task is to start with a large 4-digit 
number and to repeatedly subtract from it a specified 1- or 
2-digit number. For example, the number 1,396 can be the 
starting  number  from  which  the  number  7  should  be 
subtracted repeatedly.   

Serial  subtraction  was  chosen  because  it  is  a  task that is 
often used to measure the effects of stressors on cognitive 
performance  (e.g.,  [36]).    It  was  not  chosen  because  of 
surface validity for synthetic forces tasks, although it and 
related  tasks  will  have  to  be  included  in  models  of  air 
traffic  controllers  and  other  operators  that  do  navigation 
tasks  and  mental  arithmetic  as  part  of  their  problem 
solving.    As  we  shall  see,  we  have  data  on  how  serial 
subtraction  is  affected  by  various  moderators.  These 
moderators can give rise to large individual differences on 
task performance.   

The  cognitive  model  was  built  using  the  ACT-R  4.0 
cognitive  architecture  [2].    ACT-R  is  a  production 
system-based  cognitive  architecture 
that  combines  a 
symbolic  with  a  sub-symbolic  level.    The  symbolic  level 
represents knowledge as rules (i.e., productions) and as an 
associative  network  of  interconnected  nodes,  also  called 
chunks. The distinction between productions and network 
nodes  maps  into  a  distinction  between  procedural  and 
declarative  knowledge.  The  sub-symbolic  level  describes 
the  processes  that  support  knowledge,  with  activation 
being a central concept at this level.  

In  ACT-R,  production  rules  are  considered  the  atomic 
components  of  thought,  that  is,  they  are  the  most  basic 
unit by which thought processes. Therefore, a production 
must be selected at each step of performing a task.  When 
more  than  one  production  matches  the  current  goal,  the 
systems  selects  one  of  them  via  a  process  called  conflict 
resolution.  In  general,  the  conflict  resolution  mechanism 
selects a production by weighing the cost and benefits for 
each  of  the  matching  productions  and  then  selecting  the 
best  candidate. When, however,  there is a lot  of noise  in 
the  process,  the  mechanism  can  sometimes  select  less 
optimal  productions.    More  information  on  ACT-R  is 
available at act.psy.cmu.edu. 

Our  ACT-R  model  performs  a  serial  subtraction  task  in 
the  same  format  that  is  used  to  study  performance  under 
stress.  The model’s declarative knowledge consists solely 
of  arithmetic  facts  and  goal-related  information,  and  its 
procedural  knowledge  by  rules  to  retrieve  subtraction 
results  from  memory.    The  task  can  be  performed  using 
two strategies.  One strategy is to perform subtractions by 
counting  back  from  the  starting  number  as  may  times  as 
indicated by the second number (e.g., 7 times). The other 
strategy  is  to  retrieve  subtraction  results  directly  from 
memory. 

 

Figure  1  presents  the  graphical  interface  of  the  model. 
The  two  main  windows  are  the  Control  Panel  and  the 
Model  Behavior  windows.  The  Control  Panel  window 
contains  several  options  for  selecting 
the  model’s 
conditions,  run  control,  and  some  advanced  output 
options.    This  window  allows  the  model' s  moderators  to 
be set.   

The  Model  Behavior  window  displays  aspects  of  the 
model’s behavior, such as the current result and whether it 
is a correct or erroneous result, as well as the declarative 
memory chunks that  are being used to solve the problem. 
Summary  statistics  (number  of  attempts,  number  of 
errors,  and  task  latency)  are  also  displayed  in  this 
window. 
 
 

 
Figure 1:  The graphical interface of the serial subtraction 

model. 

5.1 Modifying the architecture 

The behavior moderator we chose to include in the serial-
subtraction  model  is  task-appraisal  [23,  24].    Task-
appraisal  is  considered  an  internal  moderator  as  it 
represents  an  individual’s  subjective  evaluation  of  a 
stressful event.  Based on the evaluation, appraisal can be 
of  a  challenging  or  a  threatening  form.    A  challenging 
appraisal is made when the individual deems her abilities 
high  enough  to  cope  with  the  stressful  event,  while  a 
threatening  appraisal  arises  when  the  stressfulness  of the 
task  is  judged  to  surpass  the  coping  abilities  of  the 
individual.    Task-appraisals  can  be  distinguished  further 
into  pre-task  appraisals  and  post-task appraisals based on 
whether  they  are  formed  before  or  after  the  execution  of 
the task.  

Empirical  evidence  suggests  a  link  between  the  form  of 
task-appraisal  (i.e., 
threatening  vs.  challenging)  and 
performance  on  arithmetic  tasks  such  as  the  serial-
subtraction task we use in our model.  While threatening 

appraisals  have  been  associated  with  fewer  solution 
attempts  and  poorer  performance,  challenging  appraisals 
have  been  related  with  better  performance  and  more 
solution attempts than neutral situations [17, 31, 36]. 

We  have  attempted  to model  these  results by varying the 
level  of  the  Expected  Gain  Noise  (EGN)  parameter  of 
ACT-R.  EGN represents the level of randomness present 
in  the  conflict  resolution  process;  that  is,  the  process  by 
which  ACT-R  decides  which  rule  will  fire  when  more 
than one rule matches the goal of the system.  

This  noise  parameter  has  been  previously  varied  to 
capture  the irrationality present in the thought process  of 
children  [15].  We  have  simply  set  this  parameter  to  a 
small  value  (0.1)  to  model  a  “clear-head”  in  the  case  of 
challenging appraisal and to a greater value (1.0) in order 
to  provide  greater  stochasticity  in  the  strategy  selection 
process under a threatening appraisal state. 

By  varying  the  default  values  of  the  EGN  parameter  of 
the  ACT-R  architecture  we  have  been  able  to  model  the 
effects  of  the  pre-task  appraisal  moderator.    The  model 
also  takes  into account post-task appraisal. Post-appraisal 
simply  inherits the parameters of pre-task appraisal at the 
end of each running cycle.   

Data  suggest  that  it  is  not  this  simple;  there  is  almost  a 
resetting  that  occurs  such  that  the  appraisals  are  not 
exactly  the  same  (Task  1  post  is  not  identical  to  Task  1 
pre).  This simplification is a working assumption that can 
be refined later. 

As  can  be  seen  in  the  top  two  sections  of  Table  1,  the 
model  produces  a  pattern  of  results  that  is  similar  with 
that reported at the group level in an empirical study using 
the same serial-subtraction task [36].  

As can been see in the upper section of Table 1, the model 
performs more attempts and it is also more accurate under 
neutral  than  under  challenging  appraisal.  This  raises 
questions  about  ACT-R’s  default  value  of  the  EGN 
parameter (default value is “Nil”). 

The  model  performance  provides  a  very  close  fit  to  the 
empirical data for threatening appraisals.  For challenging 
appraisals  it  does  not  attempt  as  many  subtractions  as 
subjects  did.    As  the  number  of  model  runs  (N)  can  be 
increased, the difference is reliable but not a terrible flaw.  
However, 
the 
percentage of correct responses out of the total number of 
attempts for both conditions. 

the  model  produces  very  precisely 

5.2 Modifying the knowledge of the model 

The  previous  subsection  described  how  we  modified  the 
EGN  parameter  of  the  cognitive  architecture  to  capture 

 

the  effects  of  task-appraisal  in  our  serial-subtraction 
model.  However,  we  believe 
that  some  behavior 
moderators  might  be  built  into  cognitive  models  without 
varying  the  values  of  architectural  parameters.  Instead, 
the  knowledge  provided  to the model can be modified to 
incorporate  the  effects  of  behavior  moderators.    As  an 
example, we have used  the  same serial-subtraction model 
and  we have modified its knowledge in order to simulate 
the effects of worry on performance.   

is  processed 

For the purposes of our current work, we defined worry as 
the anxiety that is specific to the task to be performed but 
that 
in  a  non-task  specific  and  non-
productive  way.    Because  our  task  is  of  an  arithmetic 
nature, worry may be equivalent to the term math anxiety 
that is used by Ashcraft and Kirk [4]. This type of effect 
is likely to be found in other stressful,  anxiety-producing 
tasks  that  might  be  found  is  synthetic  environments  or 
their real-world analogue. 

on 

somewhat 

that 

decrements 

Previous  research  has  associated  math  anxiety  with 
performance 
complex 
arithmetic tasks.   Particularly, lower accuracy and longer 
latencies  have  been  observed 
in  solving  arithmetic 
involve  a  carry  operation,  such  as 
problems 
multicolumn  addition  [3,  9].    Ashcraft  and  Kirk  [4] 
suggest  that  the  effect  of  math  anxiety  on  arithmetic 
performance is caused by an on-line reduction of working 
memory  resources.  In  line  with  Eysenck  and  Calvo’s  [8] 
processing  efficiency  theory,  they  propose  that  math 
anxiety produces intrusive thoughts that compete with the 
main  task  for  cognitive  resources.    Because  of  this,  the 
amount  of  cognitive  resources  that  remains  available  for 
the arithmetic task is diminished under high math anxiety. 
Indeed,  participants  with  high  levels  of  math  anxiety 
report  the  presence  of  such  intrusive  thoughts  when 
solving arithmetic tasks (Faust, 1992, cited in [4]).  

serial 

We  have  simulated  the  experience  of  intrusive  thoughts 
by  modifying  the  knowledge  of  the  serial-subtraction 
model  to  enable  the  model  to  “worry”.    Specifically,  we 
added  into  the  model’s  procedural  knowledge  a  simple 
rule that  can fire any time while the model is performing 
the serial-subtraction task.   In essence, math anxiety here 
is  modeled  as  a  secondary  task  that  is  performed 
concurrently  with 
It  directly 
implements  distracting  thoughts.    These  thoughts  thus 
lead to a decrease in working memory -- due to the serial 
nature  of  rule-firing  in  ACT-R,  whenever  the  worry rule 
fires, it results into a slowing down of the execution of the 
subtraction  task.  In  addition  to  producing  an  increase  in 
total  solution  time,  the  occasional  firing  of  the  worry 
production  affects 
the  content  of  working  memory. 
Because  the  processing  of  the  main  task  is  halted  when 
the  worry  rule  fires,  there  is  more  time  for  task-relevant 
declarative  information  to  decay  from  working  memory. 

subtraction. 

The  decay  of  memory 
information  produces  more 
frequent retrievals of inappropriate arithmetic facts.  This 
results  in  performance  that  is  not  only  slower,  but  more 
errorful  as  well  when  the  task  is  performed  under  high 
anxiety conditions. 

As shown in Table 1, when the model performs the serial-
subtraction  task  with  math-anxiety  “turned -on”,  it  makes 
more errors and takes more time. 

To the best  of our knowledge, there are no available data 
that  examine  the  effects  of  math  anxiety  on  performance 
in  a  serial  subtraction  task.  Therefore,  we  have  not  yet 
been  able  to  compare  directly  the  performance  of  our 
model  with  human  data.    Nevertheless,  the  model  seems 
to  capture  the  effects  reported  by  studies  that  use 
multicolumn  addition  (e.g.,  [4]).  The  middle  section  of 
Table 1 shows the average performance of our model with 
math-anxiety  turned  on  and  off  under  different  levels  of 
task-appraisal. 
 

Table 1.  Comparison of model with human data. 

 

Pre-task  

Number  

CH 

  TH 

  NE 

appraisal  

of 

Model  

Attempts 

57.6  >  46.2  <  70.7 

Correct 

53.2  >  42.1  <  70.7 

 

 

(N=100) 

% correct 

 

92%   

91%   

100% 

Model  with 

Attempts 

43.2  >  37.2  <  59.3. 

Worry  

(N=100) 

Correct 

37.9  >  32.6  <  59.3 

% correct 

 

88%   

88%   

 

Tomaka et al. 

Attempts 

61  >  46 

  n.a. 

(1993) 

  

Correct 

56  >  42 

  n.a. 

% correct 

 

92%   

91%   

 

Note Human data taken from Tomaka et al. [36]; 

< and > denote significant differences at the p<.01 level,  N= 

number of simulation runs, CH=challenging appraisal, 

TH=threatening appraisal, NE=neutral  

 

 

 

6. Conclusions 

The  cognitive  model  that  we  have  presented  implements 
the two approaches we suggested for including the effects 
of  behavior  moderators. 
  First,  we  have  varied  a 
parameter  that  is  provided  by  the  ACT-R  architecture  to 
model  performance  under  different 
task-appraisals.  
Second, we have modified the knowledge of the model to 
simulate the influence of anxiety in general as knowledge 
that has secondary effects and applied it to a math task.  

In  both  cases  we  were  able  to  produce  the  pattern  of 
results that are documented by empirical research. We did 
this  by  using  very  simple techniques  that could be easily 
adopted  and  used  in  cognitive  models  of  other  tasks  by 
reusing our overlay in ACT-R. This approach of adding a 
reusable  overlay  could  be  applied  to  other  architectures, 
moderators, and models. We believe that a greater number 
of moderators should be explored and their effects should 
be  modeled  by  using  reusable  techniques  that  can  be 
shared among modelers.  

These  changes  do  not  appear  to  be  model  specific.    As 
they  were  created  within  a  cognitive  architecture,  they 
should  be  reusable by other models.  We can now create 
nearly  immediate  predictions  of  the  effects  of  task 
appraisal  and  worry  on  all  the  tasks  that  have  models 
provided  in  the  ACT-R  model  library,  including driving, 
phone dialing,  and interface  use.  All the source files for 
the ACT-R model of  serial subtraction and the two types 
of  overlays  we  discussed  here  are  available  at 
acs.ist.psu.edu/papers/serial-sub/ 

the  effects  of  behavior  moderators 

Including 
into 
computational  models  of  cognition  will  give  power  to 
cognitive  modelers  as  it  will  provide  them  with  the 
capability  of  designing  models  that  can  capture  more 
realistically  human behavior.  The design of high-fidelity 
models  is  particularly  important  for  models  that  can  be 
used for training purposes. In particular, cognitive models 
that  populate 
in  military 
simulations  should  incorporate  the  effects  of  behavior 
moderators in order to achieve training environments that 
closely  match  the  characteristics  of  real  combat.  Ideally, 
entities  in  synthetic  environments  should  perform  their 
missions should very similarly when they are operated by 
human users and when they are driven cognitive models.  

synthetic  environments 

References 
 
[1]  Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., and 
Pelletier,  R.:  Cognitive  tutors:  Lessons  learned. 
Journal  of  the  Learning  Sciences,  Vol.  4,  pp.  167-
207, 1995. 

[2]  Anderson,  J.  R,  and  Lebiere,  C.:  The  atomic 
components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1998 

[3]  Ashcraft,  M.,  H,  and  Faust,  M.  W.:  Mathematics 
anxiety  and  mental  arithmetic  performance:  An 
exploratory  investigation.  Cognition  and  Emotion, 
Vol. 8, pp. 97-125, 1994 

[4]  Ashcraft,  M.  H,  and  Kirk,  E.  P.:  The  relationship 
and 
among  working  memory,  math  anxiety, 
performance.  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology: 
General, Vol. 13, pp.  224-237, 2001. 

[5]  Bartl,  C.,  and  Dörner,  D.:  PSI:  A  theory  of  the 
integration  of  cognition,  emotion  and  motivation.  In 
F.  E.  Ritter  &  R.  M.  Young  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of 
the  2nd  European  Conference  on  Cognitive 
Modelling,  pp.  66-73,  Thrumpton,  Nottingham,  UK: 
Nottingham University Press, 1998. 

[6]  Busetta, P., Rönnquist, R., Hodgson, A., and Lucas, 
A.:  JACK 
intelligent  agents  -  Components  for 
intelligent  agents in JAVA. AgentLink News Letter, 
2(Jan.), 
1999,  www.agent-software.com/white-
paper.pdf. 

[7]  Cian,  C.,  Koulmann,  N.,  Barraud, P. A, Raphel, C., 
Jimenez, C., and Melin, B.: Influence of Variations in 
Body  Hydration  on  Cognitive  Function:  Effect  of 
Hyperhydration,  Heat  Stress,  and  Exercise-Induced 
Dehydration.  Journal  of  Psychophysiology,  Vol.  14, 
2000. 

[8]  Eysenck,  M.  W,  and  Calvo,  M.  G.:  Anxiety  and 
theory. 

performance: 
Cognition and Emotion, Vol. 6, pp. 409-434, 1992. 

the  processing  efficiency 

[9]  Faust,  M.  W.,  Ashcraft,  M.  H,  and  Fleck,  D.  E.: 
Mathematics  anxiety  effects  in  simple  and  complex 
addition. Mathematical Cognition, Vol. 2, pp. 25-62, 
1996.  

[10] Hammond,  K.,  R,  Hamm,  R.,  M,  Grassia,  J.,  and 
Pearson,  T.:  Direct  comparison  of  the  efficacy  of 
intuitive and analytical cognition in expert judgment. 
IEEE  Transactions 
and 
Cybernetics, Vol. 17, pp. 753-770, 1987. 

on  Systems,  Man 

[11] Howes,  A.,  and  Young,  R.:  Learning  consistent, 
interactive,  and  meaningful  task-action  mappings:  A 
computational model. Cognitive Science, Vol. 20, pp. 
301-356, 1996. 

[12] Hudlicka,  E.  Modeling  behavior  moderators 

in 
report 
military  performance  models 
9716). Lincoln, MA: Psychonometrix Associates Inc, 
1997. 

(Technical 

[13] Hudlicka,  E.,  and  McNeese,  M.  C.:  Assessment  of 
user affective & belief states for interface adaptation: 
Application  to  an  Air  Force  pilot  task.  Journal  of 
User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction, Special 
Issue  on User Modeling  and Adaptation of Affective 
Computing, 2002. 

[14] Jones, R. M., Laird, J. E., Nielsen, P. E., Coulter, K. 
J., Kenny, P., and Koss, F. V.: Automated intelligent 
pilots  for  combat  flight  simulation.  AI  Magazine, 
Vol. 20, pp. 27-41, 1999. 

[15] Jones,  G.,  Ritter,  F.  E,  and  Wood,  D.  J.:  Using  a 

 

cognitive  architecture  to  examine  what  develops. 
Psychological Science, Vol.  11, pp.  93-100, 2000. 

[16] Jongman,  G.  M.:  How 

to  fatigue  ACT-R?  In 
Proceedings  of  the  Second  European  Conference  on 
Cognitive  Modelling,  pp.  52-57,  Nottingham: 
Nottingham University Press, 1998. 

[17] Kelsey,  R.  M.,  Blascovich,  J.,  Leitten,  C.  L., 
Schneider,  T.  R.,  Tomaka,  J.,  and  Wiens,  S.: 
Cardiovascular  reactivity  and  adaptation  to  recurrent 
psychological  stress:  The  moderating  effects  of 
evaluative  observation.  Psychophysiology,  Vol.  37, 
pp. 748-756, 2000. 

[18] Kieras,  D. E, and Meyer, D. E.: An overview of  the 
EPIC  architecture  for  cognition  and  performance 
with  application 
interaction. 
Human-Computer  Interaction,  Vol.  12,  391-438, 
1997. 

to  human-computer 

[19] Laird, J. E, Newell, A., and Rosenbloom, P. S.: Soar: 
An  architecture  for  general  intelligence.  Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol.  47, pp.  289-325, 1991. 

[20] Koelega,  H.    S,  and  Brinkman,  J.-L.:  Noise  and 
vigilance:  An  evaluative  review.  Human  Factors, 
Vol. 28, 465-481, 1986. 

[21] Koelega, H. S, Brinkman, J.-L., and Bergman, H.: No 
effect  of  noise  on  vigilance  performance?  Human 
Factors, Vol. 28, pp. 581-593, 1986. 

[22] Laird, J., E, Newell, A., and Rosenbloom, P. S.: Soar: 
An  architecture  for  general  intelligence.  Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 47, pp. 289-325, 1991. 

[23] Lazarus,  R.  S.:  Psychological  stress  and  the  coping 

process. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966. 

[24] Lazarus, R. S., and Folkman, S.: Stress, appraisal and 

coping. New York: Springer Publishing, 1984. 

[25] Lovett,  M.  C.,  Daily,  L.  Z.,  and  Reder,  L.  M.:  A 
source  activation  theory  of  working  memory:  cross-
task prediction of performance in ACT-R. Journal of 
Cognitive  Systems  Research,  Vol.  1,  pp.  99-118, 
2000. 

[26] Newell,  A.:  You  can' t play 20 questions with nature 

and  win.  In  W.  G.  Chase  (Ed.),  Visual  Information 
Processing: Academic Press, 1973. 

[27] Newell,  A.:  Unified 

theories  of 

cognition. 

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. 

[28] Pew,  R.  W.,  and  Mavor,  A.  S.  (Eds.):  Modeling 
human  and  organizational  behavior.  Washington, 
D.C: National Academy Press, 1998. 

[29] Mertens,  H.,  W,  and  Collins,  W.,  E.:  The  effects  of 
age,  sleep  deprivation,  and  altitude  on  complex 
performance.  Human  factors,  Vol.  28,  pp.  541-551, 
1986. 

[30] Quigley,  K.  S.,  Barret,  L.  F.,  and  Weinstein,  S.: 
Cardiovascular  patterns  associated  with  threat  and 
challenge  appraisals:  Individual  responses  across 
time. Psychophysiology, in press. 

[31] Ritter,  F.  E.,  Avraamides,  M.  N.,  Councill,  I.,  van 
Rooy, D., Quigley, K. S., Klein, L. C., McNeese, M. 

D.,  Stine,  M.  M.,  and  Rodrigues,  I.  M.:  Pre-task 
appraisal  and  caffeine:  An  architectural  overlay  for 
ACT-R.  In  Air  Force  Workshop  on  ACT-R  Models 
of  Human-System  Interaction,  Mesa,  AZ,  January 
2002. 

[32] Ritter, F. E., Quigley, K. S., Klein, L. C., McNeese, 
M. D., Rooy, D. V., Councill, I., Avraamides, M. N., 
Stine,  M.  M.,  and  Rodrigues,  I.  M.:  Including  the 
effects  of pretask appraisal and caffeine in the  ACT-
R  cognitive  architecture:  Creating  a  dynamic 
architectural overlay, submitted. 

[33] Ritter, F. E., Shadbolt, N. R., Elliman, D., Young, R., 
Gobet,  F.,  and  Baxter,  G.  D.:  Techniques  for 
modeling 
synthetic 
environments:  A  supplementary  review.  Wright-
Patterson  Air  Force  Base,  OH:  Human  Systems 
Information Analysis Center, (in press). 

performance 

human 

in 

[34]  Ritter, F. E., & Young, R. M.: Embodied models as 
simulated  users: Introduction  to this special issue  on 
using  cognitive  models  to  improve  interface  design. 
International  Journal  of  Human-Computer  Studies, 
Vol. 55, pp. 1-14, 2001. 

[35] Tambe, M., Johnson, W. L, Jones, R., M, Koss, F., V, 
Laird, J., E, Rosenbloom, P. S, and Schwamb, K., B.: 
Intelligent 
simulation 
environments.  AI  Magazine,  Vol.  16,  pp.  15-39, 
1995. 

interactive 

agents 

for 

[36] Tomaka,  J.,  Blascovich,  J.,  Kelsey,  R.  M.,  and 
Leitten,  C.  L.:  Subjective,  physiological,  and 
behavioral  effects  of  threat  and  challenge  appraisal. 
Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology,  Vol. 
65, pp.  248-260, 1993. 

[37] Van  Dijk,  F.,  Souman,  A.,  and  de  Vries,  F.:  Non-
auditory effects of noise in industry.VI . A final field 
study 
International  Archive  of 
Occupational  Environmental  Health,  Vol.  59,  pp. 
133-145, 1987 

industry. 

in 

[38] Webb,  W.  B,  and  Levy,  C.,  M.:  Age,  sleep 
deprivation  and  performance.  Psychophysiology, 
Vol. 19, pp. 272-276, 1982. 

[39] Webb,  W.  B.:  A  further  analysis  of  age  and  sleep 
deprivation  effects.  Psychophysiology,  Vol.  22,  pp. 
156-161, 1985. 

[40] Williams,  P.  S.:  Processing  demands,  training,  and 
the vigilance decrement. Human Factors, Vol. 28, pp. 
567-579, 1986. 

Acknowledgements 

This  project  was  supported  by  the  US  Office  of  Navy 
Research,  award  number  N000140110547  and  by  the 
Space  and  Naval  Warfare  Systems  Center,  San  Diego. 
The  views  expressed  in  this  article  do  not  necessarily 
reflect 
the  U.S. 
Government,  and  no  official  endorsement  should  be 
inferred. Discussions with Roman Belavkin, Wayne Gray, 

the  positions  or 

the  policies  of 

 

John  Anderson,  and  our  colleagues  on  this  project, 
McNeese, Klein, and Quigley, have greatly benefited our 
work. 
 
Author Biographies 
 
DR  FRANK E. RITTER is one of the founding faculty 
of the School of Information Sciences and Technology, a 
new interdisciplinary academic unit at Penn State to study 
how  people  process  information  using  technology  and  to 
train leaders  for the digital economy. Ritter works on the 
development,  application,  and  methodology  of  cognitive 
models, particularly as applied to interfaces and emotions. 
Ritter  is  a  member  of  the  editorial  board  of  Human 
Factors,  and  is  on  the  board  of  the  UK' s  Society  for  the 
Study  of  AI  and  Simulation  of  Behaviour  (AISB).   His 
review  (with  others)  on  applying  models  in  synthetic 
environments  will  be  published  as  a  book  this  year  by 
HSIAC as a State of the Art Report. 
 
MARIOS  AVRAAMIDES  is  a  doctoral  candidate  in 
Cognitive  Psychology  and  a  research  assistant  for  the 
School  of  Information  Sciences  and  Technology  at  the 
Pennsylvania  State  University.  He  has  previously 

obtained  an  MS  in  Cognitive  Psychology  from  Penn 
State,  and  a  BA  in  Psychology  from  the  University  of 
Texas  at  Austin.  His  current  research  examines  how 
people update spatial information provided in texts. In the 
School  of  IST,  Avraamides  has  worked  on  several 
projects  building  and  supporting  cognitive  models, 
including helping update the Soar FAQ. 
 
ISAAC  COUNCILL  is  a  doctoral  student  and  research 
assistant  in  the  School  of  Information  Sciences  and 
Technology at the Pennsylvania  State University.  He has 
previously  received  a  BA 
the 
University of North Carolina at Asheville.  Currently, he 
is  developing  methodologies  that  will  allow  agents 
created  within  the  Soar  architecture  to  be  articulate 
regarding the reasons for their decisions.  Councill is the 
author  of  the  ACT-R/A/C  serial  subtraction  model  and 
user interface. 
 
 
 
 
 

in  Psychology  from 

 

Appendix 

 
Behavior Moderator 

Effect on cognition/behavior 

Background Noise 

Reduces vigilance and deteriorates attention [37] 

Intermittent Noise 

Increases sensitivity in vigilance tasks ( [21]; see [20] for an evaluative review). 

Dehydration 

Impairs perceptive discrimination, psycho-motor skills, and short-term memory 

Expertise Level 

Correlates with ability to perform mental what-if simulations, ease of adopting 

[7] 

multiple perspectives, ability to extract relevant information ([10]; Deckert et al., 

1994, cited in [28]; Badre, 1978, cited in [28]; see [12] for an elaborate 

discussion on expertise-level differences). 

Anxiety 

Narrows the focus of attention, biases interpretation of ambiguous stimuli as 

threatening [40]. Reduces working memory span and harms performance on 

math-related tasks [4]. 

Sleep deprivation 

Reduces performance on the Civil Aeromedical Institute’s Multiple Task 

Performance Battery (MTPB), which includes tracking, monitoring of warning 

stimuli, mental arithmetic, target identification and problem-solving [30]. 

Altitude 

Interacts with sleep deprivation to harm performance on the MTPB. The effects 

of sleep deprivation are exaggerated in higher altitudes [30]. 

Interacts with sleep deprivation to affect performance on psychological tasks. 

Sleep deprivation effects are exaggerated in older populations [38, 39] 

Age 

 

