Directed Sprays and Liquid Baits to Manage Ants in Vineyards and Citrus Groves1
John H. Klotz, Michael K. Rust, Daniel Gonzalez, Les Greenberg, Heather Costa, Phil Phillips,2 Carmen Gispert,3 Donald A. Reierson, and
Ken Kido
Department of Entomology, University of California at Riverside, Riverside, California 92521
J. Agric. Urban Entomol. 20(1): 31­40 (January 2003) ABSTRACT Chemical treatments were evaluated for efficacy against specific ant pests in two perennial field crop systems. A directed spray of Lorsban applied in grape vineyards resulted in significant reductions of Formica perpilosa Wheeler (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) for 9 wk. Significant reductions in the number of foraging Argentine ants, Linepithema humile (Mayr) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), were obtained in citrus for the 4-mo duration of a test with a liquid bait delivery system containing either 0.0001% fipronil or thiamethoxam in 25% sucrose water.
KEY WORDS Hymenoptera, Formicidae, Linepithema humile, Formica perpilosa, Argentine ants, ant baits, residual spray
The Argentine ant, Linepithema humile (Mayr) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) is a significant invasive pest species of urban, agricultural, and natural environments (Vega & Rust 2001). It is common in California orange orchards and has for years been especially numerous in Los Angeles and Riverside Counties (Horton 1918). In the Ojai Valley (Ventura County, California), Argentine ants attain tremendous population levels in citrus. In San Diego County, California, Markin (1967) estimated that 50,000 to 600,000 foraging ants could ascend an individual citrus tree in a single day.
Unlike the Argentine ant, the status of Formica perpilosa Wheeler (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) as a pest is not documented. Indigenous to the United States, this ant ranges from central Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas westward to California (Wheeler & Wheeler 1986). In the arid southwest, it nests around the roots of bushes or trees near streams (Wheeler & Wheeler 1986). It is therefore ideally suited to infest the irrigated soils of vineyards in the Coachella Valley (Riverside County, California), where it nests at the base of grapevines in close proximity to its major honeydew source, the vine mealybug, Planococcus ficus (Signoret) (Homoptera: Pseudococcidae).
Ants reduce the effectiveness of biological control by their cultivation and protection of homopteran pests from their predators and parasitoids (Prins et al.
1Accepted for publication 24 July 2003. 2University of California Cooperative Extension, Ventura, California 93003. 3University of California Cooperative Extension, Indio, California 92201.
31

32 J. Agric. Urban Entomol. Vol. 20, No. 1 (2003)
1990). Homopteran populations grow larger and more stable, and their rate of dispersal increases when ants are present (Hölldobler & Wilson 1990). A strategy that weakens or breaks the mutualistic association between ants and homopterans can thus have major consequences for pest management. For example, reducing the number of ants tending and protecting the homopterans will leave the latter vulnerable to predation and parasitism, thereby reducing their population as well (Moreno et al. 1987).
Chemical control of ants is primarily accomplished by the application of residual insecticides or use of toxic baits (Hedges 1997). Unless properly applied, however, residual insecticides are ineffective (Rust et al. 1996) and kill a significant proportion of beneficial organisms (Smith et al. 1996). To overcome this problem in grapes, Phillips & Sherk (1991) used a hand-held compressed air sprayer to direct insecticide to the base of vines where the ants were concentrated while avoiding application to the foliage, where beneficial organisms are found. This approach was effective, but it was difficult for growers to treat large areas using this method. Therefore, our first objective was to develop a practical method to apply residual insecticides in a target-specific manner to control F. perpilosa in vineyards.
Moreno et al. (1987) used residual insecticides to control Argentine ants in citrus. In combination with skirt-pruning, they applied chlorpyrifos or diazinon as a barrier on the trunk or on the ground around trees. Tree banding with repellents or sticky substances can also prevent Argentine ants from tending honeydew-producing homopterans (James et al. 1995; Shorey et al. 1996). Because these strategies are labor-intensive and not practical or cost-effective, growers have avoided using them. Another drawback of residual insecticides is that they kill foraging ants but not reproductives nor the majority of workers in the nest (Knight & Rust 1990, 1991). The use of baits would be practical and more effective approach to ant control in citrus.
An effective liquid bait reduces the need for broadcast sprays, thereby decreasing the amount of insecticide used to control ants (Hooper-Bui & Rust 2001). A slow-acting toxin in a highly attractive bait may potentially be distributed throughout the colony by exploiting the recruitment and food-sharing behavior of ants. Bait stations reduce the exposure of the crop and laborers to insecticide, eliminate the need for food tolerances, and do not interfere with biological control. We believe that low-toxicity baits delivered in stations would provide growers with a powerful and safe method to control ants. Therefore, the second objective was to evaluate the efficacy of liquid baits in reducing the number of Argentine ants in citrus groves.
Materials and Methods
Test sites. Four growers in the Coachella Valley (Riverside County, California) and one in the Ojai Valley (Ventura County, California) provided us with acreage of table grape vineyards and Valencia orange trees, respectively. Both sites are located inland in southern California, however, the hot, arid climate of Coachella contrasts with the more moderate conditions in Ojai.
Experimental design. Each of the four growers in the Coachella Valley provided a 2.8-ha block of vineyards. Each block was divided into four 0.7-ha plots where the two treatments, insecticide spray, and untreated control were ran-

KLOTZ et al.: Targeted Ant Control in Groves and Vineyards

33

domly assigned, providing two replicates of each per farm. Each plot consisted of 24 rows with approximately 50 vines per row.
In the Ojai Valley, we were provided 15.8 ha of orange trees. Two different bait applications and untreated controls were randomly assigned to 12 0.6-ha plots such that each treatment was replicated four times. Each plot consisted of a 9 × 12 block of trees. An additional seven rows of trees served as a buffer zone between adjacent plots.
Monitoring. To estimate ant numbers in vineyards, we set 18 pitfall traps through the center three rows of each plot with six traps per row. Outer rows of each side of the sampled area served as a buffer zone between treatments. Traps were made from 250-ml plastic cups containing approximately 50 ml of antifreeze. Traps were set in the soil so that the top of the cup was flush with the ground surface. A plywood cover was set above the top of the trap to prevent dirt and debris from falling in but leaving enough space for ants to crawl under and fall into the trap. Traps were left for 24 h, after which the number of ants caught was counted.
In citrus, sucrose water monitoring tubes for Argentine ants were constructed according to specifications described by Klotz et al. (2000). Tubes were filled with 25% sucrose water, weighed on an electronic top-loader scale (model GT4100, OHAUS Corp., Florham Park, New Jersey) and taped to the trunks of nine trees located in the center of each plot. To correct for evaporative water loss from monitoring tubes, two additional tubes were filled with 25% sucrose water, weighed and each placed in a tree in the center of each plot. To prevent ants from feeding at control tubes, the tubes were suspended from a branch on a string coated with Stikem Special (Seabright, Emeryville, California). After 24 h, the tubes were collected and reweighed. Consumption of sucrose water from monitoring tubes by the ants was obtained by correcting for evaporative water loss from the control tubes. Consumption is directly related to the number of ants that visit a monitoring tube (Reierson et al. 1998), thus providing an estimate of ant numbers. Estimates of ant numbers were made at all sites both before and after treatments on a biweekly basis.
Insecticide treatments. For ant control in vineyards, two applications of an insecticide were made early in the growing season. Chlorpyrifos (Lorsban-4E, Dow AgroSciences, Indianapolis, Indiana) was applied with a sprayer mounted on an all terrain vehicle (Fig. 1) at the label rate of 2.35 l per hectare (2.0 pints/acre) on February 23, and March 15, 2000. Spray nozzles attached at ends of the boom were directed below the leaf canopy at the base of the vines where ant nests were located. Because the cultivated region between vine rows was found to have little or no ant activity, the spray-rig was designed to target nests and foraging ants concentrated in the soil berm at the base of the vines.
Bait treatments in citrus consisted of liquid baits containing 0.0001% technical thiamethoxam (Syngenta, Greensboro, North Carolina) or technical fipronil (Aventis, Montvale, New Jersey) in 25% sucrose water. Baits were delivered in 320-ml capacity AdvanceTM ACE Stations (Whitmire Micro-Gen Research Laboratories, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri). The stations were placed on the ground along the irrigation lines at every fourth tree in a row (27/plot). Stations were removed from treated plots before monitoring and replaced and filled with fresh bait afterwards. Control plots were not baited.

34 J. Agric. Urban Entomol. Vol. 20, No. 1 (2003)
Fig. 1. Spray-rig for ant control: (1) 4' spray boom mounted in front of ATV; (2) 1.5 adjustable extension sleeve secured by two bolts; (3) 6" steel tubing (1" diameter) with v-shaped welding rod in front. This unit is attached to (2) by a hinge and spring, which allows it to fold back when it hits an object; (4) two spray nozzles attached to each end of the boom. The nozzles are controlled by independent ON-OFF valves; (5) pressure valve mounted between two control valves; (6) 25 gallon fiber-glass tank equipped with electric pump mounted in back of ATV.
Statistical methods. Using Systat statistical software (Systat 1999) a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on each data set (ant counts in pitfall traps in vineyards and consumption of sucrose water in citrus groves) before and after insecticide treatment. We were primarily interested in the main treatment effect, which compares the height of the treatment profiles over time. Furthermore, the "simple effects" of treatments are the separate ANOVAS at each sample date (Keppel 1991). These simple effects can pinpoint which dates had significant differences among the treatments.
Vineyards. There were two pretreatment and nine post-treatment counts for ants caught in pitfall traps in vineyards. We did separate repeated measure ANOVAS on the pre- and post-treatment data. We reasoned that pretreatment data should show no differences between treatment conditions, while post-

KLOTZ et al.: Targeted Ant Control in Groves and Vineyards

35

treatment data should show differences in the heights of the profiles, and that combining them into one data set would confound the interpretation of the results.
The data were plotted to check for deviations from normality. A logarithmic transformation gave the best visual fit to a normal distribution by removing much of the skewness apparent in the data. In the repeated measures design we considered the four vineyards and the two treatments as non-repeating fixed factors, and trials over time as the repeated factor. There was significant variability among vineyards; in using vineyards as a fixed factor we are describing what happened at these specific locations (Wilkinson et al. 1996). We would need to sample many more vineyards to generalize about them. In all cases replicates within vineyards were not a significant source of variability, so we pooled that term with the model's error term (Sokal & Rohlf 1969), which was then used for the tests of significance.
Citrus. There were four pre- and seven post-treatment measurements of sucrose water consumption by ants in citrus. These data were plotted, and we found that a square root transformation gave the best visual fit to a normal distribution. As in the above, we did separate repeated measure ANOVAS on the pre- and post-treatment data. In the repeated measures design we considered treatment as the nonrepeated factor and trials over time as the repeated factor. Furthermore, the four plots for each treatment were a random variable nested within treatments. The mean squares of this variable were used as the model's error team for the treatment effect. The first post-treatment data (July 13) were excluded from the analysis because the treatments did not have time to be fully effective at this date. Subsequent to that date the treatment profiles did not cross.

Results
Vineyards. Figure 2 shows the pooled results for these trials. First we analyzed the two pretreatment dates. For the main treatment effect the ANOVA was not significant (F  0.4; df  1, 280; P > 0.5). For the nine post-treatment dates, the ANOVA for the treatment factor was highly significant (F  40.8; df  1, 279; P < 0.00001). This result means that there was a difference in average height of the treatment profiles (the control and the Lorsban) where height is a measure of the number of ants in pitfall traps. The "simple" effects for the treatment variable are the ANOVAS for each date, which contrast the control and Lorsban. These ANOVAS of the simple effects show that for each sample date from March 9 through May 18 the number of ants in pitfall traps was significantly lower in the Lorsban-treated areas. From June 1 through the end of the experiment on June 29, there was no significant difference between the treated and untreated areas.
Citrus. Figure 3 shows the results for these trials. The decline in sucrose water consumption on several of the monitoring dates was due to irrigation or low temperature, which reduced ant foraging. First we analyzed the four pretreatment dates. For the main treatment effect the ANOVA was not significant (F  0.61; df  2, 9; P  0.6). Therefore, there were no differences in the height profiles of the control or treatments.
For the last six post-treatment data samples the ANOVA for the treatment factor was significant (F  11.9; df  2, 9; P  0.003). Multiple comparisons

36 J. Agric. Urban Entomol. Vol. 20, No. 1 (2003)
Fig. 2. Natural logarithm of the mean number of ants per pitfall trap in vineyards.
among the treatment means (with Bonferroni correction) show that the control profile is significantly higher than that of the thiamethoxam (F  11.9; df  1, 9; P  0.02) or the fipronil (F  22.2; df  1, 9; P  0.003). Furthermore, the fipronil and thiamethoxam profiles do not differ significantly (F  1.6; df  1, 9; P  0.75).
The "simple" effects for the treatment variable are the ANOVAS for each date, which contrast the control, fipronil, and thiamethoxam. From August 9 until September 20, the control and treatment profiles were significantly different. On October 4, the treatment means are still different. However, an unusually large variability among the replicates within plots that we are using for the ANOVA's error term prevented us from obtaining a significant result for that date (P  0.09).
Discussion The species composition of the ant­homopteran­plant association in the two cropping systems is different, but they share similar characteristics that allow for chemically focused ant treatments. In both systems, ants nest at the base of plants and ascend into the canopy to forage. In the hot, arid climate of the Coachella Valley, F. perpilosa build their nests in the shade below the vine canopy where drip irrigation provides them with water. The majority of ants trapped were F. perpilosa, with a few Solenopsis spp.; however, this study only refers to

KLOTZ et al.: Targeted Ant Control in Groves and Vineyards

37

Fig. 3. Sucrose water consumption by Argentine ants in citrus. Numbers are mean values of sucrose water consumed during a 24-h monitoring period.
the former species, which is the primary pest. In the citrus grove, each tree is associated with its own nest of L. humile, usually located on the south side (Markin 1968). The ants ascend the trunk into the canopy on a single well-defined trail to tend citrus mealybugs, Planococcus citri (Risso) and various species of scale (Markin 1970a).
Our chemical treatments in the two cropping systems were designed to intercept the foraging traffic into the canopy. In vineyards, insecticide spray was directed below the foliage to create an insecticidal barrier on the vine trunks (Phillips & Sherk 1991). In the citrus grove, the bait stations were placed adjacent to irrigation lines, which the ants use as guidelines for travel. Use of baits and directed sprays not only minimizes pesticide drift, but also reduces potential residual deposits of insecticides on the foliage (J. H. K., unpublished data), which could negatively impact biological control agents.
Residual insecticides like Lorsban are effective against foraging ants but do not eliminate the colony. Consequently, ants return when the residual insecticide degrades, which can occur within weeks in the hot, dry conditions in the Coachella Valley. However, if properly timed, applications of Lorsban early in the season can provide a significant reduction of ants for nine weeks. In spring, the ant colonies are undergoing rapid growth, and acquisition of an adequate food supply is critical to their success. By eliminating many of the foraging ants we were able to inhibit colony growth resulting in low numbers of ants later. With the regulatory discontinuance of organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, however,

38 J. Agric. Urban Entomol. Vol. 20, No. 1 (2003)
alternative treatments are necessary. Baiting is the preferred method to control F. perpilosa, but unfortunately this species will not forage most granular fire ant baits or liquid Argentine ant baits (M. K. R., unpublished data), requiring the need to use sprays for control and pitfall traps for monitoring. Additional research on the feeding preferences of F. perpilosa is needed.
Similarly, for L. humile, the application of baits in citrus should commence in late February to early March when the new seasonal life cycle of Argentine ants begins (Markin 1970b). The unicoloniality of Argentine ants makes them particularly amenable to bait treatment. Markin (1968) estimated that in 5 d the exchange of ants between neighboring nests is >50% of the worker population. Therefore, a toxic bait consumed by ants from one nest in a citrus grove will be gradually spread into surrounding nests. A liquid bait formulation is ideal for Argentine ants because 99% of the food brought into the nest is in liquid form (Markin 1970c). Water is a good carrier because during the hot dry months of August, September, and October, Argentine ants recruit to it (Markin 1970a), and when combined with sucrose it becomes a highly attractive bait to Argentine ants (Baker et al. 1985). Sucrose is a primary component of honeydew (Auclair 1963), which is the dietary staple of Argentine ants (Markin 1970a). Fipronil and thiamethoxam were chosen as bait toxicants due to their excellent performance in laboratory tests. Hooper-Bui & Rust (2000) obtained 100% queen kill in Argentine ants with 0.0001% fipronil in 25% sucrose water. In field tests in Chilean citrus groves, Ripa et al. (1999) used a dye to measure the distance and speed of dispersion of this bait. At 72 h, the bait was found 27 m away from the feeding site.
In conclusion, directed sprays and baits can be used effectively to reduce the number of ants in vineyards and citrus orchards, and are less likely to kill beneficial organisms than full canopy treatments. Our goal is to develop bait formulations and delivery systems that are more effective against ants and less disruptive to the environment than directed insecticidal sprays. In addition, to be feasible as a cost-effective pest management strategy, we must also demonstrate that reductions in ant populations through bait technologies will ultimately reduce the number of pest homopterans in these agricultural systems.
Acknowledgment
We thank growers in the Coachella and Ojai valleys for providing the experimental sites to conduct our research and J. Hampton-Beesley for her assistance in the laboratory. We thank Dr. Robert Beaver, Department of Statistics, UC Riverside, for his statistical advice. We appreciate the invaluable assistance in the field of Rosa Maria and Gloria Ibarra in the Coachella Valley and John Rodgers and Coralie Clement in the Ojai Valley. We also thank the California Citrus Research Board, Department of Pesticide Regulation, Desert Grape Administrative Committee, and the Table Grape Commission for their financial support of this study.
References Cited
Auclair, J. L. 1963. Aphid feeding and nutrition. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 8: 439­490. Baker, T. C., S. E. Van Vorhis Key & L. K. Gaston. 1985. Bait preference tests for the
Argentine ant. J. Econ. Entomol. 78: 1083­1088.

KLOTZ et al.: Targeted Ant Control in Groves and Vineyards

39

Hedges, S. A. 1997. Ants, pp. 502­589. In S. Hedges [Ed.], Handbook of Pest Control, 8th ed. Mallis, Cleveland, Ohio.
Hölldobler, B. & E. O. Wilson. 1990. The ants. Belknap, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Hooper-Bui, L. M. & M. K. Rust. 2000. Oral toxicity of abamectin, boric acid, fipronil, and
hydramethylnon to groups of workers and queens of the Argentine ant, Linepithema humile (Mayr). J. Econ. Entomol. 93: 858­864. 2001. An oral bioassay for the toxicity of hydramethylnon to individual workers and queens of Argentine ants, Linepithema humile. Pest Manag. Sci. 57: 1011­1016. Horton, J. R. 1918. Control of the Argentine ant in orange groves. Farmer's Bulletin 928, USDA, 20 pp. James, D., M. Stevens, K. O'Malley & R. Heffer. 1995. Strategies for controlling ants in citrus orchards show promise. Aust. Citrus News. June: 20, 23. Keppel, G. 1991. Design and analysis: a researcher's handbook. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. Klotz, J., L. Greenberg & G. Venn. 2000. Evaluation of two hydramethylnon granular baits for control of Argentine ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Sociobiology 36: 201­207. Knight, R. L. & M. K. Rust. 1990. Repellency and efficacy of insecticides against foraging workers in laboratory colonies of Argentine ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). J. Econ. Entomol. 83: 1402­1408. 1991. Efficacy of formulated baits for control of Argentine ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). J. Econ. Entomol. 84: 510­514. Markin, G. P. 1967. Food distribution within colonies of the Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr). Ph.D. Dissertation. Univ. of California, Riverside, 139 pp. 1968. Nest relationship of the Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). J. Kansas Entomol. Soc. 41: 511­516. 1970a. Foraging behavior of the Argentine ant in a California citrus grove. J. Econ. Entomol. 63: 740­744.
1970b. The seasonal life cycle of the Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), in southern California. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 38: 1238­1242.
1970c. Food distribution within laboratory colonies of the Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr). Ins. Soc. 17:127­158.
Moreno, D. S., P. B. Haney & R. F. Luck. 1987. Chlorpyrifos and diazinon as barriers to Argentine ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) foraging on citrus trees. J. Econ. Entomol. 80: 208­214.
Phillips, P. A. & C. J. Sherk. 1991. To control mealybugs, stop honeydew-seeking ants. Calif. Agric. 45: 26­28.
Prins, A. J., H. G. Robertson & A. Prins. 1990. Pest ants in urban and agricultural areas of southern Africa, pp. 25­33. In R. K. Vander Meer, K. Jaffe, and A. Cedeno [Eds.], Applied Myrmecology, a World Perspective. Westview, Boulder, Colorado.
Reierson, D. A., M. K. Rust & J. Hampton-Beesley. 1998. Monitoring with sugar water to determine the efficacy of treatments to control Argentine ants, Linepithema humile (Mayr), pp. 78­82. In Proc. Nat. Conf. on Urban Entomol., San Diego, California.
Ripa, R., F. Rodriguez, M. K. Rust & I. Larral. 1999. Distribution of liquid food and bait in colonies of Argentine ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), pp. 225­229. In The 3rd International Conference in Urban Pests, Prague, Czech Republic.
Rust, M. K., K. Haagsma & D. A. Reierson. 1996. Barrier sprays to control Argentine ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). J. Econ. Entomol. 89: 134­137.
Shorey, H. H., L. K. Gaston, R. G. Gerber, C. B. Sisk & P. A. Phillips. 1996. Formulating farnesol and other ant-repellent semiochemicals for exclusion of Argentine ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) from citrus trees. Physiol. Chem. Ecol. 25: 114­119.
Smith, L. M., A. G. Appel & G. J. Keever. 1996. Cockroach control methods can cause other pest problems. Ala. Agric. Exp. Sta., Highlights Agric. Res. 43: 5­6.

40 J. Agric. Urban Entomol. Vol. 20, No. 1 (2003)
Sokal, R. R., and F. J. Rohlf. 1969. Biometry. W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 776 pp.
Systat 1999. Version 9. Statistics I. SPSS, Chicago, Illinois. Vega, S. J. & M. K. Rust. 2001. The Argentine ant--a significant invasive species in
agricultural, urban and natural environments. Sociobiology 37: 3­25. Wheeler, G. C. & J. N. Wheeler. 1986. The ants of Nevada. Natural History Museum of
Los Angeles County, Los Angeles, California. Wilkinson, L., G. Blank, and C. Gruber. 1996. Desktop Data Analysis with Systat.
Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 798 pp.

