 

 

 

 
1. 
 

Can We Choose Evil?  

Mark Coeckelbergh 

University of Liège, Belgium 

 

***** 

Introduction 

A Discussion of the Problem of Radical Evil as a Modern and 

Ancient Problem of Freedom 

The  problem  discussed  in  this  paper  emerges  from  work  I’ve 
done  on  the  modern  ideal  of  autonomy.1  I  found  that  autonomy  is  often 
seen as a morally neutral term. Put in terms of good and evil, this means 
that it is held consistent to say that a person is autonomous and chooses 
evil. Autonomy, by itself, so it is argued, is neutral with regard to good or 
evil. On this view, whether or not I choose evil, if I make this choice in the 
capacity  of  being  my  own  master,  of  governing  and  ruling  myself,  then 
there is nothing in the way of autonomy that I lack. For example, Feinberg 
argues  that  autonomy  is  consistent  with  ruthlessness,  cruelty,  and  other 
(moral)  failings,  and  that  it  is  therefore  at  best  only  a  partial  ideal 
“insufficient for full moral excellence.”2  

Is this a tenable position? In this paper I discuss whether it makes 
sense  to  say  that  a  person  has  a  (real)  choice  between  good  and  evil, 
regardless of his state in terms of autonomy. First, I clarify the problem by 
using aspects from the work of Plato and Augustine. Second, I show how 
Kant attempts to deal with this problem by discussing key aspects of his 
moral theory, in particular his concept of radical evil.  

For  the  sake  of  my  argument,  I  assume  in  this  paper  that  it  is 

meaningful to speak of ‘good’ and ‘evil’.  
 
2. 

Plato and Augustine 
 
The dominant contemporary view that we are free to choose evil 
can be challenged by looking at Plato’s ideal of the person. This ideal is, 
briefly put, to have vision of the Good and reach the Good. On the basis of 
my reading of the Phaedrus and Book VII of the Republic, it seems that 
this ideal does not allow for any choice between good and evil. Either we 
know the Good, and then we have no choice, since it is inconceivable for 
us to want anything else than the Good; or we don’t know the Good, and 

 

340 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

then we don’t really have an idea of good and evil anyway. Of course, it is 
possible to turn away from the Good, but, so it seems, this is not an option 
once  I  really  know  the  Good.  Once  I  liberated  myself,  or  once  I  am 
liberated, being no longer chained in the cave and having to look at the 
shadows of the Good, once I’ve seen the Good itself, it seems that I have 
no  reason  to  want  evil.  However,  ‘reason’  is  perhaps  not  the  best  term 
here.  If  I’ve  seen  the  Good,  I  enjoy  what  Plato  calls  ‘madness’.  This 
madness is not the madness ascribed to me by others who have not seen 
the  Good,  when  I  return  to  the  cave.  Rather,  I  have  in  mind  here  the 
madness Plato ascribes to the “lover of the Beautiful”3, which, by analogy, 
can be ascribed to whom we could call the lover of the Good. Since both 
the  Beautiful and  the Good are  Ideas,  I  believe  this  analogy  is justified. 
Therefore,  I  infer  that  once  we’ve  seen  the  Good,  or  once  we’ve 
recollected  the  Good  from  a  former  life,  as  Plato  understood  it,  we  are 
unable  to  make  any  choice  with  regard  to  good  and  evil,  since  we  are 
already lovers of the Good. This kind of madness is, according to Plato, a 
divine gift, and different from madness that is evil.4 Once this madness has 
been given to us, then, we are unable ever to choose evil. 

But  are  we  not  free  to  turn  away  from  the  Good?  Consider 
Augustine’s  position.  He,  too,  has  a  notion  of  ‘divine  gift’,  namely  his 
concept of grace, and an account of turning towards the one or away from 
the  one,  which  Augustine  calls  God.  The  general  influence  of  Platonic 
thought  on  Christianity  in  general,  and  Augustine  in  particular,  is  well-
known. However, there is a major difference between Plato and Augustine 
on the issue on choosing evil, and this difference is not the terms ‘grace’ 
or ‘God’, but a fundamentally different view of the extent of freedom we 
have.  According  to  Augustine,  we  do  have  a  choice  between  good  and 
evil,  since  God  gave  us  a  free  will.  In  On  Free  Choice  of  the  Will 
Augustine  asserts  that  “all  good  proceeds  from  God”,5  but  that  we  can 
choose evil, and that it is our responsibility if we do so. In the Confessions 
Augustine  claims  that  “we  do  evil  because  we  do  so  of  our  own  free 
will...”6 Augustine then inquires into the grounds for doing evil. He asks: 
If I do evil because of my free will, “how, then, do I come to possess a 
will that can choose to do wrong and refuse to do good...? Who put this 
will into me? Who sowed this seed of bitterness in me...?”7 He blames the 
devil  for  doing  that,  but  realizes  that  this  is  no  answer  to  the  question, 
since we still wonder why the devil got wicked. Augustine writes: “How 
did he come to possess the wicked will which made him a devil, when the 
Creator, who is entirely good, made him a good angel and nothing else?”8

 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

341 

In spite of this problem, not finding a ground for evil, Augustine 
maintains that we are free to turn away from God and Good. The capacity 
of free will is given to us, and we can choose what to do with it. But if we 
choose evil, “God the Creator is not at fault.”9 To summarize, Augustine 
wants  to  maintain  that  the  freedom  of  the  will  includes  the  freedom  to 
choose between good and evil. The problem with this view, however, is 
that he can’t find a ground for choosing evil. He is unable to give a good 
reason why we have a real choice between good and evil.  

Note that this problem can be solved by assuming that there is, 
instead of one good God, a good and an evil principle in the world and in 
ourselves,  light  and  darkness.  Then  there  is  no  problem  regarding  the 
grounds  for  choosing  evil,  since  if  I  am  merely  a  part  of  the  stage  on 
which the cosmic battle between good and evil features, I have no choice. 
But this route Augustine closed. First he was a convert to the Manichean 
religion,  holding  such  beliefs.  But,  as  we  learn  from  the  Confessions, 
having  been  influenced  by  Neo-Platonism,  he  argues  against  his  former 
religion,  rejecting  the  dualism  and  determinism  of  the  Manicheans.  He 
denies that there is an evil principle that stands on the same footing as, that 
can  claim  as  much  reality  as,  the  good  (God).  Furthermore,  he  believes 
that human beings are not determined by outer forces, but that they have a 
free will and that they can exercise this free will to choose between good 
and evil.  

I suggest that it is precisely his belief in the freedom to choose 
between good and evil that led Augustine to consider grace, since he must 
have realized that if there is no ground for choosing evil, there is also - at 
first sight - no ground for choosing good. God’s grace, then, can awaken 
our souls to the love of the Good; grace provides a ground for choosing 
good. But then Augustine has the problem that he has to marry his view 
that we have free will and that this freedom extends to the choice between 
good and evil, on the one hand, with the view that we cannot choose the 
Good  but  that  the  Good  is  something  that  happens  to  us  as  a  gift  from 
God, on the other hand. If we are dependent on God in this way, are we 
still  free?  Moreover,  again  Augustine’s  view  shows 
to  be  very 
asymmetric:  the  Good  happens  to  me,  but  evil  is  my  own  fault.  In  any 
case,  whatever  the  further  problems  with  this  view,  with  regard  to  the 
issue of choosing evil it is clear that if we consider Augustine’s view as 
including  the concept  of  grace,  there  is  still  the  problem  that  -  although 
there  may  be  a  ground  for  choosing  the  good  -  there  is  no  ground  for 
choosing  evil.  I’m  still  ‘free’  to  choose  evil,  but  it’s  not  clear  on  what 
basis I can make this choice. 

 

 

342 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

3. 

Note  that  neither  the  doctrine  of  original  sin  nor  Augustine’s 
view that there is a part in the soul that is drawn to goodness solves the 
problem. It is plain that there being ‘original sin’ does not prevent people 
from choosing good, and that there being a part of the soul that is drawn to 
goodness does not prevent people from choosing evil. It seems to me that 
Augustine wants to maintain the idea that we have the freedom to choose 
between good and evil, whatever our ‘human nature’ may be. 

 
A problem of authority and obedience 
 
The problem discussed so far can be put in terms of the authority 
of the good. If I know and acknowledge the good and/or God as having 
moral  authority  over  me,  do  I  still  have  the  freedom  to  disobey  this 
authority?  The  problem  discussed  arises  only  if  we  assume  that  there  is 
something like ‘the morally good’ and that this morally good should direct 
our actions, in other words, that the good has moral authority. Only then a 
problem of obedience arises: Do I have the choice to disobey the moral 
authority of the good? Is there a ground for such disobedience? If we have 
a free will, does that include the freedom to disobey in this sense? Plato’s 
position  can  be  rephrased  as  the  view  that  this  disobedience  is  not 
possible.  Augustine’s  position  can  be  put  as  the  claim  that  God  having 
moral  authority,  or  God  having  given  the  good  to  us  which  has  moral 
authority,  does  not  exclude  our  freedom  to  disobey,  to  turn  away  from 
God and good, and to choose evil. The problem with the latter position is, 
as  I  argued,  that  if  I  really  know God  and good,  and  recognize  them  as 
having moral authority, there seems to be no ground for choosing evil.  

 
A fundamental tension in Kant’s theory of freedom 
 
There is a tension between two positions in Kant in regard to the 

problem of the ground for choosing evil. 

The  first  is  that  there  is  no  ground  for  choosing  evil.  In  the 
Groundwork, Kant writes that the categorical imperative10 is the supreme 
principle, that what he calls ‘ordinary human reason’ does always have it 
before  its  eyes  and  uses  it  as  a  norm  of  judgment,  a  “compass”  to 
distinguish  good  and  evil.11  On  this  view,  then,  there  is  no  ground  for 
choosing evil. If I have this compass, I know what good is, so why should 
I  choose  evil?  The  problem  with  this  view  is  that  we  may  still  not  act 
accordingly, we may still do evil. In the Groundwork Kant sees this as a 

4. 

 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

343 

 
problem  of  a  tension  between  inclination  and  duty.  But  do  we  have  a 
ground to follow our inclinations?  

The second position is that there is a real choice. That is, at least, 
my interpretation of Kant’s distinction between Wille and Willkür, as we 
find  this  in  the  Religion.  Briefly  said,  Wille  makes  the  norm  (this  is 
autonomy) and Willkür chooses in the light of this norm. This distinction, 
therefore, leaves room for choosing evil. Choosing evil can be seen as a 
failure of Willkür to ‘do its job’, or a failure of the person to let Willkür 
perform  its  proper  function.  To  conclude,  by  introducing  these  concepts 
Kant  seems  to  be  able  to  account  for  the  fact  that  a  (rational  and  even 
autonomous)  person  may  still  choose  to  do  evil.  However,  the  question 
then is on what grounds a person can make that choice. And is this view 
not in contradiction with the position Kant takes in the Groundwork? 

To  solve  this  tension  we  could  go  for  the  first  position,  and 
disregard  the  Wille-Willkür  distinction  to  avoid  a  contradiction  with  the 
first position. If we look at Kant’s view of autonomy in the Groundwork, 
we see that he defines autonomy in terms of determination, in the sense 
that I determine the law and the law determines me. This is independence 
in  the  sense  that  I  determine  the  law,  but  not  independence  to  choose 
between good and evil. Kant equates the principle of autonomy with the 
categorical imperative, which means that the rule “Never to choose except 
in such a way that in the same volition the maxims of your choice are also 
present as universal law’ is “an imperative - that is, that the will of every 
rational being is necessarily bound to the rule as a condition.”12 However, 
this  could  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  our  will  is  only  bound  to  the 
categorical imperative in so far as we’re rational beings. So although we 
may have the capacity to let ourselves be determined by the law, we may 
not exercise this capacity. But on what grounds can I decide to do that? 
The problem of choosing evil remains unsolved. 

Another way of trying to solve the tension is to go for the second 
position.  Let  us  look  again  at  the  Wille-Willkür  distinction.  Bernstein 
suggests that Kant decided to introduce this distinction to account for the 
basic presupposition in Kant’s moral theory that “we are agents who have 
the capacity to choose freely to obey or disobey what is dictated by the 
moral law.”13 According to Bernstein, Kant views moral agents as being 
“radically  free  -  that  is,  to  be  an  agent  who  can  choose  good  or  evil 
maxims.”14 However, as I indicated earlier, this view is problematic since 
it is not clear on what basis we, or Willkür, can make a choice between 
good and evil. I argue now that Kant’s discussion of radical evil, in the 
Religion, is an attempt to deal with this problem.  

 

 

344 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

5. 

 
 
Kant’s account of radical evil 
 
What is radical evil? Let us first see what Kant means by ‘evil’, 
or an ‘evil’ maxim. Evil lies not in following your inclinations. Following 
your  natural  inclinations  is  “not  a  matter  of  reproach.”15  We  may  adopt 
natural inclinations as an incentive in our maxim, as long as this incentive 
is  not  primary.  The  issue  is not which  incentives  a  maxim  contains, but 
“how these incentives are ordered.”16 in particular whether or not duty or 
respect for the law is a primary incentive. If it’s not, the agent’s maxim 
(and consequently the agent’s behavior) is evil. 

What  does  Kant  mean  with  radical  evil?  It  means  neither 
‘extreme evil’, nor is it related to having a ‘diabolical will’. Rather, Kant 
speaks of a ‘propensity’ (Hang) to evil. What is this? I choose to clarify 
this briefly on the basis of Bernstein’s analysis in his book Radical Evil.17 
We can distinguish the following three Kantian concepts: pre-disposition 
(Anlage), disposition (Gesinnung), and propensity (Hang). First, according 
to Kant we have a pre-disposition to good. Second, although we have this 
predisposition,  “it  is  only  by  exercising  our  free  will  (Willkür)  that  we 
actually become morally good (or evil).”18 We are not born morally good, 
but we become good if we incorporate the moral law in our maxim as the 
primary incentive. However, there is no such thing as ‘being good’ if this 
is  to  mean  that  we  have  a  fixed  and  unchangeable  disposition.  We  are 
always free to choose otherwise, or so it seems. Bernstein interprets Kant’s 
view that a disposition is not acquired in time as meaning that “it is not 
causally  determined  but,  rather,  issues  from  our  freedom.”19  Thus,  with 
‘radical evil’ Kant does not mean that we are evil by nature, if this is to 
taken to mean that we are bound to do evil; on the contrary, the concept 
refers to (the ground for, or the source of) our capacity to choose freely. 
Wood comments: 

Radical evil is not to be sought in man’s predispositions, in the 
moral capacities of man as a finite rational being, but must, if it exists at 
all,  be  found  in  man’s  use  of  his  capacities  through  his  power  of  free 
choice, his Willkür. It is only in a very special sense, then, that we may 
call man good or evil “by nature.”20

Kant’s  concept  of  radical  evil  and  his  claim  that  we  have 
propensity to evil, then, has to be interpreted as a way of accounting for 
the capacity and the possibility to choose otherwise, including evil. First, 
although we all have a predisposition to good we can always choose evil. 

 

345 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

 
Radical evil is the property of the human will which makes it possible “to 
prefer  the  incentives  of  inclination  to  those  of  duty,  and  hence  to  do 
evil.”21 Second, although we may ‘be’ good, that is, in Kantian terms, have 
a disposition to good, we can always choose (to become) evil. To be evil is 
defined as an ‘in spite of’: “To say that a man is evil is to say that, having 
the capacity to be good, he is nonetheless evil”22. Kant’s concept of radical 
evil accounts for both possibilities, since in both cases we do not follow 
our predisposition to good. But does it really account for it? It does not 
explain why we do not follow our predisposition. Bernstein claims that it 
doesn’t do any conceptual work: “it simply reiterates the fact that human 
beings  who  are  conscious  of  the  moral  law  sometimes  (freely)  deviate 
from  it”  and  it  “does  not  have  any  exploratory  force  (practical  or 
theoretical at all!.”23 It turns out to be another name for the problem. But 
this, by itself, is an important conclusion: Kant’s insists on the freedom of 
human beings to choose between good and evil, but is not able to account 
for a ground which justifies a choice for evil.  

Note, however, that Kant is able to account for a choice for good. 
Therefore, Bernstein is mistaken when he concludes that “to ask why we 
freely  choose  to  adopt  good  or  evil  maxims  is  to  ask  an  impossible 
question”  since  “ultimately,  it  is  ‘inscrutable’  to  us.”24  Kant  is  able  to 
show  why  we  are  able  to  freely  choose  good.  In  interpreting  Kant’s 
account of radical evil in terms of radical freedom, Bernstein downplays 
the first pole of the tension I identified earlier. According to Kant, human 
beings  -  if  they  really  are  persons,  if  they  are  human  -  cannot  but 
recognize  the  authority  of  the  moral  law.  This  is  precisely  why  Kant 
categorically  rejects  the  possibility  of  man  as  a  devilish  being,  a  being 
with  a  diabolical  will.  So  although  people  may  be  free  to  choose  evil, 
having a propensity to evil, they are neither innately diabolical, since they 
are  predisposed  to  good,  nor  free  to  become  diabolical.  Concerning  the 
later,  I  disagree  with  Bernstein,  who  argues  that,  on  Kant’s  analysis  of 
Willkür, “we can choose to be perverse, we can choose to be devilish, we 
can choose to defy the moral law.”25 The problem with that choice remains 
that Kant cannot account for a ground, whereas for doing good, he offers 
(the  recognition  of)  the  existence  of  the  moral  law.  Certainly,  it  is 
questionable whether Kant is right about the existence of such a ground. 
But at least he can account for the possibility of choosing good within his 
own  framework.  If  we  only  look  at  Kant’s  concept  of  Willkür,  we  can 
understand  Bernstein’s  interpretation  of  radical  evil  in  terms  of  radical 
freedom. But this is only one side of the coin. Bernstein is right to say that 
Kant never compromises the “cardinal principle” that “human beings are 
morally  accountable  and  responsible,”26  but  this  principle  is  not  only 

 

346 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

related to the view that it is always within our power to choose between 
good  and  evil  maxims.  We  may  disobey  the  moral  law,  but  this  law 
remains the moral authority on which we are dependent as rational agents. 
Precisely because of this, we must bear complete moral responsibility for 
our choice, we are accountable. Therefore, Kant’s fundamental insight in 
morality is not only that he acknowledged “a profound moral truth about 
our radical free choice (Willkür)”; he also stresses that the will, through 
the faculty of Wille, taken as a specific aspect of the will next to Willkür, is 
bound  to  acknowledge  the  moral  law.  Therefore,  if  we  act  against  the 
moral law, we betray (the volitional and rational aspect of) our very being. 
As  Wood  argues  in  support  of  Kant:  “If  man  is  to  be  conceived  as  a 
morally  accountable  being  at  all,  it  must  be  presupposed  that  he 
understands  the  moral  imperative  as  binding  on  him,  and  consequently 
recognizes  this  imperative  as  an  incentive  to  action.”27  Furthermore,  the 
choice to be devilish, that is, to freely and consistently choose to defy the 
moral law, is on this view not possible, or, at least, entirely groundless.  

What is the argument in support of these last points made? Part of 
the source of Kant’s trouble is his conception of agency. Allison rightly 
points  to  Kant’s  distinction  between  willing  and  wishing,  giving  the 
following example: 

Thus, I can perfectly well really desire to be healthy and at the 
same  time  also  really  desire  to  eat  fattening  foods,  drink  to  excess  and 
lounge about rather than exercise. There is no inconsistency in this all, nor 
is there any sense to claim that I ought not to wish for or desire a scenario 
in which I could become healthy while still maintaining these habits. What 
I  cannot  do  is  will  to  be  healthy,  or,  more  properly,  will  to  attempt  to 
become healthy, while also refusing to change my behavior.28

I infer from this that, according to Kant, although we may wish to 
make an inclination our primary incentive, we cannot will this, we cannot 
will  evil,  we  can  only  will  good.  But  then  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  it  is 
possible that we choose evil, since the faculty of free choice is a volitional 
faculty,  a  faculty  of  the  will.  On  the  basis  of  this  distinction,  we  cannot 
choose  to  do  evil;  we  can  only  wish  to  do  evil.  Therefore,  according  to 
Kant,  if  we  act  against  the  moral  law,  “we  do  not  actually  will  that  our 
immoral  maxim  should  become  a  universal  law,  but  merely  take  the 
liberty of making an exception to it of ourselves.”29 We cannot reject the 
law; this would be incompatible with our predisposition to good. We only 
want an exception for ourselves. This is evil, and this is at the same time 
the reason why the possibility of a diabolical will is precluded, since then 
we would explicitly deny the authority of the law. And the reason why it is 

 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

347 

 
not possible, according to Kant, to deny the authority of the law, lies in his 
conception of (free) agency. If, for a free will, the moral law provides “the 
ultimate norm in terms of which its choices must be justified,” then “a free 
rational agent cannot reject the authority of the law without undermining 
its own agency.”30  

But  even  if  a  diabolical  will  is  precluded  by  Kant,  he  does  not 
preclude  the  possibility  of  choosing  and  doing  evil,  and  the  problem 
remains  on  which  grounds  I  can  will  and  choose  to  take  the  liberty  to 
make  an  exception  to  the  moral  law  for  myself.  It  may  be  true  that  “in 
order  to  be  accountable  and,  therefore  to  be  either  good  or  evil,  it  is 
necessary  to  recognize  the  validity  of  the  moral  law,”31  but  if  I  really 
recognize  and  respect  it,  what  is  the  ground  for  contravening  it?  How 
could I ever will to do so? 

To conclude, Kant stresses the freedom of the will, which creates 
the  problem  that  it  is  unclear  to  account  for  choosing  evil;  but  he  also 
maintains  that  the  will  is  bound  to  acknowledge  the  moral,  a  view  that 
suffers  from  his  insistence  on  freedom  of  the  will  (to  choose  evil).  The 
tension  between  these  two  aspects  remains,  so  deeply  embodied  and 
entrenched  in  his  account  of  radical  evil,  cannot  simply  be  dissolved  in 
favor of the ‘freedom’ aspect.  

Note  that  this  tension  is  in  fact  already  embodied  in  Kant’s 
concept  of  freedom  itself.  On  the  one  hand,  Kant  maintains  that  a  free 
being  determines  itself  spontaneously;  on  the  other  hand,  this  self-
determination  or  autonomy  is  held  to  only  make  sense  in  relation  to  a 
moral principle which provides the norm for justifying choice. “A free act 
requires  a  subjective  principle  or  maxim  in  accordance  with  which  an 
agent determines himself, just as the concept of freedom generally requires 
a moral law governing it in order to be a coherent concept at all.”32  

6. 

 
The problem of radical evil as a problem of freedom 
 
Is Kant’s problem our problem, and if so, why? It certainly is our 
problem if we want to extend the meaning of freedom to the freedom to 
choose  evil.  The  problem  discussed  in  this  paper  can  be  summarized  as 
resulting  from  a  tension  between  two  wishes,  or  ideals.  The  first  is  the 
(modern?) desire to be free. If this freedom is understood as including the 
freedom to choose between good and evil, however, the ideal of freedom 
clashes  with  the  ideal  of  moral  excellence,  being  good,  and  many  of  us 
would like to include in this ideal some notion of authority. We want to 
say that morality has authority, that we ought to choose good. However, 
the problem with this view is that it tends to make the notion of freedom of 

 

348 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

choice  redundant,  since  there  is  no  real  choice  anymore,  real  choice 
meaning grounded choice. What is the ground for doing evil, if we know 
the good and its authority?  

Kant’s  discussion  of  radical  evil  can  be  understood  from  this 
perspective,  and  from  the  perspective  of  the  problem  with  his  Wille-
Willkür view (and the tension with this view in the Groundwork) discussed 
above. 

In  an  attempt  to  hold  on  to  the  ideal  of  freedom  ‘at  all  costs’, 
Kant felt compelled to explain why we would still want to choose evil by 
saying  in  the  Religion  that  there  is  “a  radical  innate  evil  in  human 
nature,”33 more, that “man is evil by nature.”34 But what does this mean? 
Kant was faced with the difficulty to explain evil without destroying the 
spontaneity of the will. ‘By nature’ could not mean that man is determined 
to do evil. Otherwise a contradiction arises, which only could be avoided 
by destroying the freedom of the will, assigning a cause of evil other than 
the will itself, or give up the idea of the unity of the will.35 But this Kant is 
not prepared to do. Therefore, he ended up grounding evil in the freedom 
of the will itself. This is the radical evil in our nature. The problem with 
this  answer,  however,  is  that  at  the  same  time  Kant  believed  that  our 
original  predisposition  “is  a  predisposition  to  good.”36  This  leaves  him 
with the difficulty to explain why, if we have predisposition to good, we 
have  a  ground  to  choose  evil.  To  assume,  as  Kant  does,  that  there  is 
‘radical evil’, is therefore, it seems, not more than a reformulation of the 
problem. To say that there is a ground for choosing evil is, by itself, not an 
argument but an assumption. Moreover, even if we accept this assumption, 
it does not explain why we sometimes choose good, sometimes evil.  

Kant admitted his failure to account for the ground of (choosing) 
evil. But it would be wrong to call the problem of the origin of evil as it is 
discussed by Kant “a mystery.”37 I hope to have shown that the tension in 
his view, the ‘war with himself’ (to use Bernstein’s words), is in fact very 
understandable and explainable if we look at the assumptions that feed the 
tension, the trenches that mark the battle landscape. Kant fiercely holds on 
to his positions, and this means that the arguments in this framework move 
between discernable lines that can be made explicit. It may be, of course, 
that  we  can’t  solve  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  evil.  But  we  can  make 
clear  our  assumptions  about  freedom  and  agency  that  cause  us  in  the 
trouble we’re in, assumptions that are at the same time related to some of 
our finest human ideals and widely respected metaphysical views. 

Kant and Augustine could have adopted a fully dualistic view, as 
the Manicheans did. In that case, both good and evil have authority, and 

 

349 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

 
present us with a law. The struggle between good and evil in the person 
would then be a reflection or incarnation of a cosmic struggle between two 
forces, light and darkness, good and evil. But precisely because Kant and 
Augustine did refuse this route, rejecting dualism and not wanting to deny 
human  freedom,  the  problem  of  choosing  evil  emerged.  It  is  only  if  we 
belief that the Good has the only and full moral authority over our choices 
and  actions,  that  the  problem  ‘Is  there  a  ground  for  choosing  evil?’ 
emerges. Only because Kant gives the categorical imperative the nature of 
an imperative, giving this rule an imperial authority, that is, the full and 
total authority, the question of disobedience emerges. By assuming radical 
evil in human nature, it seems, at first sight, that Kant turns to a dualistic 
view  to  account  for  this  disobedience.  But  his  belief  in  the  self-
determining  power  of  the  rational  person,  who  rules  himself  and  at  the 
same time obeys the law, is to great to take his own claim that “man is evil 
by  nature”38  if  it  is  to  mean  that  there  is  something  constitutive  in  our 
nature that draws us to evil in a deterministic way. Rather, Kant’s claim 
“man is evil by nature” can only mean that it is possible to choose evil, but 
that we are free not to make use of this possibility. But is it really possible 
to choose evil, and on what grounds? The problem remains. Kant’s view 
of  autonomy  shows  the  tension  between  freedom  (to  choose  evil)  and 
obedience (to the moral law), but fails as an attempt to resolve this tension. 
Perhaps  this  is  the  price  we  have  to  pay:  (1)  if  we  want  to  keep  the 
heritage of Plato, that is, in this context, hold on to an idea of the Good 
that sees evil not as ‘the Evil’, as a separate principle having equal force 
and  authoritative  status,  but  as  the not-Good,  the  not-one,  the  manyness 
and imperfection of the world of appearance as compared with the oneness 
and perfection of the idea of the Good; or (2) if we want to retain the very 
idea  of  freedom  involved  in  this  discussion,  that  is,  is  the  idea  that  we 
cannot  blame  our  struggle  to  ‘outer’  forces,  but  that  we  ourselves  are 
responsible for turning towards or turning away from the Good. 

It  is  important  to  realize  the  significance  of  the  ‘prize’  I 
mentioned.  The  cost  of  holding  on  to  these  assumptions  is  not  just  the 
failure  to  resolve  the  tension  related  to  the  problem  of  evil  in  Kant’s 
account of morality. This is not just a problem of evil, or a problem with 
Kant.  Ultimately,  this  failure  bounces  back  to  the  credibility  of  our 
assumptions  and  the  coherence  of  our  beliefs  and  ideals,  including  our 
view of agency, morality, freedom, and autonomy (in so far as these views 
echo the aspects of Plato’s, Augustine’s, and Kant’s views I discussed in 
this  paper).  For  example,  concerning  a  widely  held  view  of  freedom, 
namely  the  view  that  we  are  free  to  reject  the  moral  law,  Seigfried 
remarks:  “If  Kant’s  explanation  of  the  freedom  of  the  will  could  not 

 

350 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

account for evil, it could not even ultimately account for human freedom, 
since [...] the possibility of both good and evil has to be accounted for if it 
is  to  be  maintained  that  the will  is  really  free.”39  Our beliefs  may  be  or 
may not be the right ones to have, but if we want to hold on to them surely 
much  more  work  is  to  be  done  to  make  sense  of  them  given  the 
philosophical problems discussed in this paper. 

 
Conclusion 
 
In my paper I have not solved the problem of choosing evil, but I 

7. 

have shown why it cannot be solved easily or without serious costs. 

First,  it  cannot  be  solved  by  choosing  either  Plato’s  or 
Augustine’s  view,  since  both  remain  problematic  for  different  reasons. 
The former since it denies our wish to be free to turn away from the Good, 
the second since it can’t provide a ground for doing so.  

Second, it cannot be solved by a moral theory that embodies the 
tension  between  the  two  positions  without  successfully  resolving  this 
tension, as my analysis of Kant shows. 

Third,  it  may  be  resolved  by  embracing  a  Manichean  dualism 
with  regard  to  good  and  evil,  but  this  can  only  be  done  at  the  cost  of 
rejecting an important aspect that lies at the root of much thinking in our 
tradition,  namely  the  idea  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  evil  with  a 
capitalized  E,  that  the  Good  as  oneness  is  more  original  and  (therefore) 
authoritative  with  regard  to  moral  choice,  and,  furthermore,  that  we 
ourselves are responsible if we turn away from it in spite of our knowing 
the Good. It remains unclear whether such a turn is possible at all, at least 
under the description ‘choosing evil’. 
 
 

 

Notes 

 
1  M. Coeckelbergh, The Metaphysics of Autonomy: The Reconciliation of 
Ancient and Modern (Ph.D. thesis University of Birmingham, 2003) 
2  J. Feinberg, The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law (Vol.III): Harm to 
Self  (New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), 45 
3 Plato, Phaedrus, 249d 
4 Ibid, 244a 
 

 

351 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

 
 
5  Augustine,  On  Free  Choice  of  the  Will  (Indianapolis:  Bobbs-Merrill 
Educational Publishing, 1964), II/48 
6 Augustine, Confessions (London: Penguin Books, 1961), VII.3/136 
7 Ibid, VII.3/136-137 
8 Ibid, VII.3/137 
9 Ibid, III/124 
10 I. Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals (London: Hutchinson, 
1948), 402 
11 Ibid, 403-404 
12 Ibid, 440 
13  Bernstein,  Radical  Evil:  A  Philosophical  Interrogation  (Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 2002), 14 
14 Ibid, 14 
15 I. Kant, Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1960), 51 
16 Bernstein, 16 
17 Ibid 
18 Ibid, 22 
19 Ibid, 26 
20  A.  Wood,  Kant’s  Moral  Religion    (Ithaca/London:  Cornell  University 
Press, 1970), 214 
21 Ibid, 216 
22 Ibid, 219 
23 Bernstein, 33 
24 Ibid, 35 
25 Ibid, 42 
26 Ibid, 43 
27 Wood, 211-212 
28 H.E. Allison, Idealism and freedom: Essays on Kant’s theoretical and 
practical philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 113 
29 Ibid, 174 
30 Ibid, 175 
31 Ibid, 176 
32 Wood, 220. See also my discussion of the concept and metaphysics of 
autonomy (Coeckelbergh). 
33 Kant, Religion, 28 
34 Ibid, 27 
 

 

352 

Can We Choose Evil? 

 

 
35 See also C.H. Seigfried, "The Radical Evil in Human Nature," in Akten 
des  4.  Internationalen  Kant-Kongresses  Mainz  6.-10.  April  1974  (Teil 
II.2.), ed. G. Funke (Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1974), 612 
36 Kant, Religion, 38 
37 Seigfried, 610 
38 Kant, Religion, 27 
39 Seigfried, 612  
 
 
 

 

Bibliography 

Allison,  H.E.  Idealism  and  freedom:  Essays  on  Kant’s  theoretical  and 
practica  Philosophy.    Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press, 
1996. 

Allison,  H.E.  Kant’s  Theory  of  Freedom.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 

University Press, 1990. 

1961. 

Augustine. Confessions. (trans. R.S. Pine-Coffin) London: Penguin Books, 

Augustine. On Free Choice of the Will. (trans. Anna S. Benjamin and L.H. 
Hackstaff)  Indianapolis:  Bobbs-Merrill  Educational  Publishing, 
1964. 

Bernstein,  Richard  J.  Radical  Evil:  A  Philosophical  Interrogation. 

Cambridge: Polity Press, 2002. 

Bernstein,  Richard  J.  "Radical  Evil:  Kant  at  War  with  Himself,"  in 
Rethinking  Evil,  ed.  Maria  Pia  Lara  (Berkeley:  University  of 
California Press, 2001). 

Coeckelbergh,  M.  The  Metaphysics  of  Autonomy:  The  Reconciliation  of 
Ancient  and  Modern.  Ph.D.  thesis,  University  of  Birmingham, 
2003. 

Feinberg, J. The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law (Vol.III): Harm to Self. 

New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986. 

Kant,  I.  Groundwork  of  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals  (trans.  H.J.  Paton). 

London: Hutchinson, 1948 (original 1785). 

Kant, I  Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone (trans. T.M. Greene 
and  H.H.  Hudson).  New  York:  Harper  &  Row,  1960  (original 
1793). 

 

 

Mark Coeckelbergh 

353 

 
 
Kant, I. The Metaphysics of Morals (trans. M. Gregor). Cambridge: C.U.P, 

1797. 

Plato.  Phaedrus  in  The  Dialogues  of  Plato  (Vol.III),  ed.  and  trans.  B. 
Jowett (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1953). Plato. Republic in 
The Dialogues of Plato (Vol.II), ed. and trans. B. Jowett (Oxford: 
The Clarendon Press, 1953). 

Seigfried,  C.H.  "The  Radical  Evil  in  Human  Nature"  in:  Akten  des  4. 
Internationalen  Kant-Kongresses  Mainz  6.-10.  April  1974  (Teil 
II.2.), ed. G. Funke (Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1974). 
Wood,  Allen  W.  Kant’s  Moral  Religion.  Ithaca/London:  Cornell, 

University Press, 1970. 

 

 

 

