> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

1

Hardware Centric Original Character 

Recognition 

Benny Thörnberg, Bala Subramanyam ,  Kassahun Frew                                                               

Department of Information Technology and Media                                                                                        

Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall 

  

Abstract—This  paper  discusses  a  hardware  centric  character 
recognition model for English (handwritten and machine letters) 
characters  using  histogram  of  oriented  gradient  (HOG)  method 
as  the  main  feature  and  minimum  distance  classifier  (MDC).  It 
also describes how HOG feature can be extended for recognition 
of rotated version of template object. It is a continuation of what 
was started by Benny Thörnberg 
 

Index  Terms—  Histogram  of  oriented  gradient;  Minimum 

distance classifier 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T

 Here  are  several  OCR  algorithms  with  very  high 
recognition  rates.  Most  all 
they  are  designed  for 
computational  environment  without  considering  the  need  to 
conserve  resource  in  terms  of  memory  and  computational 
speed.  In  this  project  a  character  recognition  method  is 
discussed  with  the  main  objective  of  hardware  capability.  A 
typical  OCR  composed  pre-processing  of  the  image;  feature 
extraction  followed  by  some  type  of  classifier  to  identify  to 
which class the particular object belongs to. The same step, we 
followed  in  this  project.  The  algorithms  usually  use  different 
kind  of  geometrical  and  pixel  value  feature  to  uniquely 
Identify. Of the geometrical features that can be used for OCR 
includes centroid, eccentricity.  In this paper angle of gradient 
is used to differentiate among different class. In this paper we 
try to discuss the methodology we followed to achieve this. In 
the  first  section,  the  preprocessing  is  defined,  followed  by 
definition of Hog and the feature vector we used is discussed. 
In  section  three  the  attempt  to  make  this  feature  independent 
of rotation is discussed. In section four and five classifier and 
conclusion are discussed. 
 

II. PRE PROCESSING 

 

In this project the preprocessing has two main steps. These 

are. 
A. Processing of the image 

No image can be noise free so the first step is to reduce the 
effect of noise. After acquiring an image, it will be converted 
to gray scale which is suitable for further processing. The first  

 

 

 
thing  is  to  detect  edges  of  the  gray  image  using  a  sobel 
operator.    Sobel  operator  is  an  approximation  to  discrete 
differentiation  or  the  gradient  of  the  image.  After  calculating 
the horizontal and the vertical gradient the angle is calculated.  
Now the image can be segmented, to remove any discontinuity 
the image is closed by a square matrix of size 3. The close also 
removes small  noises.  Labeling  each  connected object  enable 
us  to  access  each  object.  In  addition  to  calculate  the  rate  of 
recognition which compares the input character and the output 
of the classifier, the image should be labeled horizontally from 
left  to  right.  Each  object  should  be  categorized  into  rows  or 
lines.  The  row  is  comprised  of  all  the  letters  that  have  their 
centroid above the lower level of the bounding box of the most 
upper  element.  In  other  words  the  upper  most  objects  is 
labeled  as  one  and  each  object  that  has  centroid  above  the 
lower  level  of  the  first  element  is  in  this  line.  After  creating 
the  line  they  will  be  relabeled  this  time  by  their  horizontal 
position from left to right. 
B. HOG 
Sobel  operator  uses  a  3x3  matrix  and  convolves  with  the 
original image to get the gradient. [3] 

Gx= 

 

െ  
െ    
െ  

*A and Gy= െ െ  െ
  
   

  *A 

 
 
    The angle of the gradient makes this feature independent of 
size so the angle is calculated next. 
 

G=ටܩ௫ଶ ൅ܩ௬ଶ   and ߠ ൌ ?Iିଵ ீೣ
ீ  

The  ߠ that is found from the above equation will span from 0 

to π radian. This means a gradient with angle 110 and 290 will 
have the same gradient of 110. Obviously this will limit the 
uniqueness. So to make the angle from 0 to 2π the sin of the 
angle needs to be considered. 
 

ߠ ൌ IEିଵܩ௬
ܩ  

 
If the sin of the angle is negative it means the angle belongs to 
3rd or 4th quarter. By reducing from 360 all the angles that has 
negative sine,ߠ extends from 0 to 360 degree. 

 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

2

Histogram describes the number of occurrence angles between 
predefined bins. By trying different ranges, the accuracy is at 
its highest when the histogram bins is 15. These 15 bins 
combined with some geometrical feature makes up the feature 
vector. 
 

 

III.  FEATURE VECTOR. 

Feature  vector  of  an  object  can  be  seen  as  the  numerical 
representation  of  that  object  and  in  this  case  image  of 
characters.  And  if  these  numbers  describe  the  unique  feature 
of  that  object  the  easer to identify  it.  In this  project  there are 
up to 21 features used. The first 15 comprise the HOG and the 
remaining  6  are  geometrical  parameters.  Gradient  expresses 
how  the  pixels  lie.  By  calculating  the  X  and  Y  gradient  the 
angle can be calculated. The histogram is divided into 15 bins. 
To  make  the  histograms  probability  they  are  divided  by  the 
sum.  The following diagram shows the HOG  for letter R and 
B is shown in the following images. 

                         Fig1. HOG feature for letter B 
 
 

 

 

Fig3. Displacement features for letter P 

 

 
Distance ‘a’ and ‘b’ describes the horizontal and vertical 
displacement. To make this feature size independent it has to 
be normalized by dividing it by the major and minor axis of 
ellipse that contain the region. 
 
The next four features describe the histogram of localized 
zone marked by rectangles in the figure below. This feature 
can be used to identify letters ‘R’ and ‘B. As machine printed 
letters are precise the smaller rectangles can be used and result 
better performance. However for handwritten the box should 
be big to accommodate a little variation. The point where the 
two lines meet is the center of the box and the length of the 
smaller box is one fourth of the size. 

Fig4. Zonal histogram in for letter R 

 

 
After including the extra features the vector for B and R is 
shown below. 

Fig2. HOG feature for letter R 

 
As can be seen from the figure Hog feature can describe each 
object uniquely. However combined with the simple minimum 
distance classifier (MDC) it is limited in certain conditions. 
For instance Letters ‘P ’and ‘D’, ‘P’ and ‘B’ and ‘B’ and R’ 
are the common mistakes. With HOG feature and   MDC the 
max accuracy we get 85 % so to make it more robust the need 
to add more feature becomes obvious.  In total 6 geometrical 
features were added. The first two describes the displacement 
of centroid from geometrical center. 

Fig5. Feature vector of vector B after addition of geometrical feature. 

 

 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

3

Fig6. Feature vector of vector R after addition of geometrical feature 

 

 

As  can  be  seen  from  the  pictures  the  extra  feature  helps  to 
distinguish the two very similar letters. The additional features 
are not angles and it is shown here for comparison purpose 

 
 

IV.  EXTENDING HOG FEATURE TO BE ROTATIONAL 

INDEPENDENT.  

Rotation  independency  can  be  achieved  either  the  features 
should  be  rotational  independent.  Which  means  that  is  the 
same  value  expected  for  original  and  rotated  version  of  an 
object. The second possibility is that even though the features 
are rotational dependent the feature vector of the original and 
rotated version and the angle of rotation are related. 

HOG  feature  falls  into  the  second  category.  Where  the  angle 
of rotaion  and its some noise are added to the histogram of the 
original object. 
The following pictures depict these phenomena. 

Fig7. Mean Feature vector of letter R 

 

 

 
Fig8. Mean Feature vector of letter R after rotated by -50 

 
From the above two pictures it can be shown that the rotated 
picture is resembles a shifted version of its unrotated version 
of the object. To further process the angle of shift must be 
determined. Moment of region can be used to calculate this 
angle. [2] 
 

݉௣௤ୀ ෍ ݎ௣ܿ௤

 

ሺ௥௖ሻאோ

 
From moment of region we can calculate the area and center 
of gravity as m00 and (m10, m01) respectively. 
To get moment that is invariant of size we need to divide the 
moment by the area of the region.  
 

݉௣௤ୀ

ܽ ෍ ݎ௣ܿ௤
ሺ௥௖ሻאோ

 

 
Also to make the moment invariant of position the center of 
gravity should be deducted. 
 

௣௤ ൌ 

ܽ ෍ ሺݎ െ ݊ଵ଴ሻ௣ሺܿ െ ݊଴ଵሻ௤
ሺ௥௖ሻאோ

 

 

 

The angle  ǘ can be calculated. 
 ݐܽ݊ିଵ

ǘ ൌ െ

 ଵଵ
଴ଶ െ ଶ଴

 

 

 
By sliding by the angle of rotation the following probability 
for different angles is shown  
 
 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE
CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

4

With this classifier the following results are 
With this classifier the following results are obtained. It 
describes the how much recognition rate has been 
with the methods. 
  

recognition rate has been achieved 

 

Non
Non- rotated 

Rotated 

Only 
Only 
HOG
HOG 

HOG 

+Geometrical 

Only HOG 

Hand written 

Machine printed 

70 

87 

86 

100 

<30 

~40 

 

 

Fig9. Corrected Feature of letter R
letter R 

 
Although  the  gives  a  good  approximate  ion
approximate  ion  of  the  angle  of 
rotation  in  most  cases  ,  it’s  accuracy  decreases  as  the  object 
,  it’s  accuracy  decreases  as  the  object 
width  approaches  its  length  and  it  gives  incorrect  result  for 
width  approaches  its  length  and  it  gives  incorrect  result  for 
deformed  letters  like  Q  which  gives  some  angle  greater  than 
which  gives  some  angle  greater  than 
zero even though the letter is not rotated. A
zero even though the letter is not rotated. And for hand written 
letters. 
Besides  the  limitation  of  angle  determination  in  accuracy  in 
Besides  the  limitation  of  angle  determination  in  accuracy  in 
reduction  the  other  factor  needs  to  be  considered  is  rotated 
reduction  the  other  factor  needs  to  be  considered  is  rotated 
images  have  ladder  type  lines.  As  shown  in  the  following 
images  have  ladder  type  lines.  As  shown  in  the  following 
figure. 

VI.  CONCLUSION
CONCLUSION 

The  main  aim  of  this  project  was  to  investigate  how  Hog 
The  main  aim  of  this  project  was  to  investigate  how  Hog 
can  be  used  in  identifying  different  pattern  by  using 
can  be  used  in  identifying  different  pattern  by  using 
characters and the processing should be also simple enough 
characters and the processing should be also simple enough 
to be calculated by hardware.  The computation here can be 
to be calculated by hardware. 
computed  using  hardware  and 
computed  using  hardware  and 
in  combination  with 
appropriate  preprocessing 
appropriate  preprocessing  Hog  can  be  used  for  much 
machine  vision  application
machine  vision  application.  For  future  work  a  versatile 
method  of  calculating  the  angle  of  rotation  and  a  more 
method  of  calculating  the  angle  of  rotation  and  a  more 
robust classifier boosts the 
robust classifier boosts the performance.  
 

[1]  Handbook of Machine Vision,

Vision,Wiley-VCH, 2006, ISBN: 978, 527-

REFERENCES
EFERENCES 

-527-40584-8 

0734-A. Hornberg,978-3-
[2]  S. Singh, "Shape Detection Using Gradient Features for 
S. Singh, "Shape Detection Using Gradient Features for 
Handwritten Character Recognition," icpr, vol. 3, pp.145, 13th 
Handwritten Character Recognition," icpr, vol. 3, pp.145, 13th 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR'96) 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR'96) - 
Volume 3, 1996 
[3]  Hailong Liu, Xiaoqing Ding,  "Handwritten Character Recognition 
Hailong  Liu, Xiaoqing Ding, "Handwritten Character Recognition 
Using  Gradient  Feature  and  Quadratic  Classifier  with  Multiple 
Using  Gradient  Feature  and  Quadratic  Classifier  with  Multiple 
Discrimination  Schemes,"  icdar,  pp.19
Discrimination  Schemes,"  icdar,  pp.19-25,  Eighth  International 
Conference  on  Document  Analysis  and  Recognition  (ICDAR'05), 
Conference  on  Document  Analysis  and  Recognition  (ICDA
linear  forms 
2005B.  Smith,  “An  approach 
2005B.  Smith,  “An  approach 
linear  forms 
(Unpublished work style),” unpublished.
(Unpublished work style),” unpublished. 
[4]  Md. Allmran, Jobed Hossain, Tanay Dey, Bijan Kumar Debroy, 
Md. Allmran, Jobed Hossain, Tanay Dey, Bijan Kumar Debroy, 
Ahsan   Habib Abir ” OSDT: Outer Shape Detection Technique 
OSDT: Outer Shape Detection Technique 
Bangia Optical Character” Dept. of Computer 
for Recognition of  Bangia Optical Cha
Science & Engineering, Khulna University ofEngineering & 
Science & Engineering, Khulna University ofEngineering & 
Technology, Khulna, Bangladesh
Technology, Khulna, Bangladesh. 
[5]  A Fast Algorithm for the Minimum Distance Classifier
A Fast Algorithm for the Minimum Distance Classifier 
and Its Application to Kanji Character Recognition
and Its Application to Kanji Character Recognition 
SENDA Shuji, MINOH Michihiko 
SENDA Shuji, MINOH Michihiko and IKEDA Katsuo 
Department of Information Science, Kyoto University
Department of Information Science, Kyoto University 
[6]  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator 
[7]  Handwritten Character Recognition Using Multiresolution
Handwritten Character Recognition Using Multiresolution 

to  graphs  of 
to  graphs  of 

riented GradientsQinyunlong, Sunguangling 

                  Histograms of Oriented Gradients
                  School of Communication and Information Engineering
School of Communication and Information Engineering 
                  Shanghai UniversityShanghai, Chinasunguangling@shu.edu.cn
Shanghai, Chinasunguangling@shu.edu.cn 
 

 

Fig10. Noise created when letter is rotated
Noise created when letter is rotated 

 
All the saw teeth will alter the patter of the feature
l the saw teeth will alter the patter of the feature vector. To 
alleviate this smoothing filter can be used.
alleviate this smoothing filter can be used. Although the filter 
make smooth the overall efficiency has not improved.
make smooth the overall efficiency has not improved. 
 
 

V.      CLASSIFIER 

 
In  this  project  we  used  Euclidian  minimum  distance 
In  this  project  we  used  Euclidian  minimum  distance 
classifier.  This  is  calculating  the  distance  between  object 
This  is  calculating  the  distance  between  object 
and all the class. The class which has the minimum distance 
The class which has the minimum distance 
is seen as the best solution. Although this method is simple 
is seen as the best solution. Although this method is simple 
and can easily be calculated using hardware, 
ated using hardware, it is limited if 
the  template  used  has  some  variation  as  it  uses  only  the 
emplate  used  has  some  variation  as  it  uses  only  the 
mean of the data without how the data is distributed
mean of the data without how the data is distributed 

E௝ ෍ටሺݎ௜ െܿ௜௝ሻ
ሻଶ 

௡

௜

