FAIM'02 ­ July 2002, Dresden, Germany

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

1

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and challenges
Luis M. Camarinha-Matos
New University of Lisbon ­ Faculty of Sciences and Technology Quinta da Torre, 2829-516 Monte Caparica, Portugal1
ABSTRACT The Virtual Organizations paradigm is gaining a growing importance in manufacturing as an instrument to help companies face the challenges of fast evolving market conditions. In this context an overview of current trends in areas such as virtual enterprises, industry clusters, virtual communities, remote supervision and virtual laboratories, and required infrastructures is presented. Fast shop-floor reengineering is also discussed as an important requirement for the participation of manufacturing enterprises in agile virtual organizations. Some of the major open research challenges for various types of virtual organizations are identified.
1. INTRODUCTION
The Virtual Organizations (VO) paradigm, be it in the form of Virtual Enterprise, Extended Enterprise, Integrated Supply Chain, or Virtual Community, is finding its way in the manufacturing industry. Turbulent market conditions characterized by very fast and continuous changes, new environment and working conditions regulations, improved standards for quality, and fast technological mutation, are forcing manufacturing companies to adopt new organizational and production paradigms. This trend is facilitated by the advances of the last decades in information and communication technologies that have triggered fast developments in a large number of application areas involving cooperation among networked entities. On one hand, the Internet developments enabled the implantation of a number of previously foreseen collaborative paradigms that were just waiting for the proper conditions, and on the other hand these developments also motivated the emergence of new concepts.
In this context a large number of new terms have populated the literature such as the ebusiness, virtual organizations, virtual enterprises, networked enterprises, virtual communities, communities of practice, e-commerce, and even e-manufacturing. As usual in times of rapid advances, this fast proliferation of new terms does not always represent wellunderstood or truly new concepts. Nevertheless one of the main underlying trends in research and development is the focus on models, protocols, and mechanisms to support the collaboration of pre-existing heterogeneous and autonomous entities in distributed environments, be it among organizations, among people, or among people and
1 Tel. +351-212948517, Fax +351-212941253, E-mail: cam@uninova.pt, URL: www.uninova.pt/~cam

2 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
organizations. A large number of research publications have pointed out the potential advantages
brought in by virtual organizations (VO) and virtual enterprises (VE). Many recent proposals address more advanced dynamic cooperative networked organizations. The idea of highly dynamic organizations, that form themselves according to the needs and opportunities of the market and remain operational as long as these opportunities persist, suggests a number of benefits, among which the following can be emphasized:
- Agility: represented by the ability to recognize, rapidly react and cope with the unpredictable changes in the environment in order to achieve better responses to opportunities, shorter time-to-market, and higher quality with less investment. The composition of a VE is determined by the need to associate the most suitable set of skills and resources contributed by a number of distinct individual organizations. When and if necessary, the VE can reorganize itself by adding / expelling some members or by dynamically re-assigning tasks or roles to its members.
- Complementary roles: enterprises seek for complementarities (creation of synergies) that allow them to participate in competitive business opportunities and new markets.
- Achieving dimension: especially in the case of SMEs, being in partnerships with others allow them to achieve critical mass and appear in the market with a larger "visible" size.
- Competitiveness: achieving cost effectiveness, by proper division of subtasks among cooperating organizations.
- Resource optimization: smaller organizations sharing infrastructures, knowledge, and business risks.
- Innovation: being in a network opens the opportunities for the exchange and confrontation of ideas, the basis for innovation.
The area of VE/VO is particularly active in Europe, not only in terms of research and development, but also in terms of the emergence of various forms of enterprise networking and advanced clustering at regional level. This "movement" is consistent with the process of European integration, which represents a push towards a "culture of cooperation", but also with the very nature of the European business landscape that is mostly based on small and medium size enterprises (SME) that have to join efforts in order to be competitive in open and turbulent market scenarios. But important activities can also be identified in other regions such as Australia, Brazil, Mexico, and Canada, in addition to the USA.
However, in order to leverage the potential benefits of the agile VE/VO paradigm, there is a need for flexible and generic infrastructures to support the creation, operation, and dissolution of VE/VOs. Achieving such infrastructures is still a major challenge. It is also important to harmonize the results of various leading projects in order to reach interoperable approaches and common business practices. Some important initiatives in this direction are the following networks of excellence: IFIP COVE, IST VOSTER, and IST CE-NET. Fostering and characterizing emerging and future organizational forms and their needs is also an important aspect that is being addressed by the IST THINKcreative.
2. VIRTUAL ENTERPRISES
Technology and infrastructures. Although the advantages of the Virtual Enterprise are well known at the conceptual level [4], [8], the practical implantation is still far from the

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

3

expectations, except for the more stable, long-term networks applied to supply chains. Nevertheless, the potential agility of a VE in terms of fast reaction to business opportunities is certainly a very appealing feature in a scenario of fast changing market conditions. But the early phase of VE planning and creation, as well as several aspects of VE operation are still difficult and need to be properly adapted even by advanced and competitive enterprises. Some of the obstacles include the lack of appropriate support tools, namely for: partners search and selection (e-procurement), VE contract bidding and negotiation, competencies and resources management, task allocation, well-established distributed business process management practices, monitoring and coordination of task execution according to contracts, performance assessment, inter-operation and information integration protocols and mechanisms, etc. Further problems include the lack of common ontologies among the cooperating organizations, derivation of the information visibility regulations based on the contracts, the proper support for socio-organizational aspects e.g. lack of a culture of cooperation, the time required for trust building processes, the need for BP reengineering and training of people, etc. Support for VE dissolution is, so far, a subject almost absent from the large majority of research projects.
A large number of R&D projects try to establish some technological foundations for the support of Virtual Enterprises /Virtual Organization [4]. Relevant examples can be found in the NIIIP program in US, the ESPRIT and IST programs in Europe (e.g. projects such as PRODNET II, VEGA, E-COLLEG, WHALES, ECOLNET, EXTERNAL, etc.), or interregional cooperation programs such as the IMS (e.g. projects such as GLOBEMAN, GNOSIS, GLOBEMEN, etc.) and INCO (e.g. MASSYVE). Many of these development efforts were concentrated on the design and development of infrastructures and basic VE/VO support functionalities. But only a few of these initiatives correspond to horizontal developments, aimed at establishing the base technology, tools and mechanisms, while most others correspond to vertical developments, addressing certain specific needs of specific sectors such as: cooperative design (collaborative engineering) in manufacturing, dynamic supply chain management in manufacturing and agribusiness, service federation in tourism, etc. It can also be observed that the lack of a common and widely accepted reference model and infrastructure [7] is still forcing every vertical development project to design and implement its own mini-infrastructures, deviating some resources from its main focus, while generating something only applicable to that project.
Fast development of a large number of contributing technologies is frequently presented as an enabling factor for the materializing of the VE/VO concept. Some examples include: Web technologies, standards and tools, communication security, federated information management, distributed workflow and coordination theory and systems, component-based system design and developments, MAS technology and software mobility, GRID technology, mobile computing, advances in knowledge representation, with particular focus on shared ontologies and imprecise knowledge representation / soft-computing, collaborative engineering tools, P2P, integrated ERP/PDM Systems for dynamic SMEs, contracts and negotiation models and tools, etc. However, most of these technologies are in their infancy and under development, requiring considerable effort to implement and configure comprehensive VE/VO support infrastructures. In fact, even the most advanced infrastructures coming out of leading R&D projects still require complex configuration and customization processes, which are hardly manageable by SMEs. In general, there is a:
o Lack of effective approaches to interoperability

4 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
o Lack of standard definitions and mechanisms, and the fact that emerging solutions are all in preliminary stages, for instance in the areas of: Definition of information / behavior semantics - Ontology of the concepts, Semantic/syntactic heterogeneity of legacy systems, Autonomy of organizations in their behavior and decision-making processes. Workflow management and coordination of distributed business processes.
It is even the case that some business functionalities for advanced cooperative organizations are not properly understood yet. As most R&D projects need to build their own infrastructure from scratch, limited resources in fact remain for the business functionalities definition!
When an infrastructure is built up by integrating a number of heterogeneous components coming from different vendors, it is also difficult to determine which component (or tool provider) is responsible when something goes wrong with such complex systems.
Some of the main trends in the attempts to develop generic VE infrastructures include: Layer-based frameworks, which add a cooperation layer to the existing IT platforms of the enterprises. Inter-enterprise cooperation is then performed via the interaction through these layers. Examples of this approach are early efforts in VE infrastructures, as represented by the NIIIP [12], PRODNET [4], or VEGA [20] projects, that aimed at designing open platforms to support the basic information exchange and coordination needs in industrial virtual enterprises. Such cooperation layers support the exchange of basic business data (e.g. via EDIFACT-type messages), technical product data (e.g. using STEP), and basic distributed workflow-based coordination. Safe communications (through mechanisms such as cryptography, digital signature, certificates, etc.) is one of the main components. Agent-based frameworks, including those approaches that represent enterprises as agents, and the inter-enterprise cooperation as interactions in a distributed multiagent system. Although less-developed than the layer-based approaches, various examples focusing the creation and operation of VEs can be found: Agents in VE creation - A growing number of works are being published on the application of multi-agent systems and market-oriented negotiation mechanisms for the VE formation [6], [16]. Agents in VE operation ­ Various projects have been addressing the dynamic scheduling and execution of distributed business processes [14]. Service-federation / service-market frameworks - According to this model, enterprises should be able to plug/unplug their services to/from service directories [5]. By means of proper "standard" service interface, the interoperability with other (requesting) enterprises, regardless of the heterogeneity associated with the actual implementation of the services themselves, is supported. This means that no matter how the service is actually implemented, in terms of the computer platform, operating system, programming language, internal modules, etc., there is a client service interface (service proxy) that can be managed by a lookup service and made available to other enterprises that may request it. For instance, the underlying concepts of the JINI architecture [18] show how to support, in a transparent way, a federation of service functions offered by different service suppliers and running on different nodes of a network. Although JINI may contribute, in theory, to

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

5

facilitate the interoperability among services offered by different enterprises, its use in VO environments requires its extension to properly work in wide area networks and the development of additional support functionalities. For instance, the matter of access rights and enterprises information visibility is a very important issue, and therefore when searching and accessing a specific service type it is also relevant to determine both the supplier of the service and the requesting client, in order to check such visibility rights. It is also necessary to define the rules for both service specification/definition and service registration through the service interface. Furthermore, the general acceptance of the service interface by the service providers for developing services compliant with such rules is of great importance. Latest developments such as WSDL / SOAP represent a positive step in this direction.
Nevertheless, setting up an infrastructure for VE/VO still requires a large engineering effort, which represents a major obstacle for the implantation of this new organizational paradigm. Furthermore, it shall be noted that the fast evolution of the information technologies often presents a disturbing factor for non-IT companies.
Business process modeling. One important aspect in the VE creation and operation is the specification of the tasks necessary to achieve a VE business goal. The activities carried out by a company are usually organized in groups of inter-related activities called processes (business processes) that can be seen as a set of activities, rules and constraints specifying the steps that must be taken, and conditions that must be satisfied, in order to accomplish a given goal. The composition of each process is designed in order to achieve a (partial) specific goal. A business process can be decomposed into a hierarchy of sub-business processes and enterprise activities. When a Business Process (BP) is executed by a virtual enterprise, parts of the decomposition of this BP (i.e. sub-processes) are assigned to different enterprises, what makes the BP a Distributed Business Process (DBP) [4]. When properly "orchestrated", a combination of various processes taking place at different members of the VE will lead to the achievement of the global goal of the VE. The problem of the supervision or coordination of a DBP at its various levels of decomposition is quite important in this context where its definition and enactment is not limited to a single organization, but instead to a set of autonomous, distributed, and heterogeneous nodes that need to cooperate.
Most of the early projects adopted a workflow approach for BP modeling and coordination, usually following the Workflow Management Coalition reference model. One example is given by the project PRODNET that developed a graphical language and an associated editor that borrows many ideas from the workflow management systems, trying to be compliant with the WfMC Reference Model, but including some adaptations to the VE environment. Various projects have been addressing further extensions to the workflow paradigm in order to support flexible workflows and distributed planning and execution, or combining workflow with multi-agent approaches.
An important requirement is the establishment of a standard and platform independent BP modeling language to allow BP exchange. Potential candidates include PIF (Process Interchange Format) that emerged in the area of Business Process Reengineering [10] and aims to be a neutral format to act as a bridge across different process representations, and PSL (Process Specification Language) [17], developed by the American National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to be a neutral, standard language for process

6 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
specification to help the integration of multiple process-related applications throughout the manufacturing life cycle. There have been some initiatives towards the merging of PSL with PIF. Such combined effort could be expected to bring together the representation of both business and manufacturing process-related concepts into a single, unified process modeling language. A recent European initiative, the IST UEML project, is also expected to bring some contribution towards a common process modeling language.
Cluster and VE creation. The concept of cluster of enterprises, which should not be confused with a VE, represents a group or pool of enterprises and related supporting institutions that have both the potential and the will to cooperate with each other through the establishment of a long-term cooperation agreement [4], [5]. Buyer-supplier relationships, common technologies, common markets or distribution channels, common resources, or even common labor pools are elements that typically bind the cluster together. This is not a new concept as a large number of related initiatives have emerged during the last decades, namely in Europe and USA. But the advances in information and communication technologies now bring new opportunities to leverage the potential of this concept, namely by providing the adequate environment for the rapid formation of agile virtual enterprises. In fact, although not well understood earlier, it is now clear that the formation of dynamic VO/VE requires an appropriate "embedding" or "nesting" environment in order to guarantee basic requirements such as: Trust building ("trusting your partner" is a long-term process); Common infrastructures and agreed upon business practices (requiring substantial engineering / re-engineering effort); a sense of community; and some sense of stability. A cluster represents a long-term organization and therefore presents an adequate environment for the establishment of cooperation agreements, common infrastructures, common ontologies, and mutual trust, which are the facilitating elements when building a new VE.
For each business opportunity found by one of the cluster members, a subset of the cluster enterprises may be chosen to form a VE for that specific business opportunity. In this perspective, the expected competitive advantage of cooperative development of products and services becomes a more relevant tie among the cluster members. The more frequent situation is the case in which the cluster is formed by organizations located in a common region, although geography is not a major facet when cooperation is supported by computer networks. Nevertheless, the geographical closeness has some advantages for cooperation as it may facilitate better adaptation to the local (culture) needs and an easier creation of a "sense of community".
The cluster enterprises are normally "registered" in a directory, where their core competencies are "declared". Based on this information, the VE initiator / creator (broker), which is usually a member of the cluster enterprises, can select partners when a new business opportunity is detected. Clearly, several VEs can co-exist at the same time within a cluster, even with some members in common.
The cluster does not need to be a closed organization; new members can adhere but they have to comply with the general operating principles of the cluster. Similarly, for the formation of a VE, preference will be given to the cluster members but it might be necessary to find an external partner in case some skills or capacities are not available in the cluster. The external partner will naturally have to adhere to the common infrastructure and cooperation principles. In addition to enterprises, a cluster might include other organizations (such as research organizations, sector associations, etc.) and even free-lancer

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

7

workers. The establishment and management of clusters through adequate infrastructures represent therefore an important support for the creation of agile virtual enterprises (Fig. 1).

"Open universe"

Market trends Competitiveness

"Controlled-borders universe" Cluster

·Partners search & selection ·Cooperation agreement ·Common infrastructure ·Sharing principles
Business oportunity

·Controlled partners selection ·Contract and cooperation details ·Infrastructure parametrization
VE

·Wide partners search & selection ·Common Infrastructure definition and parametrization · Sharing principles ·Contract and cooperation agreement
Figure 1 - Two approaches for VE formation
The idea of using a cluster as the basis for the formation of virtual enterprises has been identified in other research works such as the COSME/VIRPLAS [11] or VIRTEC [3] projects. These projects have identified some of the major characteristics and needs of cluster management, but did not introduce the necessary IT infrastructure and support tools. MASSYVE is an example of a project that adopted a multi-agent approach for the management of industry cluster and support of a broker for VE creation [15]. Some of the aspects that have been subject of more attention in recent projects are: Brokerage, partners search and selection (e-procurement), definition of cooperation rules (negotiation and contracting), etc. The concept of cluster is evolving in parallel with the emergence of other forms of relationships, such as "communities of practice" or "virtual communities", representing a general trend to the emergence of a kind of "society of relationships".
From a regional perspective, a well-managed cluster may offer the opportunity to combine the necessities of both "old" and "new" economies, and form a sustainable environment (local business ecosystem). The Industry Cluster Management concept can support the exploitation of local competencies and resources by an agile and fast configuration of the most adequate set of partners for each business opportunity, and therefore extending the scope of intervention of manufacturing companies into the services area. Furthermore, the local clusters can gather and empower a unique set of competencies tailored to regional culture and local customers' preferences, allowing a concerted offer of cooperation to global companies. In this way, members of the local industry cluster can play an important role in the customization and final assembly of products to local markets even though the basic components may be produced elsewhere. Therefore, in times of tough competition, the organization and effective management of the local industry or service enterprises, clusters focused on the characteristics of SMEs, provide a promising approach for regional sustainability. In addition to the mentioned benefits of cooperation on dynamic VE/VO, there is also the opportunity to share experiences and costs in the learning process of introducing new ICT within an industry cluster, and to reduce the risk of failure.

8 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
Some examples of major current challenges in VE research and development include: · Establishment of common reference models for VE · Development of interoperable, progressively invisible and safe support infrastructures. · Development of new generic business support functions for collaborative processes. · Coordination, administration and management of highly distributed activities, tasks,
processes, and roles. · Advanced federated information management, supporting the authorized information
exchange, information integration mechanism, and collaborative work among organizations. · Design, development, provision and management of value-added services provided in the context of VE/VOs. · Management and configuration of local/regional clusters operating on specific vertical markets with specific business processes requirements. · Dynamic evaluation of revenues, rights and liabilities of every VE relationships, and dynamic selection of new partners in order to make the VE network more effective. · Soft-modeling and reasoning with special decision support mechanisms for supply chain management, selection of partners or efficiency of VE relationships. · Comprehensive VO/VE creation and dissolution frameworks. · E-notary services for networked organizations with special services such as: black lists, past performance, credentials, best practices. · Legal framework and e-contract management and adaptation to the legal frameworks. · Inter-domain transactions, business processes sharing and management. · Effective integration of legacy systems as well as methodologies for transforming existing organizations into VO-ready organizations. · Tracking and auditing support services. · Advanced simulation models and tools for networked collaborative organizations. · Mechanisms for handling post-cooperation IPRs and liabilities. The development of such functionalities cannot be separated from the socioorganizational issues. Therefore, a stronger emphasis on multidisciplinary research is necessary in this field.
3. VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES
When a proper cooperation nesting environment (e.g. cluster or long term network) is in place, virtual communities of practice (VCP) / virtual teams emerge within such environment, constituting a fundamental element of value creation and sustainability. Virtual Communities and Communities of Practice are not new concepts but they acquire specific characteristics and increased importance when considered in the context of the collaborative networks of organizations. These communities, although spontaneously created, are bound to certain social rules resulting from the commitment of their members to the underlying organizations (new concept of social-bound VCPs).
This is the case, for instance, in concurrent or collaborative engineering where teams of engineers, possibly located in different enterprises, cooperate in a joint project such as the co-design of a new product. A large number of computer supported cooperative tools are

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

9

becoming widely available for synchronous cooperation. Some examples are teleconference, and chat tools combined with application sharing mechanisms. As the participants are not located in the same place and eventually the work is developed with different time schedules (asynchronous processes), it is very important to support:
(i) Sharing of information models and process models, describing the product model and its manufacturing process and the design/planning process itself. The requirement is not only for a bi-lateral exchange of information, but also for the establishment of shared spaces.
(ii) Provision of adequate visibility and access rights definition and management. (iii) Coordination of (asynchronous) activities performed in different places by
different actors. (iv) Provision of notification mechanisms regarding major events in the design /
planning process (e.g. conclusion of a step by one actor). The federated database paradigm represents a suitable approach to develop shared spaces with the appropriate mechanisms to specify and ensure the visibility levels and access rights as represented in the CIMIS.net project [13]. A flexible notification mechanism can also be implemented by combining the federated information management with a workflow-based coordination system. But additional coordination mechanisms can be supported by the use of a multi-agent approach. In terms of coordination, several approaches to develop flexible workflow systems have been proposed. In the case of processes mainly executed by humans, rigid forms of procedural control are not adequate. People like to keep their freedom regarding the way they work. Product design, like any other creative process evolves according to a kind of "arbitrary" flow. It is therefore necessary to also support loosely constrained sets of business processes. For instance in the CIM-FACE system [13], the human experts use the enterprise Computer-Aided tools (e.g. CAD, CAPP, CAM, etc.) to perform their design and planning tasks. In order to facilitate the coordination among team members, the concept of process assistant agent is introduced. One process assistant is created to assist each human member of the Concurrent Engineering team. This assistant is an agent that represents the human expert in the virtual community and provides the human with a "window" to the process model he/she is involved in. The coordination of activities among the team members is ensured by these special agents that are responsible for: -Keeping track of the evolution of the collective design / planning process. -Notifying other members of the team (via the corresponding assistant agents) of important events. -Checking and ensuring the required precedence rules in the flow of activities. Considering the geographical distribution, the autonomy of the VE members, the local corporate cultures, and also the individual working preferences of the team members, it is likely that most of the activities in such VCP will be carried out in an asynchronous way.
Some open research challenges in virtual communities include:
· Development and management of shared, smart spaces for geographically distributed teams of the same or different organizations that develop complex engineering products.
· Provision of adequate visibility and access rights definition and management.
· Understand and model multi-level relationships among VCP members.

10 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
· Coordination of (asynchronous) activities performed in different places by different actors; flexible coordination models.
· Frameworks for collaboration in mobile contexts. · Tools for community management, leadership, and creation of incentives. · Provision of notification mechanisms regarding major events in the design / planning
process (e.g. conclusion of a step by one actor). · Mechanisms to handle Intellectual Property in VCP under social contracts. · Understand the interactions between VCP and VO/VE formation.
4. REMOTE SUPERVISION IN COLLABORATIVE ENVIRONMENTS
Advanced forms of cooperation mostly in the area of design and manufacturing require mechanisms to support a controlled "intrusion" of a company, for instance the VE coordinator, into the "territory" of its partners. An initial example of this "intrusion", which is properly supported by the federated database paradigm, is the access to selected (authorized by the cooperation agreements) subsets of the information (for instance, the orders' status, stock levels, etc.) [4]. But this process may assume more extensive forms. Consider the case that a company wishes to "open a window" over the shop-floor of its partner (according to contractual rules) to monitor the manufacturing process of the ordered parts and even have an interference on the shop-floor processes, i.e. supervise these processes from distance and in cooperation with the local people. The local supervision functionalities installed in each production site shall interact / cooperate with the global VE (network-wide) supervision, providing controlled levels of transparency.
Mobile computing also suggests new forms of tele-operation and tele-supervision of processes.
The design of a proper support system for collaborative remote supervision (CRS) ­ when the supervision process involves the collaboration of various actors, located at different remote places - can benefit from the contributions coming from a number of areas that, although conceptually close, are usually addressed by different communities of researchers with little interaction among them. The two main contributing areas to remote supervision are the Telerobotics and Virtual Laboratories. Further contributions to CRS might be offered by areas such as Virtual Reality, Virtual Organizations, and Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
The remote operation of equipment has been addressed for many years, mainly in security related and hazardous environments applications. However, the Internet has been opening new opportunities for remote operation due to low costs and widespread availability, what makes it very appealing as a basis for remote operation. In fact several examples of connection of robots, cameras, and other devices to the WEB were implemented during the last decade. Remote operation in manufacturing via Internet suffers however, from several problems: i) Internet is still characterized by long and irregular timedelays and very often, suffers from low levels of availability, raising new challenges in what concerns the reliability of the implemented system and its dependence on the characteristics of the network; ii) in practical application domains, high levels of heterogeneity can be expected in terms of sensors and equipment at the remote places, which can challenge the flexibility and scalability of the system; and iii) the composition of

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

11

the execution environments is potentially unstructured and unknown, which means that it is not adequate to resort to deterministically programmed systems. Complementarily, the increasing use of wireless networking (mobile / ubiquitous computing) requires short connection periods.
Adaptable mobile agents approach. In order to cope with the mentioned difficulties, an approach based on adaptive mobile agents was developed by the Robotics and Integrated Manufacturing Group at the New University of Lisbon [19]. The mobile agents paradigm shows important advantages when remote manipulation and remote supervision are considered, since: i) moving the code to the places where the machines and sensors are located, contributes to enable close to real-time response, and so, the availability, delays and reliability of the network become less of a problem; ii) new mobile agents can be built and sent for remote execution whenever needed, thus greater flexibility and scalability is achieved; and iii) it eases remote maintenance and diagnosis.
In this approach and in order to allow execution in different remote places, mobile agents may carry a high level abstract plan (mission), which must be refined/adapted when the agent reaches every target place. Therefore, agents are equipped with decision-making and plan-refining capabilities, which allow them to, based on the carried mission, build specific plans suitable for execution in the particular environment of each site they reach. Figure 2 illustrates the application of this approach to a remote assembly cell supervision.

feedback

real visual

simulation

Visualization & simulation
Supervision

Mission agent
Internet

Feedback Collector

Supervision site

Data carrier

Sensors Local control

Remote site

Figure 2. Feedback collector and Visualization agents

When dealing with remote operation, agents must run with a high degree of autonomy in uncertain environments. To achieve this goal, an approach based on general monitoring and recovery methods and on plans with annotations, intended to help the execution monitoring and error recovery, was adopted in the mentioned work. A hierarchical plan structure was considered, since, besides other advantages of hierarchical planning, it allows the specification of monitors at various levels of detail, which is quite appropriate for complex domains. A language called MAAPL (Mobile Agents Abstract Plan Language)

12 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
was developed for the specification of the plans of the agents. The execution control component implements the mechanisms that allow one agent to
adapt its high level abstract plan to the exact environment it finds in each place it visits, and to execute the adapted plan, including execution monitoring and error recovery. Execution control involves plan adaptation, execution monitoring and error recovery. Plan adaptation allows an agent to adapt its high level plan for execution in the current place, according to the capabilities found there; execution monitoring and error recovery is a crucial aspect, since the agents may be operating autonomously for long periods of time. The hierarchical plan structure allows the specification of monitors at various levels of detail, which is very appropriate for complex domains. Furthermore, the hierarchical approach is a powerful mean to structure interesting monitoring strategies.
Virtual Laboratories. A Virtual Laboratory (VL) is another form of collaborative network, representing a heterogeneous, distributed problem solving environment that enables a group of researchers located in different geographical places to work together, sharing resources (equipments, tools, experimental data, etc.), a specialized form of VO.
Virtual Laboratories are attracting growing interest due to their potential applications in areas such as education, research, medicine, etc., in order to operate tools and equipment in remote locations or hazardous environments, among others. A typical VL involves scientific equipments connected to a network, large-scale simulations, visualization, data reduction and data summarization capabilities, application-specific databases, collaboration tools e.g. teleconferencing, federated data exchange, chat, shared electronic-whiteboard, notepad, etc., application-dependent software tools and interfaces, safe communications, and large network bandwidth.
Collaborative remote supervision in manufacturing shares many requirements and challenges with the VL environment, among which the following can be mentioned: Operation of remote instruments / equipment, remote diagnosis, team discussion, virtual meetings, sharing data at highly interpreted level, tele-mentoring (e.g. explaining a new process), what-if analysis / simulation, exclusive and shared accesses (to data, tools, and devices), access rights definition (to data, tools, and devices), visual checks and video link (conferencing), support for un-experienced users (the supervision partner does not necessarily know the details of the remote environment), and the need to automated many adjustments that were previously done manually (if not assisted by local operators in the physical equipment place).
Therefore, the concept of Virtual Laboratory has to be supported by the following main requirement classes: (i) Remote operation: in order to have access and manipulate tools and equipment located at a remote workshop; (ii) Information management: to store information and data generated by the experiments realized; (iii) Simulation: to visualize and reproduce the actions on the remote workshop, and (iv) Collaborative tools: in order to share and coordinate the experiments among different partners around the world.
The mobile-agent approach represents a sound basis for a flexible implementation of remote manipulation or virtual laboratory systems. Potential applications are in providing remote access to experiments in collaborative research, specially, in the case of expensive setups only available in a few places. The VL application can also benefit from the autonomy of adaptable agents in order to not require a synchronous availability of the participants in a given experiment. These participants can delegate on their agent

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

13

representatives the actual realization of some task, which will be done when the necessary conditions are satisfied. This approach allows high levels of decoupling between the participants in the experiment, both in spatial and temporal terms, since they do not need to be physically present in the place where the experiment takes place and neither do they need to participate on-line in the experiment. Another application area is remote learning, especially for life-long training programs. Remote access to virtual teaching labs gives the student the opportunity to get almost "hands on" experience.
Recent advances in networking, high performance computing and resource management have introduced new possibilities for secure communication and computation intensive resource management [1], [9]. The GRID is a world-wide effort in this area, which takes advantage of improvements in the overall network bandwidth, and adds a new dimension to the distributed computing. Through the GRID environment, a large number of Unix-based workstations and supercomputers can be connected in an efficient way, offering users a vast amount of computational power, offering new potential for remote supervision and VL applications. However, the development of communication infrastructures such as the GRID architecture and the supporting GRID middle-ware, are on going world-wide efforts which will not be completed any time soon.
Some important open research topics in remote supervision include:
· Integration of component technologies into a coherent platform, including coordinated and dynamic resource sharing for collaborative problem solving - direct access to hardware, software, data, etc.
· Tele-supervision and tele-operation assisted by intelligent mobile agents with advanced error recovery support.
· Facilities for dynamic definition of information (and services) access rights / different visibility levels for different VL community members, i.e. encouraging the joint developments while preserving rights, responsibilities, and liabilities.
· Definition of adequate representation languages for cooperation formalization cooperation agreement / contracts, liability and risks negotiation, credit assignment (based on contributions), value and ownership of common developments, intangible entities (IPR, services).
· Understanding and supporting the social aspects of remote collaboration (lack of "silent language" of body motions and spatial positions).
· Asynchronous cooperation and delegation. Further developments in coordination approaches for diverse, autonomous, semi-cooperative, semi-reliable, heterogeneous, and evolving organizations.
· Extended error recovery mechanisms.

5. SHOP-FLOOR REENGINEERING
The capability to rapidly change the shop-floor infrastructure is an important condition to allow participation of manufacturing enterprises in dynamic cooperative networks. Shopfloor agility implies an increasing level of re-engineering activity. The processes of change (re-engineering/adaptation) have been addressed mostly at the level of business process reengineering and information technology infrastructures. Little attention however has been

14 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
devoted to the changes of the manufacturing system itself and yet the shop floor suffers a continuous evolution along its life cycle.
A particularly critical element in a shop-floor re-engineering process is the control system. Current control/supervision architectures are not agile because any shop-floor changes require considerable programming modifications, which imply the need for qualified programmers, usually not available in manufacturing SMEs. To worsen the situation, the changes (even small changes) might impact the global system architecture, what increases the programming effort and the potential for side-effect errors. It is therefore mandatory to develop approaches to eliminate or reduce these problems, making the process of change (re-engineering) faster and more flexible, focusing on configuration instead of codification.
Contract-based reengineering. An agent-based architecture in which cooperation is regulated by contracts has been proposed by the Robotics and Integrated Manufacturing Group of UNL [2] as a flexible approach to dynamic shop-floor re-engineering. Manufacturing components are modeled using agents, which build up a community. Each manufacturing component e.g. robots, tools, fixing devices, is associated to an agent that represents its behavior. These agents must interact in order to generate aggregated functionalities that in some cases are more complex than the simple addition of their individual capabilities. This is what happens, for instance, when several manufacturing components are working together, forming a manufacturing cell.
A set of agents working together towards a common goal is called a consortium. The consortium ­ the agency equivalent to a manufacturing cell - is the basic organizational form of co-operation. A basic consortium is composed of one or more agents performing the role of manufacturing agents and one agent performing the role of coordinator, and can also include other consortia as members. The coordinator of a consortium is able to execute complex operations that are composed of simpler operations offered by the consortium members.
It is important that agents willing to cooperate are grouped according to their spatial relationships (or any other relevant relationship e.g. technological compatibility), i.e., manufacturing agents that could establish consortia should be grouped together because they share something when they are candidates to consortia. The structure used to group manufacturing agents that can co-operate and from which the agents share some concepts, similarly to enterprise clusters, is called cluster. Adding or removing a component from the physical manufacturing system also implies that the corresponding agent must be removed from the cluster what can also have impact on the established consortia. Each consortium is formed with the help of a broker. The broker is an agent that interacts with a human, the cluster, and candidate members to the consortium.
The interactions between the cluster and its members are regulated by a cluster adhesion contract, which is a bilateral contract formed between the cluster and the candidate member. This contract establishes the terms under which the co-operation is going to be established. It includes terms such as the ontologies that must be used by the candidate, the duration, the consideration (a term that describes what the candidate should give in turn of joining the cluster, usually the skills or capacities that the candidate is bringing to the cluster) [2]. The behavior of the consortium is regulated by a multilateral consortium contract that is "signed" by all members of the consortium. The important terms of this type of contract other than the usual ones like duration, names of the members, penalties,

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

15

etc. are the consideration and the individual skills that each member brings to the consortium. Note that the skills involved in a specific consortium contract may be a subset of the skills offered by the involved agent when it joins the cluster. The importance of contracts as a mechanism to create/change flexible and agile control structures (consortia) lays on the fact that the generic behaviors presented by generic agents are constrained by the contract that each agent has signed. This calls forth that different consortium behaviors can be achieved by just changing the terms of the consortium contract, namely the skills brought to the consortium.
An agent can participate on a consortium according to two different roles: 1) as member or 2) as coordinator. A member must execute all the operations signed by it on the consortium contract that are requested by the coordinator. On the other hand, the coordinator can create complex operations (services) by aggregation of the individual operations of the members. A coordinator can have more complex operations either by adding more members or through the creation of a hierarchical structure of consortia.
Figure 3 illustrates both roles an agent can play. It is interesting to note that in both roles agents might be subject to two kinds of contracts: membership contracts, and coordination contracts, what just expresses their dual roles, as an agent can be simultaneously member of a consortium and coordinator of another consortium. This is the case of the agent Z, which coordinates member X and Y, and simultaneously is a member of the consortium led by R. The terms to the right of each contract in figure 3 represent the skills offered to the consortium by each member. For instance, agent Z knows from its coordination contract that it can access the skills SA and SC, provided by agent Y, and skill SB, provided by agent X. From these skills agent Z creates the more complex skills SD and SE, which are offered to a higher-level consortium contract, which are represented in the membership contract of Z. The services (complex operations) of each level can be represented using a workflow model or even a Petri Net, and each generic agent must have an execution engine to execute these kinds of operations. In the current implementation these operations are created with the help of a human expert interacting with the broker agent, during the creation/changing of a consortium.

Co-ordinator role R

co-ordination contracts

T:SF T:SG Z:SD Z:SE

Co-ordinator role Z

VISIO CORPORATI
ON $
membership contract

co-ordination contracts

Z:SD->SA,SB Z:SE->SB,SC,SA
Y:SA Y:SC X:SB

Member role X

VISIO CORPORATI
ON $
membership contract

X:SB X:SB

Member role Y

VISIO CORPORATI
ON $
membership contract

Y:SA Y:SC
Y:SA Y:SC

Member role T

VISIO CORPORATI
ON $
membership contract

AMI

co-ordination contracts

AMI

co-ordination contracts

AMI

co-ordination contracts

Figure 3 ­ Hierarchy of consortia

T:SF T:SG
T:SF T:SG

Figure 3 also shows that a manufacturing agent coordinates an AMI (Agent Machine Interface), which is an agent representing the controller of some specific physical

16 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
manufacturing component. Separating the AMI from the agent enables that the same generic agent model can be used to play both roles: member and coordinator. This is an important advantage because any kind of manufacturing architecture can be implemented using only one type of agent.
The most important global behaviors of the proposed architecture can be summarized as: 1) cluster registering, 2) new consortium formation, 3) consortium alteration, 4) service execution, and 5) contract termination.
Some challenges in shop-floor reengineering research: · New integrated and comprehensive methodologies for shop-floor reengineering. · Intelligent brokerage functionalities for manufacturing consortia formation. · Further development of the relationships between BP requirements and contract-based
shop-floor behavior. · Derivation methods for high level control strategies out of the intended behavior. · Definition of a kind of universal "plug and play" standard for manufacturing devices. · Combination of re-engineering and remote supervision approaches.
6. CREATING SYNERGIES
As mentioned in the Introduction, there is an urgent need to create synergies and harmonize the results of various leading projects in order to reach interoperable models and common business practices. Some important initiatives in this direction are the following networks of excellence: IFIP COVE, IST VOSTER, IST CE-NET, and IST THINKcreative.
COVE started as a project aiming to contribute to the harmonization and knowledge dissemination of world-wide research results on virtual organizations, and to foster needed collaborative developments. More recently COVE evolved to a permanent Working Group of the IFIP Technical Committee 5, WG5.5. The VOSTER network represents an ongoing effort to cluster major European VO projects, systematize the state of the art, and contribute to the harmonization of models and infrastructures. Similarly to VOSTER, but focused on the Concurrent Engineering aspects, CE-NET also aims at having a role in terms of harmonization and defining roadmaps for further developments. Finally THINKcreative is an EC funded network of experts that aims at identifying and characterizing emerging organizational collaborative forms and their required infrastructures, modeling and application tools, as well as the corresponding socio-organizational needs for the next 5, 10 and 20 years.
Although VOs should be addressed by multi-disciplinary teams, some early developments have been tackled separately either by the "ICT community" or by the "organizations and management community". In particular in the European context, most of the early Esprit and IST projects were technology-driven. A few recent projects put more emphasis on the management and organizational issues (with a corresponding decrease on the ICT infrastructure) but a balanced integration between the "ICT" and the "Management and Organizational" communities still seems to be missing. One exception is present at the EC-funded THINKcreative network that involves a balanced composition of experts from these two main areas. In addition to the mentioned aspects, there are other important

Virtual Organizations in Manufacturing: Trends and Challenges

17

factors to be considered in a VO, such as the social, ethical, and educational issues. The barriers for VO implantation are more of a socio-organizational and command logic than of technological nature. One of the early attempts to combine a "sociology" component with the technology development was represented in IST PRODNET [4]. Although there is a growing awareness for the advantages / need of taking a multi-disciplinary approach, it is important to not under-estimate the difficulties of putting together communities with different backgrounds, different language and culture, and different approaches to problem solving. Even within the engineering area it is not always easy to reach a common language and understanding. For instance, many of the European projects on VO, although ICTbased, are mostly developed by industrial-, mechanical-, or electrical-engineers, where, there is, in many cases, a "divorce" between this community and the software engineering community. The difficulties are much bigger when other non-engineering communities are put together with engineers.
There is therefore a need for an integrated multi-disciplinary approach leading to truly joint work (mutual understanding and respect for the other areas!) among: Theoreticians, System engineers and ICT developers, Social & organizational experts, Economists, Standardization bodies, and the Application Domain experts. In order to make this possible, there is also a need for further investments in specific formal modeling languages ­ a must in order to ensure mutual understanding in a complex multi-disciplinary domain.

7. CONCLUSIONS
Virtual Organizations are playing an increasing role in providing manufacturing companies with a powerful tool to face the challenges of fast evolving market conditions. A large number of research projects and practical implantation cases have been supported during the last decade. There is however the need for a more systematic and comprehensive understanding of the area, namely in terms of the emerging collaborative organizations, and the development of appropriate support infrastructures and tools. It is also mandatory to reach some harmonization of models and approaches in order to achieve inter-operability and reduce the engineering efforts still required to launch an operative VO. Such developments shall be undertaken by teams with a multi-disciplinary composition, for which the difficulties of communication among different communities should not be underestimated.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported in part by the European Commission through the IST VOSTER, CE-NET and THINKcreative projects, and IFIP through the COVE project.

REFERENCES
1. Afsarmanesh, H.; Kaletas, E.C.; Hertzberger, L.O. ­ A Reference Architecture for Scientific Virtual Laboratories, Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 17, 2001.
2. Barata, J.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. ­ Contract management in agile manufacturing systems, in Collaborative Business Ecosystems and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, May 2002.
3. Bremer, C. F.; Mundim, A.; Michilini, F.; Siqueira, J.; Ortega, L., 1999 - A Brazilian case of VE coordination, in Infrastructures for Virtual Enterprises - Networking Industrial Enterprises, L.M. CamarinhaMatos, H. Afsarmanesh (Ed.s), Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 0-7923-8639-6, Oct 1999.

18 International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing 2002, Dresden, Germany
4. Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; Afsarmanesh, H. ­ Infrastructures for Virtual Enterprises - Networking Industrial Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Oct 1999.
5. Camarinha-Matos, L. M.; Afsarmanesh, H. - Service Federation in Virtual Organizations, Proceedings of PROLAMAT'01, 7-10 Nov 2001, Budapest, Hungary.
6. Camarinha-Matos, L. M. and Afsarmanesh, H. - Virtual Enterprise Modeling and Support Infrastructures: Applying Multi-Agent Systems Approaches, in Multi-Agent Systems and Applications, M. Luck, V. Marik, O. Stpankova, R. Trappl (eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence LNAI 2086, Springer, July 2001.
7. Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; Afsarmanesh, H.; Rabelo, J. ­ Infrastructure developments for agile virtual enterprises, to appear in J. Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 2002.
8. Goranson, H.T., 1999 ­ The Agile Virtual Enterprise ­ Cases, metrics, tools. Quorum Books. 9. Kaletas, E. C. ; Afsarmanesh, H. ; Hertzberger, L. O. ­ Virtual Laboratories and Virtual Organizations
supporting biosciences, in Collaborative Business Ecosystems and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, May 2002. 10. Lee, J.; Yost, G. - The PIF Process Interchange Format and Framework, Version 1.0, http://ccs.mit.edu/pifmain.html, Dec22, 1994. 11. Molina, A.; Flores, M.; Caballero, D., 1998 ­ Virtual enterprises: A Mexican case study, in Intelligent Systems for Manufacturing, L.M. Camarinha-Matos et al. (Eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 0-41284670-5. 12. NIIIP. www.niiip.org. 13. Osorio, A.L.; Oliveira, N.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. - Concurrent Engineering in Virtual Enterprises: The extended CIM-FACE architecture, Proc. Of BASYS'98 ­ 3rd IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. On Balanced Automation Systems, Intelligent Systems for Manufacturing (Kluwer Academic Publishers), ISBN 0-412-84670-5, Prague, Czech Republic, Aug 1998. 14. Rabelo, R.; Afsarmanesh, H.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. - Federated multi-agent scheduling in virtual enterprises, in E-business and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Oct 2000. 15. Rabelo, R.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M.; Vallejos, R. - Agent-based brokerage for virtual enterprise creation in the moulds industry, in E-business and Virtual Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Oct 2000. 16. Rocha, A.; Oliveira, E. ­ An electronic market architecture for the formation of virtual enterprises, in [4], 1999. 17. Schlenoff, C., Gruninger M., Tissot, F., Valois, J., Lubell, J., Lee, J., 2000 - The Process Specification Language (PSL): Overview and Version 1.0 Specification, NISTIR 6459, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD (2000). 18. SUN - JINI Technology Architectural Overview, www.sun.com/jini/whitepapers/architecture.html, Jan 1999. 19. Vieira, W.; Camarinha-Matos, L.M. - Adaptive mobile agents: Enhanced flexibility in Internet-based remote operation, in Advances in Networked Enterprises, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Sept 2000. 20. Zarli, A.; Poyet, P. ­ A framework for distributed information management in the virtual enterprise: The VEGA project, in [4], 1999.

