Modeling Interaction Between Metacognition and Emotion in

a Cognitive Architecture

Eva Hudlicka

Psychometrix Associates, Inc.

1805 Azalea Drive,  Blacksburg, VA , USA

evahud@earthlink.net   

Abstract

While research in metacognition has grown  significantly in the
past 10 years, there has been a relative lack of research devoted
to the focused study of the interactions between metacognition
and  affective  processes.  Computational  models  represent  a
useful tool which can help remedy this situation by constructing
causal  models  of  demonstrated correlational relationships, and
by  generating  empirical  hypotheses  which  can  be  verified
experimentally.   In this paper we describe enhancements to an
existing  cognitive–affective  architecture  that  will  enable  it  to
perform  a  subset  of  metacognitive  functions.  We  focus  on
modeling the role of a specific  metacognitive factor, the feeling
of confidence, and the anxiety-linked  metacognitive strategy of
emotion-focused coping.
  

Introduction and Objectives

   Metacognition,  defined  variously  as  ‘thoughts  about
thoughts’ or ‘awareness and control’ of one’s thoughts, is
considered  by  many  to  be  an  essential  component  of
skilled  performance,  influencing  memory  functions,
learning  and  skill  acquisition,  and  problem-solving.
While research in metacognition has  grown  significantly
in the past 10 years, there has been a relative paucity of
research devoted to the focused study of the interactions
between metacognition and affective processes. A notable
exception is the work of Wells (2000), and Matthews and
Wells  (2004).  However, 
this  work  focuses  on
metacognition  and  emotion  in  the  context  of  emotional
disorders (e.g., depression, generalized anxiety, obsessive
compulsive disorders), rather than on the role of emotion
in  normal  subjects,  or  the  interaction  between  emotion
and metacognition in transient affective states (e.g., high
stress or frustration).
   Computational  models  represent  a  useful  tool  for
elucidating  the  mechanisms  of  cognitive  processing.
Ideally, these models are based on existing empirical data
and used to confirm hypothesized mechanisms. However,
in  situations  where  such  data  are  lacking,  these  models
can  be  helpful  in  generating  empirical  hypotheses  for
further experimental testing and data gathering.
    In this paper we describe enhancements to an existing
cognitive–affective  architecture  (MAMID)  (Hudlicka
2002; 2003),  which support the exploration of affective-

metacognitive interactions. The enhancements will enable
MAMID  to  perform  a  subset  of  the  metacognitive
functions involved in monitoring and control of cognition,
and the associated metacognitive knowledge and beliefs.
The initial focus will be on modeling the role of a specific
metacognitive  factor,  the  feeling  of  confidence  (FOC),
and the  anxiety-linked metacognitive strategy of emotion-
focused coping.
    The intended benefits of the model are in both the
theoretical   and  the  applied  realms.   In  the  theoretical
realm,  the  exercise  of  building  a  model  requires  an
operationalization  of  concepts  and  relationships  which
help refine existing psychological theories, and generate
empirical  hypotheses  for  further  testing.  In  the applied
realm,  the  explicit  model  of  metacognition,  and  its
interactions with affective factors, promises to provide a
more  realistic  model  of  human  behavior,  both  adaptive
and  maladaptive  (e.g.,  models  where  metacognition
diminishes  performance  (e.g.,  Wilson  and  Schooler
1991)),  and generate more effective agent behavior (e.g.,
improved performance under stress).
    This paper is organized as follows. First, we briefly
summarize key findings about metacognition   and  about
known interactions between metacognition and emotion.
Next,  we  describe  the  existing  MAMID  cognitive-
affective  architecture,  within  which  the  proposed
metacognitive component will be implemented. We then
describe  the  proposed  design  for  modeling  the  role  of
FOC  in  metacognitive  monitoring  and  control,  and  the
metacognitive knowledge required.   We then outline two
models  where  emotion  influences  metacognitive
processing.   We  conclude  with  a  brief  discussion  of
related work, a  summary and future work.

Metacognition and Its Interaction with

Emotion

What  is  metacognition?  The  simplest  definition  of
metacognition  is  “thinking  about  thinking”  (Nelson
2002). However, the simplicity of this statement belies the
complexity and diversity of processes and structures that
mediate the variety of identified metacognitive activities.
More  differentiated  definitions  distinguish  between

awareness  (and  associated  monitoring  functions  of
cognition), and control (and associated executive and self-
regulatory functions of cognition) (Osman and Hannafin
1992; Nelson and Narens 1990).   A more encompassing
definition  states  that  metacognition  is  a  “multifaceted
concept comprising the knowledge and beliefs, processes
and strategies that appraise, monitor or control cognition”
(Wells 2000).   Metacognitive knowledge is then defined
as  knowledge  individuals  have  about  their  own
cognitions, as well as about the factors that influence their
cognitions.   (A very useful glossary of terms relating to
metacognition can be found in Schooler (2002)).

What is the role of metacognition? Evidence  indicates
that metacognitive control and regulation is comprised of
a  range  of  functions  including  attention  allocation,
checking,  planning,  memory  retrieval  and  encoding
strategies,  and  detection  of  performance  errors  (Wells
2000).   In general,  metacognition is involved in strategy
selection  for  complex  problems  requiring  resource
tradeoffs, for dealing with unfamiliar situations, and for
troubleshooting.  A number of researchers discuss the fact
that metacognition can be helpful, neutral, or harmful to
cognition and performance (e.g., Paris 2002; Wilson and
Schooler 1991).

Relationship Between Metacognition and Emotion  As
stated above, data regarding the mutual influences among
emotion and metacognition are unfortunately limited, and
focused  almost  exclusively  on  psychopathology  (e.g.,
Wells 2000; Matthews and Wells 2004). For the purpose
of  modeling,  we  need  to  identify  the  specific  effects  of
particular affective factors (states or traits) on particular
metacognitive functions and knowledge. To help organize
the known effects, and to identify gaps in data, it is useful
to categorize the effects into those resulting from states
vs. traits, and those affecting processing mechanisms vs.
knowledge structures.  Examples of identified correlations
include:  State  effects  on  processes:  Anxiety-linked
appraisal  of  events  as  threats;  emotion-focused  coping;
Depression-linked  self-criticism  focused  coping;  Trait
effects  on  processes:  Neuroticism-linked  preference  for
self-information;  Trait  effects  on  knowledge:
Neuroticism-linked  predominance  of  negative  schemas
(threat,  negative  self  evaluations,  negative  future
projections).

MAMID Cognitive-Affective Architecture

and Modeling Methodology

Here we briefly describe the existing MAMID cognitive-
affective  architecture  which  will  be  enhanced  with  the
proposed  metacognitive  functions.  A  key  component  of
the  architecture  is  an  affect  appraisal  module,  which
dynamically  generates  affective  states  as  a  function  of
both  internal  and  external  factors  (e.g.,  incoming  cues,
internal  situation  assessments  and  goals),  and  both

dynamic  and  static  agent  attributes  (e.g.,  prior  existing
emotion, stable personality trait profile). We also discuss
the  generic  modeling  methodology  used  to  model  the
interacting  effects  of  states,  traits  and  other  individual
differences  in  terms  of  parametric  manipulations  of  the
architecture  processes  (e.g.,  attention)  and  structures
(working and long-term memories).

MAMID  Cognitive  Architecture  The  cognitive
architecture  implements  a  sequential  see-think-do
processing  sequence  (figure  1),  consisting  of  the
following  modules:  sensory  pre-processing,  translating
incoming data into task-relevant cues;  attention, filtering
incoming  cues  and  selecting  a  subset  for  processing;
situation  assessment, integrating individual cues into an
overall  situation  assessment;  expectation  generation,
projecting  current  situation  onto  possible  future  states;
affect  appraiser,  deriving  the  affective  state   (both
valence and four of the basic emotions) from a variety of
external  and  internal  elicitors,  both  static  and  dynamic;
goal  selection,  selecting  critical  goals  for  achievement;
and action  selection,  selecting  the  best  actions  for  goal
achievement.
   These  modules map the incoming stimuli (cues) onto
the  outgoing  behavior  (actions),  via  a  series  of
intermediate 
internal  representational  structures
(situations, expectations, and goals), collectively termed
mental constructs.  This mapping is enabled by long-term
memories  (LTM)  associated  with  each  module,
represented  in  terms  of  belief  nets  or  rules.   Mental
constructs  are  characterized  by  their  attributes  (e.g.,
familiarity, novelty, salience, threat level, valence, etc.),
which  influence  their  processing;  that  is,  their  rank  and
the  consequent  likelihood  of  being  processed  within  a
given  architecture  cycle;  (e.g.,  cue  will  be  attended,
situation derived, goal or action selected). (Note that the
availability of the mental constructs from previous frames
of  the  execution  cycle  allows  for  dynamic  feedback
among  constructs,  and  thus  departs  from  a  strictly
sequential processing sequence.)

Cues
CuesCues

Attention
Attention

Attended cues
Attended cues

Situation 
Situation 

Assessment
Assessment

Current Situations 
Current Situations 
Task, Self, Other
Task, Self, Other

Expectation
Expectation
Generation
Generation

Expectations
Expectations
Future states task, self,other
Future states task, self,other

Affect 
Affect 

Appraiser
Appraiser

Affective state & emotions:
Affective state & emotions:
Valence (+ |  -)
Valence (+ |  -)
Anxiety, Anger, Neg. Affect, Pos. Affect
Anxiety, Anger, Neg. Affect, Pos. Affect

Goal 
Goal 

Manager
Manager

Action 
Action 
Selection
Selection

Goals
Goals
Task, Self, Other
Task, Self, Other

Actions
Actions
Actions

Figure 1: MAMID Cognitive Architecture:

Modules & Mental Constructs

   The Affect Appraisal module is a core component of the
MAMID  architecture.  It  integrates  external  data  (cues),

internal  interpretations  (situations,  expectation)  and
priorities  (goals),  and  stable  and  transient  individual
characteristics (traits and existing emotional states), and
generates an affective appraisal in terms of both a valence
(positive / negative) and one of the four basic emotions
(fear/anxiety, anger/frustration, sadness, joy).
   The emotion intensities are calculated via a series of
belief nets stored in the agent’s LTM.  Differences in the
triggering  elicitors  for  particular emotions  allow  for  the
representation  of  individual  idiosyncracies  in  emotion
triggering (e.g., Agent A might react to situation x with
anger,   Agent  B  with  fear,  whereas  Agent  C  might  not
have an affective reaction at all.) The model incorporates
elements  of  several  recent  appraisal  theories:  multiple-
levels and multiple  stages (Leventhal and Scherer 1987;
Smith  and  Kirby 2001).

Generic State / Trait Modeling Methodology To model
the  interacting  effects  of  traits  and  states  on  cognitive
processing,  MAMID  uses  a  previously  described
methodology  (Hudlicka  2002;  1998;  (see  also  Pew  and
Mavor 1998)), which consists of mapping particular state
/ trait profiles onto specific architecture parameter values
(figure  2).  These  parameters  then  control  processing
within individual architecture modules.
    Functions implementing these mappings were
constructed on the basis of the available empirical data.
For  example,  reduced attentional  and  working  memory
(WM)  capacity,  associated  with  anxiety  and  fear,  are
modeled by dynamically reducing the attentional and WM
capacity of the architecture modules, which then reduces
the number of constructs processed (fewer cues attended,
situations  derived,  expectations  generated,  etc.).
Attentional  threat  bias  is  modeled  by  higher  ranking  of
threatening cues, thus increasing their likelihood of being
attended, and by higher ranking of threatening situations
and  expectations,  thus  increasing  the  chances  of  a
threatening situation / expectation being derived.   Trait-
linked  structural  differences  in  LTM  are  supported  by
allowing  the  flexible  selection  of  alternative  LTM
clusters, reflecting  distinct  personality  traits.  Traits  also
influence  the  dynamic  characteristics  of  the  emotional
responses (ramp up, decay, and maximum intensities).

INDIVIDUAL
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
DIFFERENCES

Cognitive 
Cognitive 
Cognitive 

Attention Speed / Capacity
Attention Speed / Capacity
Attention Speed / Capacity
WM Speed / Capacity
WM Speed / Capacity
WM Speed / Capacity

Skill level
Skill level
Skill level

Traits
Traits

Extraversion 
Extraversion 
Stability
Stability
Aggressiveness 
Aggressiveness 
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness

Affective States
Affective States
Affective States
Anxiety / Fear
Anxiety / Fear
Anxiety / Fear
Anger / Frustration
Anger / Frustration
Anger / Frustration
Negative affect
Negative affect
Negative affect
Positive affect
Positive affect
Positive affect

COGNITIVE 
COGNITIVE 
COGNITIVE 

ARCHITECTURE
ARCHITECTURE
ARCHITECTURE
PARAMETERS
PARAMETERS
PARAMETERS

Processing
Processing
Processing

Module Parameters
Module Parameters
Module Parameters
(Attention / Working Memory)
(Attention / Working Memory)
(Attention / Working Memory)

Capacity
Capacity
Capacity
Speed
Speed
Speed

Inferencing speed & biases
Inferencing speed & biases
Inferencing speed & biases

Cue selection & delays
Cue selection & delays
Cue selection & delays
Situation selection & delays
Situation selection & delays
Situation selection & delays
...
...
...

Structure
Structure
Structure

Architecture topology
Architecture topology
Architecture topology

Weights on  intermodule  links
Weights on  intermodule  links
Weights on  intermodule  links

Long term memory
Long term memory
Long term memory
Content & structure  of     
Content & structure  of     
Content & structure  of     
knowledge clusters  (BN, rules)
knowledge clusters  (BN, rules)
knowledge clusters  (BN, rules)

COGNITIVE  ARCHITECTURE
COGNITIVE  ARCHITECTURE
COGNITIVE  ARCHITECTURE

Attention
Attention
Attention

Situation 
Situation 
Situation 

Assessment
Assessment
Assessment

Expectation
Expectation
Expectation
Generator
Generator
Generator

Affect 
Affect 
Affect 

Appraiser
Appraiser
Appraiser

Goal 
Goal 
Goal 

Manager
Manager
Manager

Action 
Action 
Action 
Selection
Selection
Selection

Figure 2: Parametric State / Trait Modeling

Methodology

   The initial version of MAMID was implemented in the
context of a peacekeeping scenario, with each instance of
the  MAMID  architecture  controlling  the  behavior  of  a
simulated  Army  commander,  reacting  to  a  series  of
surprise situations (e.g., ambush, hostile crowd) (Hudlicka
2003).  MAMID  was  able  to  demonstrate  distinct
processing  differences  due  to  the  different  trait  profiles
and  dynamically  generated  states,  with  the  distinct
commanders behaving differently during the course of the
scenario, leading to differences in mission outcomes. The
domain-independent  MAMID   architecture  is  currently
being transitioned into a NASA context, and it is within
this  context  that  the  metacognitive  enhancements
described below will be implemented.

Proposed MAMID Enhancements

Implementing Metacognitve Functions

The objective of the enhancements described below is to
augment  the  existing  MAMID  architecture  with  the
ability  to  perform  a  subset  of metacognitive functions,
and  to  explicitly  model  interactions  among  selected
metacognitive functions and emotion. Below we describe
a model of the feeling of confidence factor, and its role in
triggering  metacognitive  control  strategies.  In  the  next
section we describe two examples focusing on emotion.

Feeling of Confidence (FOC)  FOC  is   a  component  of
metacognition  that  reflects  the  level  of  confidence  in
particular cognitions. In the metacognition literature, FOC
judgments  typically  refer  to  the  FOC’s  of  inferred
solutions  to  problems,  and  to  memory  retrieval.  In  this
modeling  effort  we  extend  FOC  to  also  apply  to  future
projections (i.e., the FOC that particular expectations are
‘correct’).  FOC  is  thought  to  play  a  role  in  controlling
cognitive  iteration  during problem-solving  and  memory
retrieval, by determining whether a particular answer will
be accepted, or whether further cognitive refinement will
be necessary (e.g., Narens et al. 1994).
   To model FOC and its role within MAMID we
introduce  a  meta-layer  “above”  the  current  MAMID
processing sequence (refer to figures 1 and 3). The meta-
layer contains two modules, “Monitoring” and “Control”,
each  of  which  accesses  the  metacognitive  knowledge-
base.   Similarly  to  its  object-level  analogs,  the
metacognitive knowledge base consists of rules and belief
nets  which  contain  beliefs  and  knowledge  about
cognitions,  and 
for  selecting  particular
metacognitive monitoring, control, and coping strategies.
   To model FOC and its role, two other features are
introduced  to  the  existing  MAMID  model.   First,  each
mental  construct  is  augmented  to  include  an  FOC
attribute. Thus a distinct FOC is associated with all of the
generated  cues,  situations,  expectations,  goals  and
actions. This FOC value reflects the  agent’s confidence
that  the  corresponding  constructs  represent  the  actual
stimuli  (wrt  cues),  accurate  interpretations  (wrt
situations),   accurate  projections  (wrt  expectations),

rules 

appropriate  priorities  (wrt  goals),  and  appropriate
responses (wrt actions). Initially, FOC will be calculated
using  a  combination  cognitive  and  affective  factors,
which will include: anxiety (reducing FOC), awareness of
alternatives  (inversely  proportional  to  FOC),  task
difficulty (inversely proportional to FOC), and awareness
of lack of knowledge (reducing FOC) (Efklides 2002).
   Second, a distinct FOC threshold is introduced for each
construct  type.   Thus there is a situation FOC threshold,
expectation FOC threshold, action FOC threshold etc.
   When a mental construct is produced by the
corresponding module during the processing sequence at
the object level, the construct’s FOC is compared to the
corresponding construct-type FOC threshold (e.g.,   FOC
(situation  X) is compared with the FOC threshold for the
construct type ‘situation’, etc.).   If the construct FOC is
greater than the corresponding construct type threshold,
then the feeling of confidence is adequate and no further
metacognitive  activity  is  required.  If  the  FOC  is  lower
than the FOC threshold, this signals that the desired level
of  subjective  confidence  has  not  been  reached  and
metacognitive control activity is triggered, in an attempt
to increase FOC, or to shift strategies entirely.

Metacognitive

Knowledge / Beliefs

Metacognitive Level

Monitoring 
Processes

Control 

Processes

Attention

Cognitive Level

Cues

Situation 

Assessment

Expectation
Generation

Affect

Appraiser

Goal

Manager

Action

Selection

Actions

Figure 3: Augmenting MAMID With a

Metacognitive Layer

What  exact  form  the  metacognitive  control  then  takes
depends  on  the  construct  type,  the  contents  of  the
metacognitive  knowledge-base,  and  both  the  situational
context (external factors) and the agent’s internal context
(currently activated constructs and emotional states).
    Several options exist. One option of course is to do
nothing and continue processing at the object level, with
the lower-than-desired feeling of confidence. (There may
be interesting cumulative effects of this on further future
processing,  such  as  an  increased  sense  of  subjective
uncertainty which may contribute to stress which in turn
has a series of specific effects on attention, perception and
cognition.) Another option is to re-derive the construct in
an  attempt  to  increase  the  feeling  of  confidence.   The
nature  of  this  re-derivation  process  depends  on  several
factors, including the position in the processing sequence

of the construct in question, and the type of re-processing
possible given the current informational context. Both are
explained below.

Position in processing sequence   The further along the
processing sequence a construct is, that is, the closer it is
to the action (end) as opposed to the cue (beginning), the
more extensive the re-processing can be. To re-calculate
the  FOC  for  a  cue,  the  only  option  is  for  the  attention
module  to  re-scan  and  obtain  a  new  set  of  cues.  In
contrast, to recalculate an action FOC, the agent has the
option  to  re-calculate  the  action  FOC  within  the  action
selection module, and to go back recursively through the
preceding  modules,  recalculating  the  FOC’s  of  the
intervening  constructs,  and  perhaps  including  an
attentional re-scan to obtain new cues.

Informational   context   By  informational  context  we
mean the nature of the data available for (re)processing.
For example, to recalculate the situation certainty during a
‘second  pass’  through  the  situation  assessment  module,
the agent has several options: (1) using different subset of
the existing information to re-calculate the situation and
its  associated  FOC  (e.g.,  use  different  schemas,  cues  –
perhaps  pursuing  options  which  were  rejected  in  the
previous pass); (2) using a different weighting scheme for
the  existing  information  (e.g.,  using  the  same  cues  and
schemas  to  calculate  the  information  but  changing  the
relative importance of the constituent cues in contributing
to  the  final  situation,  assigning  more  or  less  weight  to
self-related cues);  or  (3)  attempting  to  obtain  additional
information  by  directing  the  attention  module  to  collect
additional cues, which may then contribute to a change in
the situation FOC.
   The choice among these alternatives depends on the
current dynamic context (e.g., the current configuration of
mental  constructs  and  the  agent’s  affective  state),  in
conjunction with the contents of the metacognitive long-
term  memory  (mLTM),  which  stores  the  particular
metacognitive  control  strategies  and  their  specific
triggers.
    Thus, for example, a particular agent’s 
mLTM may
contain  rules  that  indicate  that  when  a  situation  FOC  is
below the desired threshold, the metacognitive procedure
is  to  re-scan the  environment,  obtain  an  update  cue  set,
and recalculate the situation using the standard procedure.
(This  process  also  enables  the  modeling  of  the  familiar
confirmation  bias,  where  cues  are  selectively  attended
which  confirm  an  existing  interpretation  and  reject
alternative  interpretations.)  Another  agent  may  have  an
alternative  strategy  that  involves  a  repetition  of  the
situation assessment process, incorporating “weak” cues
that had been rejected in the previous pass, in an attempt
to  increase the FOC.
    A number of possible options can be explored here,
including specific content-related variations in strategies,
both  across  and  within  agents.  For  example,  within  the
same agent, different control strategies might be used for

situations involving the self, a particular task or another
specific  individual.   Different  strategies  may  also  be
linked to different affective states. For example, during a
low state of anxiety, low action FOC may trigger the re-
calculation of the action FOC using different data (e.g.,
taking  into  consideration  a  broader  range  of  triggering
situations and  expectations, in  addition  to  the  goal).   In
contrast, during a high state of anxiety, a low action FOC
may trigger an immediate re-scan of the environment in
an attempt to restart the processing sequence, in the hopes
that a higher action FOC will be achieved.
   The contents of the  mLTM defining these alternative
strategies are specified by the modeler and, to the extent
possible, based on available empirical evidence. When the
necessary  data  are  lacking,  the  modeler  must  make
assumptions  and  generalize  from  available  data.  The
resulting  model  can  then  be  evaluated  according  to  the
appropriate relevant criteria (e.g., “Does it generate useful
empirical  hypotheses  which  can  be  verified
experimentally?” “Does the agent produce more realistic
and effective behavior in simulated situations as a result
of  the  metacognitive  enhancements?”  etc.),  and  the
mLTM  contents   are  then  iteratively  refined  until  the
desired performance criteria are obtained.

Modeling Interactions Among Metacognition

and Emotions

Below  we  describe  how  the  proposed  design  integrates
the  metacognitive  functions  with  the  existing  affective
components  of  the  MAMID  architecture.  We  focus  on
models  of  two  specific  phenomena:  one  supported  by
existing empirical data (anxiety-related emotion-focused
coping), and the other a speculative model of the possible
relationship  between  affective  factors  and  the  FOC
discussed above.

Anxiety-related emotion-focused coping  Empirical data
indicate that particular state and trait values are linked to
distinct styles of coping. Specifically, heightened states of
anxiety,  and  a  high  score  on  the  neuroticism  trait,
correlate with emotion-focused coping strategies (Wells,
2000).  These are problem-solving strategies that focus on
altering an undesirable emotion state, rather than altering
the   features  of  the  environment  that  gave  rise  to  that
state.  Examples  of  emotion-focused  coping  strategies
include   attempts  to  calm  self  by  distraction,  excessive
worry,  and  avoidance.  In  many  cases,  this  choice  of
coping  exacerbates  the  problem,  since  it  may  not
effectively  eliminate  the  original  source  of  the  negative
emotion.
   MAMID already implements this capability, by a
combination of several mechanisms: (1) by the dynamic
calculation  of  affective  states;  (2)  by  the  ability  of  a
particular  state-value  pair  to  trigger  the  selection  of  a
particular  goal  or  a  specific  action  (e.g.,  IF  (anxiety  =
high)  THEN  (communicate  with  peer);  IF  (anxiety  =
high) THEN (goal = ‘reduce anxiety’), etc.); and (3) by

making a distinction between self- and task-related mental
constructs,  which  allows  the  preferential  processing  of
one  or the  other type  of construct (this type  of self- vs.
task-bias is linked to several state – trait combinations).
   In the proposed enhanced model, we will augment the
set  of  possible  coping  strategies,  and  will  explicitly
represent hierarchies of these strategies, within the mLTM
knowledge-base.  Thus  the  mLTM  will  contain  rules
linking specific emotions, and emotion-trait combinations
to  either  problem-focused  or  emotion-focused  coping
strategies.   Within  these  broad  categories,  further
refinements  will  then  be  possible,  allowing  choices
among  a  broader  range  of  both  problem-focused  (e.g.,
improved  planning,  focus  on  removal  of  negative
stimulus,  finding  help,  etc.),  and  emotion-focused
strategies  (acceptance,  venting,  avoidance,  etc.).  This
richer  repertoire  of  strategies  will  then  support  more
realistic  agent  behavior,  and  provide  the  means  for
exploring  models  of  how  alternative  strategies  are
selected, and the role of metacognition in this process.

Speculative  model  of  FOC-affect  interactions  In  this
example  we  describe  how  a  model  of  the  FOC  and  its
interactions  with  emotions  could  help  elucidate  the
mechanisms  underlying  a  particular  affective  and
behavioral disorder: obsessive-compulsive disorder. One
characteristic  of  this  disorder  is  excessive  checking
behavior.   This may be due to an abnormally high FOC
threshold,  which  demands  repeated  “checks”  of  the
performed action, to assure that it has been done. A more
internally-oriented characteristic may result in excessive
planning and re-planning without ever taking an action –
the  familiar  ‘paralysis  by  analysis’  phenomenon.  While
the exact role of FOC in these phenomena has not been
empirically established, the roles outlined above represent
plausible hypotheses. Below we describe how they would
be modeled in the enhanced MAMID architecture.

Metacognitive

Level

Traits

Neuroticism

increases

increases

States

Anxiety

increases

Metacognitive

Knowledge / Beliefs

(FOC thresholds)

Monitoring 
Processes

Control 

Processes

increase

Object Level

(Low FOC’s)

Figure 4:  Relationships Between States, Traits,

and the Feeling of Confidence Mechanism

Existing  data  suggest  that  obsessiveness correlates with
both   a high degree of the conscientiousness trait, and a
high  state  of  anxiety  (Matthews  and Deary  1998).   To
model effects of obsessiveness on FOC, MAMID will use
the  value  of  the  conscientiousness  trait  and  the  level  of
anxiety  to  calculate  the  FOC  thresholds  for  the  mental
constructs.   Since  the  empirical  data  are  lacking  to
determine  what  the  exact  effects  of  the  contributing
factors are, we begin with a first approximation function
that  captures  the  qualitative  relationship  of  these  two
factors to the mental construct thresholds, by having each
factor  contribute  .5  to  the  final  FOC  threshold,  whose
normalized value range is [0-1].
    Inclusion of this relationship in the model explicitly
links  the  affective  state  into  the  FOC-triggered
metacognitive-cognitive  processing  feedback  cycle.   It
allows  the  modeling  of  both  adaptive  and  maladaptive
sequences.
   Adaptive  Sequence Low FOC values for a particular
mental  construct  trigger  anxiety  which  raises  FOC
threshold.   The  FOC  construct  /  threshold  discrepancy
triggeres  metacogntiive  processing,  which  attempts  to
increase  the  construct  FOC.  This  is  successful,  which
leads to a reduction in the level of anxiety which in turn
reduces  the  FOC  threshold.  Metacognitive  activity
intervened temporarily to correct the problem.
   Maladaptive  Sequence  In  an  obsessive-compulsive
disorder,  this  regulatory  feedback  system  is  disrupted.
The high level of anxiety, coupled with inadequate coping
strategies,  prevents  the  derivation  of  adequately  high
FOC  values,  this  perpetuates  the  high  level  of  anxiety,
which maintains the high FOC threshold. As a result, the
agent is unable to arrive at a decision and remains ‘stuck’
in  internal  processing  and  re-processing  of  existing
information.

Related Work

While  to  our  knowledge  there  is  no  computational
modeling  effort  focusing  exclusively  on  modeling
interaction among metacognition and emotion, there are a
large number of  systems that use metacognitive functions
(reasoning about reasoning, metalevel-control) to improve
agent  performance,  to  explore  human  learning   and
human metacognition (e.g., Reder and Schunn 1996), to
explore  architectural  requirements  for  adaptive  and
intelligent  behavior  (e.g.,  Sloman  2003),  or  to  improve
particular  type  of  processing  (e.g.,  natural  language
processing, planning, or aspects of HCI).  There are at this
point  also  numerous  computational  models  of  emotion,
and  some  models  of  coping  (e.g., Gratch  and  Marsella
2004).  There  are  also  important  models  in  psychology,
which have not yet been implemented. An example most
relevant to the current effort is Wells’ and Matthews S-
REF model (Wells 2000; Matthews and Wells 2004).

Summary, Conclusions an Future Work

We described an existing cognitive-affective architecture
and  the  design  extensions  that  would  enable  it  to
explicitly  model  selected metacognitive  functions,  and
their  interaction  with  several  affective  factors.  We
focused on a model of the feeling of confidence factor, its
role  in  triggering  metacognitive  processing,  and  the
metacognitive  control  alternatives  available  for  re-
processing to achieve a greater FOC.  We then described
a speculative model of  possible interactions between the
FOC  and  affective  factors.  We  also  described  how  the
enhanced  architecture  would  model  the  known  anxiety-
linked emotion-focused coping.
    The near-term future work will focus on implementing
the proposed metacognitive component within the context
of  the  existing  MAMID  architecture.  We  will  then
evaluate  the  resulting  model  in  terms  of  two  criteria:
realism  and  plausibility  of  the  associated  agents’
behavior, and the ability to generate empirical hypotheses
regarding  specific  causal  mechanisms  for  empirical
exploration of metacognition-emotion interactions.

Acknowledgements

MAMID  was  developed  under  a  US  Army  contract
DASW01-00-C-3000.  We  would  like  to  acknowledge
support of the COTRs, Drs. B, Witmer and J. Psotka, and
the contributions of: Profs. William Revelle  and  Gerald
Matthews,  and  Mr.  Ted  Fichtl,  as  well  as  the
Psychometrix  software 
team.  The  author  also
acknowledges the helpful comments of the reviewers.

References

Cary, M.and Reder,L.M. 2002. Metacognition in Strategy
Selection. 
Izaute,M.  &
Marescaux,P-J. Metacognition: Process,   Function
and Use. Boston Kluwer.

In  Chambres,P., 

Efklides,  A.  

2002.   The  Systemic  Nature  of
Metacognitive  Experiences.  In  In  Chambres,P.,
Izaute,M.  &  Marescaux,P-J.  Metacognition:
Process,  Function and Use. Boston Kluwer.

Gratch, J. and Marsella, S. 2004.  A Domain-independent
Framework  for  Modeling  Emotion.  Journal  of
Cognitive Systems Research, 5, 269-306.

Hudlicka,  E.  1998.  Modeling  Emotion  in  Symbolic
Cognitive  Architectures.  AAAI  Fall  Symposium
Series, TR FS-98-03. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.

Hudlicka,  E.  2002.  This  time  with  feeling:  Integrated
   Model of Trait and State Effects on Cognition and
   Behavior. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 16:1-31.

consciousness. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8),
339-344.

Smith, C.A. and Kirby, L.D. 2001. Toward Delivering on
the  Promise  of  Appraisal  Theory.  In  Appraisal
Processes  in  Emotion.  K.R.  Scherer,  A.Schorr,  T.
Johnstone (Eds.). NY: Oxford.

Sloman,  A.  2003.  How  many  separately  evolved
emotional  beasties  live  within  us?  In Emotions  in
Humans  and  Artifacts,  R.Trappl,  P.  Petta,  and  S.
Payr (Eds.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Wells,  A.  2000.  Emotional  Disorders 

   Metacognition.  NY: Wiley.

and

Wilson,  T.  D.,  and  Schooler,  J.  W.  1991.  Thinking  too
much:  Introspection  can  reduce  the  quality  of
preferences  and  decisions.  Journal  of  Personality
and Social Psychology, 60(2), 181-192.

Hudlicka,  E.  2003.  Modeling  Effects  of  Behavior
MAMID Methodology and Architecture, In Proc. of
BRIMS-12.

Leventhal, H. and Scherer, K.R. 1987. The relationship of
emotion to cognition. Cognition and Emotion, 1, 3-
28.

Matthews,  G.,  and  Deary, I.J. 1998. Personality  Traits.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge.

Matthews,  G.,  and  Wells,  A.  2004  Rumination,
depression, and metacognition: The S-REF model.
In C. Papageorgiou & A. Wells (Eds.), Rumination:
Nature, theory, and treatment. Chichester: Wiley

Mazzoni, G. and Nelson, T.O. 1998.  Metacognition and

   Cognitive Neuropsychology. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Metcalfe,  J.  and  Shimamura,  P.  1994.  Metacognition:
Knowing  about  Knowing.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT
Press.

Narens,  J.,  Jameson,  K.A.  &  Lee,  V.A.  1994.
Subthreshold Priming and Memory Monitoring. In
Metcalfe, 
(eds).
Metacognition:  Knowing  about  Knowing.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

J.  and  Shimamura,  P. 

Nelson,  T.O.  and  Narens,  L.   1990.  Metamemory:  A
theoretical  framework  and  some  new  findings.  In
G.H. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of learning and
   motivation, 26. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Nelson,  T.O.  2002.  New  Theory  and  Data  on
   Metacognitive  Monitoring  and  Control  in
Different  Contexts and by Different Individuals. In
Chambres,  P.   Izaute,  M.  and  Marescaux,  P-J..
Metacognition: Process, Function and Use. Boston:
Kluwer.

Osman,  M.E.  and  Hannafin.  M.J.  1992.  Metacognition
research and theory: Analysis and implications for
instructional  design.  Educational  Technology
Research and Development, 40 (2), 83-99.

Paris,  S.G.  2002.  When  is  Metacognition  Helpful,
   Debilitating, or Benign? In  Chambres, P.,  Izaute,
M.  and  Marescaux,  P-J.. Metacognition:  Process,
Function and Use. Boston: Kluwer.

Pew, R.W. and Mavor, A.S. 1998.  Representing Human
Behavior in Military  Simulations. Washington, DC.
National Academy Press.

Reder,  L.  and  Schunn, C. 1996. Metacognition does not
imply  awareness.  In  L.M.  Reder  (ed.),  Implicit
Memory and Metacognition. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Schooler,  J.W.  2002.  Re-representing  consciousness:
dissociations  between  experience  and  meta-

