ACI 440.2R-02

Guide for the Design and Construction of Externally Bonded FRP Systems for Strengthening Concrete Structures
Reported by ACI Committee 440

www.afzir.com

ACI encourages the development and appropriate use of new and emerging technologies through the publication of the Emerging Technology Series. This series presents information and recommendations based on available test data, technical reports, limited experience with field applications, and the opinions of committee members. The presented information and recommendations, and their basis, may be less fully developed and tested than those for more mature technologies. This report identifies areas in which information is believed to be less fully developed, and describes research needs. The professional using this document should understand the limitations of this document and exercise judgment as to the appropriate application of this emerging technology.

Sami H. Rizkalla Chair

John P. Busel Secretary

Charles E. Bakis P. N. Balaguru Craig A. Ballinger Lawrence C. Bank Abdeldjelil Belarbi
Brahim Benmokrane Gregg J. Blaszak*
Gordon L. Brown, Jr. Vicki L. Brown
Thomas I. Campbell Charles W. Dolan Dat Duthinh Rami M. Elhassan Salem S. Faza Edward R. Fyfe David M. Gale

Ali Ganjehlou Duane J. Gee T. Russell Gentry Arie Gerritse Karl Gillette William J. Gold*
Charles H. Goodspeed, III Nabil F. Grace Mark F. Green
Mark E. Greenwood Doug D. Gremel
Michael S. Guglielmo Issam E. Harik
Mark P. Henderson Bohdan N. Horeczko
Srinivasa L. Iyer

Damian I. Kachlakev Vistasp M. Karbhari
Howard S. Kliger James G. Korff Michael W. Lee
Ibrahim Mahfouz
Henry N. Marsh, Jr. Orange S. Marshall
Amir Mirmiran Ayman S. Mosallam Antoine E. Naaman
Antonio Nanni Kenneth Neale Edward F. O'Neil, III Max L. Porter

Morris Schupack David W. Scott
Rajan Sen Mohsen A. Shahawy
Carol K. Shield
Khaled A. Soudki
Luc R. Taerwe Jay Thomas
Houssam A. Toutanji Taketo Uomoto Miroslav Vadovic
David R. Vanderpool Milan Vatovec
Stephanie L. Walkup David White

*Co-chairs of the subcommittee that prepared this document. Note: The committee acknowledges the contribution of associate member Paul Kelley.

Fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) systems for strengthening concrete structures have emerged as an alternative to traditional strengthening techniques, such as steel plate bonding, section enlargement, and external post-tensioning. FRP strengthening systems use FRP composite materials as supplemental externally bonded reinforcement. FRP systems offer advantages over traditional strengthening techniques: they are lightweight, relatively easy to install, and are noncorrosive. Due to the characteristics of FRP materials, the behavior of FRP strengthened members, and various issues regarding the use of externally bonded reinforcement, specific guidance on the use of these systems
ACI Committee Reports, Guides, Standard Practices, and Commentaries are intended for guidance in planning, designing, executing, and inspecting construction. This document is intended for the use of individuals who are competent to evaluate the significance and limitations of its content and recommendations and who will accept responsibility for the application of the material it contains. The American Concrete Institute disclaims any and all responsibility for the stated principles. The Institute shall not be liable for any loss or damage arising therefrom.
Reference to this document shall not be made in contract documents. If items found in this document are desired by the Architect/Engineer to be a part of the contract documents, they shall be restated in mandatory language for incorporation by the Architect/Engineer.

is needed. This document offers general information on the history and use of FRP strengthening systems; a description of the unique material properties of FRP; and committee recommendations on the engineering, construction, and inspection of FRP systems used to strengthen concrete structures. The proposed guidelines are based on the knowledge gained from worldwide experimental research, analytical work, and field applications of FRP systems used to strengthen concrete structures.
Keywords: aramid fibers; bridges; buildings; carbon fibers; concrete; corrosion; crack widths; cracking; cyclic loading; deflections; development length; earthquake-resistant; fatigue; fiber-reinforced polymers; flexure; glass fiber; shear; stresses; structural analysis; structural design; time-dependent; torsion.
CONTENTS PART 1--GENERAL Chapter 1--Introduction, p. 440.2R-2
1.1--Scope and limitations 1.2--Applications and use 1.3--Use of proprietary FRP systems 1.4--Definitions and acronyms 1.5--Notation
ACI 440.2R-02 became effective July 11, 2002. Copyright © 2002, American Concrete Institute. All rights reserved including rights of reproduction and use in any form or by any means, including the making of copies by any photo process, or by electronic or mechanical device, printed, written, or oral, or recording for sound or visual reproduction or for use in any knowledge or retrieval system or device, unless permission in writing is obtained from the copyright proprietors.

440.2R-1

440.2R-2

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Chapter 2--Background information, p. 440.2R-8 2.1--Historical development 2.2--Commercially available externally bonded FRP systems
PART 2--MATERIALS Chapter 3--Constituent materials and properties, pp. 440.2R-9
3.1--Constituent materials 3.2--Physical properties 3.3--Mechanical properties and behavior 3.4--Time-dependent behavior 3.5--Durability 3.6--FRP system qualification
PART 3--RECOMMENDED CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Chapter 4--Shipping, storage, and handling, pp. 440.2R-12
4.1--Shipping 4.2--Storage 4.3--Handling
Chapter 5--Installation, p. 440.2R-13 5.1--Contractor competency 5.2--Temperature, humidity, and moisture considerations 5.3--Equipment 5.4--Substrate repair and surface preparation 5.5--Mixing of resins 5.6--Application of constituent materials 5.7--Alignment of FRP materials 5.8--Multiple plies and lap splices 5.9--Curing of resins 5.10--Temporary protection
Chapter 6--Inspection, evaluation, and acceptance, pp. 440.2R-16
6.1--Inspection 6.2--Evaluation and acceptance
Chapter 7--Maintenance and repair, p. 440.2R-17 7.1--General 7.2--Inspection and assessment 7.3--Repair of strengthening system 7.4--Repair of surface coating
PART 4--DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS Chapter 8--General design considerations, p. 440.2R-18
8.1--Design philosophy 8.2--Strengthening limits 8.3--Selection of FRP systems 8.4--Design material properties
Chapter 9--Flexural strengthening, p. 440.2R-21 9.1--General considerations 9.2--Nominal strength 9.3--Ductility 9.4--Serviceability 9.5--Creep-rupture and fatigue stress limits 9.6--Application to a singly reinforced rectangular section
Chapter 10--Shear strengthening, pp. 440.2R-25 10.1--General considerations 10.2--Wrapping schemes

10.3--Nominal shear strength 10.4--FRP system contribution to shear strength
Chapter 11--Axial compression, tension, and ductility enhancement, p. 440.2R-27
11.1--Axial compression 11.2--Tensile strengthening 11.3--Ductility
Chapter 12--Reinforcement details, p. 440.2R-29 12.1--Bond and delamination 12.2--Detailing of laps and splices
Chapter 13--Drawings, specifications, and submittals, p. 440.2R-30
13.1--Engineering requirements 13.2--Drawings and specifications 13.3--Submittals
PART 5--DESIGN EXAMPLES Chapter 14--Design examples, p. 440.2R-31
14.1--Calculation of FRP system tensile strength 14.2--Calculation of FRP system tensile strength 14.3--Flexural strengthening of an interior beam 14.4--Shear strengthening of an interior T-beam 14.5--Shear strengthening of an exterior column
Chapter 15--References, p. 440.2R-40 15.1--Referenced standards and reports 15.2--Cited references 15.3--Other references
APPENDIXES Appendix A--Material properties of carbon, glass, and aramid fibers, p. 440.2R-44
Appendix B--Summary of standard test methods, p. 440.2R-44
Appendix C--Areas of future research, p. 440.2R-45
PART 1--GENERAL
CHAPTER 1--INTRODUCTION The strengthening or retrofitting of existing concrete structures to resist higher design loads, correct deteriorationrelated damage, or increase ductility has traditionally been accomplished using conventional materials and construction techniques. Externally bonded steel plates, steel or concrete jackets, and external post-tensioning are just some of the many traditional techniques available. Composite materials made of fibers in a polymeric resin, also known as fiber-reinforced polymers (FRP), have emerged as an alternative to traditional materials and techniques. For the purposes of this document, an FRP system is defined as all the fibers and resins used to create the composite laminate, all applicable resins used to bond it to the concrete substrate, and all applied coatings used to protect the constituent materials. Coatings used exclusively for aesthetic reasons are not considered part of an FRP system. FRP materials are lightweight, noncorrosive, and exhibit high tensile strength. Additionally, these materials are readily available in several forms ranging from factory-made laminates to dry fiber sheets that can be wrapped to conform to the

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-3

www.afzir.com

geometry of a structure before adding the polymer resin. The relatively thin profile of cured FRP systems are often desirable in applications where aesthetics or access is a concern.
The growing interest in FRP systems for strengthening and retrofitting can be attributed to many factors. Although the fibers and resins used in FRP systems are relatively expensive compared to traditional strengthening materials like concrete and steel, labor and equipment costs to install FRP systems are often lower. FRP systems can also be used in areas with limited access where traditional techniques would be difficult to implement: for example, a slab shielded by pipe and conduit.
The basis for this document is the knowledge gained from worldwide experimental research, analytical work, and field applications of FRP strengthening systems. The recommendations in this document are intended to be conservative. Areas where further research is needed are highlighted in this document and compiled in Appendix C.
1.1--Scope and limitations This document provides guidance for the selection, design,
and installation of FRP systems for externally strengthening concrete structures. Information on material properties, design, installation, quality control, and maintenance of FRP systems used as external reinforcement is presented. This information can be used to select an FRP system for increasing the strength and stiffness of reinforced concrete beams or the ductility of columns, and other applications.
A significant body of research serves as the basis for this document. This research, conducted over the past 20 years, includes analytical studies, experimental work, and monitored field applications of FRP strengthening systems. Based on the available research, the design procedures outlined in this document are considered to be conservative. It is important to note, however, that the design procedures have not, in many cases, been thoroughly developed and proven. It is envisioned that over time these procedures will be adapted to be more accurate. For the time being, it is important to specifically point out the areas of the document that do still require research.
The durability and long-term performance of FRP materials have been the subject of much research; however, this research remains ongoing. Long-term field data are not currently available, and it is still difficult to accurately predict the life of FRP strengthening systems. The design guidelines in this document do account for environmental degradation and long-term durability by suggesting reduction factors for various environments. Long-term fatigue and creep are also addressed by stress limitations indicated in this document. These factors and limitations are considered to be conservative. As more research becomes available, however, these factors will be modified and the specific environmental conditions and loading conditions to which they should apply will be better defined. Additionally, the coupling effect of environmental conditions and loading conditions still requires further study. Caution is advised in applications where the FRP system is subjected simultaneously to extreme environmental and stress conditions.
The factors associated with the long-term durability of the FRP system do not affect the tensile modulus of the material used for design. Generally, this is reasonable given that the tensile modulus of FRP materials is not affected by environmental conditions. There may be, however, specific fibers,

resins, or fiber/resin combinations for which this is not true. This document currently does not have special provisions for such materials.
Many issues regarding bond of the FRP system to the substrate remain the focus of a great deal of research. For both flexural and shear strengthening, there are many different varieties of debonding failure that can govern the strength of an FRP-strengthened member. While most of the debonding modes have been identified by researchers, more accurate methods of predicting debonding are still needed. Throughout the design procedures, significant limitations on the strain level achieved in the FRP material (and thus the stress level achieved) are imposed to conservatively account for debonding failure modes. It is envisioned that future development of these design procedures will include more thorough methods of predicting debonding.
The document does give guidance on proper detailing and installation of FRP systems to prevent many types of debonding failure modes. Steps related to the surface preparation and proper termination of the FRP system are vital in achieving the levels of strength predicted by the procedures in this document. Some research has been conducted on various methods of anchoring FRP strengthening systems (by mechanical or other means). It is important to recognize, however, that methods of anchoring these systems are highly problematic due to the brittle, anisotropic nature of composite materials. Any proposed method of anchorage should be heavily scrutinized before field implementation.
The design equations given in this document are the result of research primarily conducted on moderately sized and proportioned members. While FRP systems likely are effective on other members, such as deep beams, this has not been validated through testing. Caution should be given to applications involving strengthening of very large members or strengthening in disturbed regions (D-regions) of structural members. Where warranted, specific limitations on the size of members to be strengthened are given in this document.
This document applies only to FRP strengthening systems used as additional tensile reinforcement. It is currently not recommended to use these systems as compressive reinforcement. While FRP materials can support compressive stresses, there are numerous issues surrounding the use of FRP for compression. Microbuckling of fibers can occur if any resin voids are present in the laminate, laminates themselves can buckle if not properly adhered or anchored to the substrate, and highly unreliable compressive strengths result from misaligning fibers in the field. This document does not address the construction, quality control, and maintenance issues that would be involved with the use of the material for this purpose, nor does it address the design concerns surrounding such applications. The use of the types of FRP strengthening systems described in this document to resist compressive forces is strongly discouraged.
This document does not specifically address masonry (concrete masonry units, brick, or clay tile) construction, including masonry walls. Research completed to date, however, has shown that FRP systems can be used to strengthen masonry walls, and many of the guidelines contained in this document may be applicable (Triantafillou 1998b; Ehsani et al. 1997; and Marshall et al. 1999).

440.2R-4

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

1.2--Applications and use FRP systems can be used to rehabilitate or restore the
strength of a deteriorated structural member, to retrofit or strengthen a sound structural member to resist increased loads due to changes in use of the structure, or to address design or construction errors. The engineer should determine if an FRP system is a suitable strengthening technique before selecting the type of FRP system.
To assess the suitability of an FRP system for a particular application, the engineer should perform a condition assessment of the existing structure including establishing its existing load-carrying capacity, identifying deficiencies and their causes, and determining the condition of the concrete substrate. The overall evaluation should include a thorough field inspection, a review of existing design or as-built documents, and a structural analysis in accordance with ACI 364.1R. Existing construction documents for the structure should be reviewed, including the design drawings, project specifications, as-built information, field test reports, past repair documentation, and maintenance history documentation. The engineer should conduct a thorough field investigation of the existing structure in accordance with ACI 437R or other applicable documents. The tensile strength of the concrete on surfaces where the FRP system may be installed should be evaluated by conducting a pull-off adhesion test in accordance with ACI 503R. In addition, field investigation should verify the following: · Existing dimensions of the structural members; · Location, size, and cause of cracks and spalls; · Location and extent of corrosion of reinforcing steel; · Quantity and location of existing reinforcing steel; · In-place compressive strength of concrete; and · Soundness of the concrete, especially the concrete
cover, in all areas where the FRP system is to be bonded to the concrete. The load-carrying capacity of the existing structure should be based on the information gathered in the field investigation, the review of design calculations and drawings, and as determined by analytical or other suitable methods. Load tests or other methods can be incorporated into the overall evaluation process if deemed appropriate. The engineer should survey the available literature and consult with FRP system manufacturers to ensure the selected FRP system and protective coating are appropriate for the intended application. 1.2.1 Strengthening limits--Some engineers and system manufacturers have recommended that the increase in the load-carrying capacity of a member strengthened with an FRP system be limited. The philosophy is that a loss of FRP reinforcement should not cause member failure. Specific guidance, including load combinations for assessing member integrity after loss of the FRP system, is provided in Part 4. FRP systems used to increase the strength of an existing member should be designed in accordance with Part 4, which includes a comprehensive discussion of load limitations, sound load paths, effects of temperature and environment on FRP systems, loading considerations, and effects of reinforcing steel corrosion on FRP system integrity. 1.2.2 Fire and life safety--FRP-strengthened structures should comply with all applicable building and fire codes. Smoke and flame spread ratings should be determined in accordance with ASTM E 84. Coatings can be used to limit smoke and flame spread.

Due to the low temperature resistance of most fiber-reinforced polymer materials, the strength of externally bonded FRP systems is assumed to be lost completely in a fire. For this reason, the structural member without the FRP system should possess sufficient strength to resist all applicable loads during a fire. Specific guidance, including load combinations and a rational approach to calculating structural fire endurance, is given in Part 4.
The fire endurance of FRP-strengthened concrete members may be improved through the use of certain resins, coatings, or other methods of fire protection, but these have not been sufficiently demonstrated to insulate the FRP system from the temperatures reached during a fire.
1.2.3 Maximum service temperature--The physical and mechanical properties of the resin components of FRP systems are influenced by temperature and degrade above their glasstransition temperature Tg. The Tg is the midpoint of the temperature range over which the resin changes from a hard brittle state to a softer plastic state. This change in state will degrade the properties of the cured laminates. The Tg is unique to each FRP system and ranges from 140 to 180 F (60 to 82 C) for existing, commercially available FRP systems. The maximum service temperature of an FRP system should not exceed the Tg of the FRP system. The Tg for a particular FRP system can be obtained from the system manufacturer.
1.2.4 Minimum concrete substrate strength--FRP systems work on sound concrete and should not be considered for applications on structural members containing corroded reinforcing steel or deteriorated concrete unless the substrate is repaired in accordance with Section 5.4. Concrete distress, deterioration, and corrosion of existing reinforcing steel should be evaluated and addressed before the application of the FRP system. Concrete deterioration concerns include, but are not limited to, alkali-silica reactions, delayed ettringite formation, carbonation, longitudinal cracking around corroded reinforcing steel, and laminar cracking at the location of the steel reinforcement.
The condition and strength of the substrate should be evaluated to determine its capacity for strengthening of the member with externally bonded FRP reinforcement. The bond between repair materials and original concrete should satisfy the recommendations of ACI 503R or Section 3.1 of ICRI Guideline No. 03733.
The existing concrete substrate strength is an important parameter for bond-critical applications, including flexure or shear strengthening. It should possess the necessary strength to develop the design stresses of the FRP system through bond. The substrate, including all bond surfaces between repaired areas and the original concrete, should have sufficient direct tensile and shear strength to transfer force to the FRP system. The tensile strength should be at least 200 psi (1.4 MPa) as determined by using a pull-off type adhesion test as in ACI 503R or ASTM D 4541. FRP systems should not be used when the concrete substrate has a compressive strength ( fc ) less than 2500 psi (17 MPa). Contact-critical applications, such as column wrapping for confinement that rely only on intimate contact between the FRP system and the concrete, are not governed by this minimum value. Design stresses in the FRP system are developed by deformation or dilation of the concrete section in contact-critical applications.
The application of FRP systems will not stop the ongoing corrosion of existing reinforcing steel. If steel corrosion is

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-5

www.afzir.com

evident or is degrading the concrete substrate, placement of FRP reinforcement is not recommended without arresting the ongoing corrosion and repairing any degradation to the substrate.
1.3--Use of proprietary FRP systems This document refers specifically to commercially
available, proprietary FRP systems consisting of fibers and resins combined in a specific manner and installed by a specific method. These systems have been developed through material characterization and structural testing. Untested combinations of fibers and resins could result in an unexpected range of properties as well as potential material incompatibilities. Any FRP system considered for use should have sufficient test data demonstrating adequate performance of the entire system in similar applications, including its method of installation.
The use of FRP systems developed through material characterization and structural testing, including welldocumented proprietary systems, is recommended. The use of untested combinations of fibers and resins should be avoided. A comprehensive set of test standards for FRP systems is being developed by several organizations, including ASTM, ACI, ICRI, and the Intelligent Sensing for Innovative Structures organization (ISIS). Available standards from these organizations are outlined in Appendix B.
1.4--Definitions and acronyms The following definitions clarify terms pertaining to FRP
that are not commonly used in the reinforced concrete practice. These definitions are specific to this document and are not applicable to other ACI documents.
AFRP--Aramid fiber-reinforced polymer. Batch--Quantity of material mixed at one time or in one continuous process. Binder--Chemical treatment applied to the random arrangement of fibers to give integrity to mats, roving, and fabric. Specific binders are utilized to promote chemical compatibility with the various laminating resins used. Bond-critical applications--Applications of FRP systems for strengthening structural members that rely on bond to the concrete substrate; flexural and shear strengthening of beams and slabs are examples of bond-critical applications. Catalyst--A substance that accelerates a chemical reaction and enables it to proceed under conditions more mild than otherwise required and that is not, itself, permanently changed by the reaction. See Initiator or Hardener. CFR--Code of Federal Regulations. CFRP--Carbon fiber-reinforced polymer (includes graphite fiber-reinforced polymer). Composite--A combination of two or more constituent materials differing in form or composition on a macroscale. Note: The constituents retain their identities; that is, they do not dissolve or merge completely into one another, although they act in concert. Normally, the components can be physically identified and exhibit an interface between one another. Concrete substrate--The existing concrete or any cementitious repair materials used to repair or replace the existing concrete. The substrate can consist entirely of existing concrete, entirely of repair materials, or of a combination of existing concrete and repair materials. The substrate includes the surface to which the FRP system is installed. Contact-critical applications--Applications of FRP systems that rely on continuous intimate contact between the

concrete substrate and the FRP system. In general, contactcritical applications consist of FRP systems that completely wrap around the perimeter of the section. For most contactcritical applications the FRP system is bonded to the concrete to facilitate installation but does not rely on that bond to perform as intended. Confinement of columns for seismic retrofit is an example of a contact-critical application.
Creep-rupture--The gradual, time-dependent reduction of tensile strength due to continuous loading that leads to failure of the section.
Cross-link--A chemical bond between polymer molecules. Note: an increased number of cross-links per polymer molecule increases strength and modulus at the expense of ductility.
Cure of FRP systems--The process of causing the irreversible change in the properties of a thermosetting resin by chemical reaction. Cure is typically accomplished by addition of curing (cross-linking) agents or initiators, with or without heat and pressure. Full cure is the point at which a resin reaches the specified properties. Undercure is a condition where specified properties have not been reached.
Curing agent--A catalytic or reactive agent that causes polymerization when added to a resin. Also called hardener or initiator.
Debonding--A separation at the interface between the substrate and the adherent material.
Degradation--A decline in the quality of the mechanical properties of a material.
Delamination--A separation along a plane parallel to the surface, as in the separation of the layers of the FRP laminate from each other.
Development length, FRP--The bonded distance required for transfer of stresses from the concrete to the FRP so as to develop the strength of the FRP system. The development length is a function of the strength of the substrate and the rigidity of the bonded FRP.
Durability, FRP--The ability of a material to resist weathering action, chemical attack, abrasion, and other conditions of service.
E-glass--A family of glass with a calcium alumina borosilicate composition and a maximum alkali content of 2.0%. A general-purpose fiber that is used in reinforced polymers.
Epoxy--A thermosetting polymer that is the reaction product of epoxy resin and an amino hardener. (See also Epoxy resin.)
Epoxy resin--A class of organic chemical-bonding systems used in the preparation of special coatings or adhesives for concrete as binders in epoxy-resin mortars and concretes.
Fabric--Arrangement of fibers held together in two dimensions. A fabric can be woven, nonwoven, knitted, or stitched. Multiple layers of fabric may be stitched together. Fabric architecture is the specific description of fibers, directions, and construction of the fabric.
Fiber--Any fine thread-like natural or synthetic object of mineral or organic origin. Note: This term is generally used for materials whose length is at least 100 times its diameter.
Fiber, aramid--Highly oriented organic fiber derived from polyamide incorporating into an aromatic ring structure.
Fiber, carbon--Fiber produced by heating organic precursor materials containing a substantial amount of carbon, such as rayon, polyacrylonitrile (PAN), or pitch in an inert environment.

440.2R-6

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Fiber, glass--Fiber drawn from an inorganic product of fusion that has cooled without crystallizing. Types of glass fibers include alkali resistant (AR-glass), general purpose (E-glass), and high strength (S-glass).
Fiber content--The amount of fiber present in a composite. Note: This usually is expressed as a percentage volume fraction or weight fraction of the composite.
Fiber fly--Short filaments that break off dry fiber tows or yarns during handling and become airborne; usually classified as a nuisance dust.
Fiberglass--A composite material consisting of glass fibers in resin.
Fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP)--A general term for a composite material that consists of a polymer matrix reinforced with cloth, mat, strands, or any other fiber form. See Composite.
Fiber volume fraction--The ratio of the volume of fibers to the volume of the composite.
Fiber weight fraction--The ratio of the weight of fibers to the weight of the composite.
Filament--See Fiber.
Filler--A relatively inert substance added to a resin to alter its properties or to lower cost or density. Sometimes the term is used specifically to mean particulate additives. Also called extenders.
Fire retardant--Chemicals that are used to reduce the tendency of a resin to burn; these can be added to the resin or coated on the surface of the FRP.
Flow--The movement of uncured resin under pressure or gravity loads.
FRP--Fiber reinforced polymer; formerly, fiber-reinforced plastic.
GFRP--Glass fiber-reinforced polymer.
Glass fiber--An individual filament made by drawing or spinning molten glass through a fine orifice. A continuous filament is a single glass fiber of great or indefinite length. A staple fiber is a glass fiber of relatively short length, generally less than 17 in. (0.43 m), the length related to the forming or spinning process used.
Glass transition temperature (Tg)--The midpoint of the temperature range over which an amphoras material (such as glass or a high polymer) changes from (or to) a brittle, vitreous state to (or from) a plastic state.
Grid, FRP--A two-dimensional (planar) or three-dimensional (spatial) rigid array of interconnected FRP bars that form a contiguous lattice that can be used to reinforce concrete. The lattice can be manufactured with integrally connected bars or made of mechanically connected individual bars.
Hardener--1) a chemical (including certain fluosilicates or sodium silicate) applied to concrete floors to reduce wear and dusting; or 2) in a two-component adhesive or coating, the chemical component that causes the resin component to cure.
Impregnate--In fiber-reinforced polymers, to saturate the fibers with resin.
Initiator--A source of free radicals, which are groups of atoms that have at least one unpaired electron, used to start the curing process for unsaturated polyester and vinyl ester resins. Peroxides are the most common source of free radicals. See Catalyst.
Interface--The boundary or surface between two different, physically distinguishable media. On fibers, the contact area between fibers and coating/sizing.

Interlaminar shear--Shearing force tending to produce a relative displacement between two laminae in a laminate along the plane of their interface.
Laminate--One or more layers of fiber bound together in a cured resin matrix.
Layup--The process of placing the FRP reinforcing material in position for molding.
Mat--A fibrous material for reinforced polymer, consisting of randomly oriented chopped filaments, short fibers (with or without a carrier fabric), or long random filaments loosely held together with a binder.
Matrix--In the case of fiber-reinforced polymers, the materials that serve to bind the fibers together, transfer load to the fibers, and protect them against environmental attack and damage due to handling.
Monomer--An organic molecule of relatively low molecular weight that creates a solid polymer by reacting with itself or other compounds of low molecular weight or both.
MSDS--Material safety data sheet. OSHA--Occupational Safety and Health Administration. PAN--Polyacrylonitrile, a precursor fiber used to make carbon fiber. Phenolic--A thermosetting resin produced by the condensation of an aromatic alcohol with an aldehyde, particularly of phenol with formaldehyde. Pitch--Petroleum or coal tar precursor base used to make carbon fiber. Ply--A single layer of fabric or mat; multiple plies, when molded together, make up the laminate. Polyester--One of a large group of synthetic resins, mainly produced by the reaction of dibasic acids with dihydroxy alcohols; commonly prepared for application by mixing with a vinyl-group monomer and free-radical catalysts at ambient temperatures and used as binders for resin mortars and concretes, fiber laminates (mainly glass), adhesives, and the like. Commonly referred to as "unsaturated polyester." Polymer--A high molecular weight organic compound, natural or synthetic, containing repeating units. Polymerization--The reaction in which two or more molecules of the same substance combine to form a compound containing the same elements and in the same proportions but of higher molecular weight. Polyurethane--Reaction product of an isocyanate with any of a wide variety of other compounds containing an active hydrogen group; used to formulate tough, abrasionresistant coatings. Postcuring, FRP--Additional elevated-temperature curing that increases the level of polymer cross-linking; final properties of the laminate or polymer are enhanced. Pot life--Time interval after preparation during which a liquid or plastic mixture is to be used. Prepreg--A fiber or fiber sheet material containing resin that is advanced to a tacky consistency. Multiple plies of prepreg are typically cured with applied heat and pressure; also preimpregnated fiber or sheet. Pultrusion--A continuous process for manufacturing composites that have a uniform cross-sectional shape. The process consists of pulling a fiber-reinforcing material through a resin impregnation bath then through a shaping die where the resin is subsequently cured. Resin--Polymeric material that is rigid or semirigid at room temperature, usually with a melting point or glass transition temperature above room temperature.

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-7

www.afzir.com

Resin content--The amount of resin in a laminate, expressed as either a percentage of total mass or total volume.
Roving--A number of yarns, strands, tows, or ends of fibers collected into a parallel bundle with little or no twist.
Sheet, FRP--A dry, flexible ply used in wet layup FRP systems. Unidirectional FRP sheets consist of continuous fibers aligned in one direction and held together in-plane to create a ply of finite width and length. Fabrics are also referred to as sheets. See Fabric, Ply.
Shelf life--The length of time packaged materials can be stored under specified conditions and remain usable.
Sizing--Surface treatment or coating applied to filaments to improve the filament-to-resin bond and to impart processing and durability attributes.
Sustained stress--Stress caused by unfactored sustained loads including dead loads and the sustained portion of the live load.
Thermoset--Resin that is formed by cross-linking polymer chains. Note: A thermoset cannot be melted and recycled because the polymer chains form a three-dimensional network.
Tow--An untwisted bundle of continuous filaments. Vinyl ester--A thermosetting resin containing both vinyl and ester components, and cured by additional polymerization initiated by free-radical generation. Vinyl esters are used as binders for fiber laminates and adhesives. VOC--Volatile organic compounds; any compound of carbon, excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides, or carbonates, and ammonium carbonate, that participates in atmospheric photochemical reactions, such as ozone depletion. Volume fraction--The proportion from 0.0 to 1.0 of a component within the composite, measured on a volume basis, such as fiber-volume fraction. Wet layup--A method of making a laminate product by applying the resin system as a liquid when the fabric or mat is put in place. Wet-out--The process of coating or impregnating roving, yarn, or fabric in which all voids between the strands and filaments are filled with resin; it is also the condition at which this state is achieved. Witness panel--A small field sample FRP panel, manufactured on-site in a noncritical area at conditions similar to the actual construction. The panel can be later tested to determine mechanical and physical properties to confirm expected properties of the installed FRP laminate. Yarn--An assemblage of twisted filaments, fibers, or strands, formed into a continuous length that is suitable for use in weaving textile materials.
1.5--Notation Af = ntfwf , area of FRP external reinforcement, in.2
(mm2) Afv = area of FRP shear reinforcement with spacing s, in.2
(mm2) Ag = gross area of section, in.2 (mm2) As = area of nonprestressed steel reinforcement, in.2
(mm2) Ast = total area of longitudinal reinforcement, in.2 (mm2) b = width of rectangular cross section, in. (mm)
bw = web width or diameter of circular section, in. (mm) c = distance from extreme compression fiber to the
neutral axis, in. (mm)

CE = d=
df =
Ec = Ef = Es = fc = fc = fc =
fcc =
ff = ff,s =
ffe =
ffu* =
ffu =
ffu =
fl = fs =
fs,s =
fy =
h= Icr =
k=
kf =
k1 =
k2 =
Le = ldf = Mcr = Mn = Ms =
Mu = n= pf*u =
pfu =

environmental-reduction factor distance from extreme compression fiber to the neutral axis, in. (mm) depth of FRP shear reinforcement as shown in Fig. 10.2, in. (mm) modulus of elasticity of concrete, psi (MPa) tensile modulus of elasticity of FRP, psi (MPa) modulus of elasticity of steel, psi (MPa) compressive stress in concrete, psi (MPa) specified compressive strength of concrete, psi (MPa) square root of specified compressive strength of concrete apparent compressive strength of confined concrete, psi (MPa) stress level in the FRP reinforcement, psi (MPa) stress level in the FRP caused by a moment within the elastic range of the member, psi (MPa) effective stress in the FRP; stress level attained at section failure, psi (MPa) ultimate tensile strength of the FRP material as reported by the manufacturer, psi (MPa) design ultimate tensile strength of FRP, psi (MPa) mean ultimate strength of FRP based on a population of 20 or more tensile tests per ASTM D 3039, psi (MPa) confining pressure due to FRP jacket, psi (MPa) stress in nonprestressed steel reinforcement, psi (MPa) stress level in nonprestressed steel reinforcement at service loads, psi (MPa) specified yield strength of nonprestressed steel reinforcement, psi (MPa) overall thickness of a member, in. (mm) moment of inertia of cracked section transformed to concrete, in.4 (mm4) ratio of the depth of the neutral axis to the reinforcement depth measured on the same side of neutral axis stiffness per unit width per ply of the FRP reinforcement, lb/in. (N/mm); kf = Ef tf modification factor applied to v to account for the concrete strength modification factor applied to v to account for the wrapping scheme active bond length of FRP laminate, in. (mm) development length of FRP system, in. (mm) cracking moment, in.-lb (N-mm) nominal moment strength, in.-lb (N-mm) moment within the elastic range of the member, in.-lb (N-mm) factored moment at section, in.-lb (N-mm) number of plies of FRP reinforcement ultimate tensile strength per unit width per play of the FRP reinforcement, lb/in. (N/mm); pf*u =ff*utf mean tensile strength per unit width per ply of the reinforcement, lb/in. (N/mm)

440.2R-8

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Pn =
r=
Rn = Rn =
SDL = sf =
SLL = tf =
Tg = Vc =
Vn = Vs =
Vf = wf = = L =
T =
1 =
b =
bi =
c = cc =
cu =
f =
fe =
fu =
fu =
f*u =
s =
sy =
= =
a =

nominal axial load strength at given eccentricity, lb (N) radius of the edges of a square or rectangular section confined with FRP, in. (mm) nominal strength of a member nominal strength of a member subjected to the elevated temperatures associated with a fire dead load effects spacing FRP shear reinforcing as described in Fig. 10.2, in. (mm) live load effects nominal thickness of one ply of the FRP reinforcement, in. (mm) glass-transition temperature, °F (°C) nominal shear strength provided by concrete with steel flexural reinforcement, lb (N) nominal shear strength, lb (N) nominal shear strength provided by steel stirrups, lb (N) nominal shear strength provided by FRP stirrups, lb width of the FRP reinforcing plies, in. (mm) angle of inclination of stirrups or spirals, degrees longitudinal coefficient of thermal expansion, in./in./ °F (mm/mm/°C) transverse coefficient of thermal expansion, in./in./°F (mm/mm/°C) ratio of the depth of the equivalent rectangular stress block to the depth of the neutral axis strain level in the concrete substrate developed by a given bending moment (tension in positive), in./in. (mm/mm) strain level in the concrete substrate at the time of the FRP installation (tension is positive), in./in. (mm/mm) stain level in the concrete, in./in. (mm/mm) maximum usable compressive strain of FRP confined concrete, in./in. (mm/mm) maximum usable compressive strain of concrete, in./ in., (mm/mm) strain level in the FRP reinforcement, in./in. (mm/ mm) effective strain level in FRP reinforcement; strain level attained at section failure, in./in. (mm/mm) design rupture strain of FRP reinforcement, in./in. (mm/mm) mean rupture stain of FRP reinforcement based on a population of 20 or more tensile tests per ASTM D 3039, in./in. (mm/mm) ultimate rupture strain of the FRP reinforcement, in./in. (mm/mm) strain level in the nonprestessed steel reinforcement, in./in./ (mm) strain corresponding to the yield strength of nonprestressed steel reinforcement strength reduction factor multiplier on fc to determine the intensity of an equivalent rectangular stress distribution for concrete efficiency factor for FRP reinforcement (based on the section geometry)

m = v = f = g =
s = = f =

bond-dependent coefficient for flexure bond-dependent coefficient for shear FRP reinforcement ratio ratio of the area of longitudinal steel reinforcement to the cross-sectional area of a compression member ratio of nonprestressed reinforcement standard deviation additional FRP strength-reduction factor

CHAPTER 2--BACKGROUND INFORMATION Externally bonded FRP systems have been used to strengthen and retrofit existing concrete structures around the world since the mid 1980s. The number of projects utilizing FRP systems worldwide has increased dramatically, from a few 10 years ago to several thousand today (Bakis et al. 2002). Structural elements strengthened with externally bonded FRP systems include beams, slabs, columns, walls, joints/connections, chimneys and smokestacks, vaults, domes, tunnels, silos, pipes, and trusses. Externally bonded FRP systems have also been used to strengthen masonry, timber, steel, and cast-iron structures. The idea of strengthening concrete structures with externally bonded reinforcement is not new. Externally bonded FRP systems were developed as alternates to traditional external reinforcing techniques like steel plate bonding and steel or concrete column jacketing. The initial development of externally bonded FRP systems for the retrofit of concrete structures occurred in the 1980s in both Europe and Japan.

2.1--Historical development In Europe, FRP systems were developed as alternates to
steel plate bonding. Bonding steel plates to the tension zones of concrete members with epoxy resins were shown to be viable techniques for increasing their flexural strengths (Fleming and King 1967). This technique has been used to strengthen many bridges and buildings around the world. Because steel plates can corrode, leading to a deterioration of the bond between the steel and concrete, and that are difficult to install, requiring the use of heavy equipment, researchers have looked to FRP materials as an alternative to steel. Experimental work using FRP materials for retrofitting concrete structures was reported as early as 1978 in Germany (Wolf and Miessler 1989). Research in Switzerland led to the first applications of externally bonded FRP systems to reinforced concrete bridges for flexural strengthening (Meier 1987; Rostasy 1987).
FRP systems were first applied to reinforced concrete columns for providing additional confinement in Japan in the 1980s (Fardis and Khalili 1981; Katsumata et al. 1987). A sudden increase in the use of FRPs in Japan was observed after the 1995 Hyogoken Nanbu earthquake (Nanni 1995).
The United States has had a long and continuous interest in fiber-based reinforcement for concrete structures since the 1930s. Actual development and research into the use of these materials for retrofitting concrete structures, however, started in the 1980s through the initiatives of the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The research activities led to the construction of many field projects encompassing a wide variety of environmental conditions. Previous research and field applications for FRP rehabilitation and strengthening are described in ACI 440R-96 and conference proceedings (Japan Concrete

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-9

www.afzir.com

Institute 1997; Neale 2000; Dolan et al. 1999; Sheheta et al. 1999; Saadatmanesh and Ehsani 1998; Benmokrane and Rahman 1998; Neale and Labossière 1997; Hassan and Rizkalla 2002).
The development of codes and standards for externally bonded FRP systems is ongoing in Europe, Japan, Canada, and the United States. Within the last 10 years, the Japan Society of Civil Engineers (JSCE) and the Japan Concrete Institute (JCI) and the Railway Technical Research Institute (RTRI) published several documents related to the use of FRP materials in concrete structures.
In Europe, Task Group 9.3 of the International Federation for Structural Concrete (FIB) recently published a bulletin on design guidelines for externally bonded FRP reinforcement for reinforced concrete structures (FIB 2001).
The Canada Standards Association and ISIS have been active in developing guidelines for FRP systems. Section 16, "Fiber Reinforced Concrete," of the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code was completed in 2000 (CSA S806-02) and the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) recently approved the code "Design and Construction of Building Components with Fiber Reinforced Polymers" (CSA S806-02).
In the United States, criteria for evaluating FRP systems are becoming available to the construction industry (AC125 1997; CALTRANS 1996; Hawkins et al. 1998).
2.2--Commercially available externally bonded FRP systems
FRP systems come in a variety of forms, including wet layup systems and precured systems. FRP system forms can be categorized based on how they are delivered to the site and installed. The FRP system and its form should be selected based on the acceptable transfer of structural loads and the ease and simplicity of application. Common FRP system forms suitable for the strengthening of structural members are listed as follows:
2.2.1 Wet layup systems--Wet layup FRP systems consist of dry unidirectional or multidirectional fiber sheets or fabrics impregnated with a saturating resin on-site. The saturating resin, along with the compatible primer and putty, is used to bond the FRP sheets to the concrete surface. Wet layup systems are saturated in-place and cured in-place and, in this sense, are analogous to cast-in-place concrete. Three common types of wet layup systems are listed as follows:
1. Dry unidirectional fiber sheets where the fibers run predominantly in one planar direction;
2. Dry multidirectional fiber sheets or fabrics where the fibers are oriented in at least two planar directions; and
3. Dry fiber tows that are wound or otherwise mechanically applied to the concrete surface. The dry fiber tows are impregnated with resin on-site during the winding operation.
2.2.2 Prepreg systems--Prepreg FRP systems consist of uncured unidirectional or multidirectional fiber sheets or fabrics that are preimpregnated with a saturating resin in the manufacturer's facility. Prepreg systems are bonded to the concrete surface with or without an additional resin application, depending upon specific system requirements. Prepreg systems are saturated off-site and, like wet layup systems, cured in place. Prepreg systems usually require additional heating for curing. Prepreg system manufacturers should be consulted for storage and shelf-life recommendations and curing procedures. Three common types of prepreg FRP systems are listed as follows:

1. Preimpregnated unidirectional fiber sheets where the fibers run predominantly in one planar direction;
2. Preimpregnated multidirectional fiber sheets or fabrics where the fibers are oriented in at least two planar directions; and
3. Preimpregnated fiber tows that are wound or otherwise mechanically applied to the concrete surface.
2.2.3 Precured systems--Precured FRP systems consist of a wide variety of composite shapes manufactured off-site. Typically, an adhesive along with the primer and putty is used to bond the precured shapes to the concrete surface. The system manufacturer should be consulted for recommended installation procedures. Precured systems are analogous to precast concrete. Three common types of precured systems are listed as follows:
1. Precured unidirectional laminate sheets, typically delivered to the site in the form of large flat stock or as thin ribbon strips coiled on a roll;
2. Precured multidirectional grids, typically delivered to the site coiled on a roll;
3. Precured shells, typically delivered to the site in the form of shell segments cut longitudinally so they can be opened and fitted around columns or other members; multiple shell layers are bonded to the concrete and to each other to provide seismic confinement.
2.2.4 Other FRP forms--Other FRP forms are not covered in this document. These include cured FRP rigid rod and flexible strand or cable (Saadatmanesh and Tannous 1999a; Dolan 1999; Fukuyama 1999; ACI 440R-96 and ACI 440.1R-01).
PART 2--MATERIALS
CHAPTER 3--CONSTITUENT MATERIALS AND PROPERTIES
The physical and mechanical properties of FRP materials presented in this chapter explain the behavior and properties affecting their use in concrete structures. The effects of factors such as loading history and duration, temperature, and moisture on the properties of FRP are discussed.
FRP-strengthening systems come in a variety of forms (wet layup, prepreg, precured). Factors such as fiber volume, type of fiber, type of resin, fiber orientation, dimensional effects, and quality control during manufacturing all play a role in establishing the characteristics of an FRP material. The material characteristics described in this chapter are generic and do not apply to all commercially available products. Standard test methods are being developed by several organizations including ASTM, ACI, and ISIS to characterize certain FRP products. In the interim, however, the engineer is encouraged to consult with the FRP system manufacturer to obtain the relevant characteristics for a specific product and the applicability of those characteristics.
3.1--Constituent materials The constituent materials used in commercially available
FRP repair systems, including all resins, primers, putties, saturants, adhesives, and fibers, have been developed for the strengthening of structural concrete members based on materials and structural testing.
3.1.1 Resins--A wide range of polymeric resins, including primers, putty fillers, saturants, and adhesives, are used with FRP systems. Commonly used resin types including epoxies, vinyl esters, and polyesters have been formulated for use in

440.2R-10

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Table 3.1--Typical densities of FRP materials, lb/ft3 (g/cm3)

Steel
490 (7.9)

GFRP
75 to 130 (1.2 to 2.1)

CFRP
90 to 100 (1.5 to 1.6)

AFRP
75 to 90 (1.2 to 1.5)

Table 3.2--Typical coefficients of thermal expansion for FRP materials*

Direction Coefficient of thermal expansion, × 10­6/°F (× 10­6/°C)

GFRP

CFRP

AFRP

Longitudinal, L

3.3 to 5.6 (6 to 10)

­0.6 to 0 (­1 to 0)

­3.3 to ­1.1 (­6 to ­2)

Transverse, T

10.4 to 12.6 (19 to 23)

12 to 27 (22 to 50)

33 to 44 (60 to 80)

*Typical values for fiber-volume fractions ranging from 0.5 to 0.7.

a wide range of environmental conditions. FRP system manufacturers use resins that have the following characteristics:
· Compatibility with and adhesion to the concrete substrate;
· Compatibility with and adhesion to the FRP composite system;
· Resistance to environmental effects, including but not limited to moisture, salt water, temperature extremes, and chemicals normally associated with exposed concrete;
· Filling ability;
· Workability;
· Pot life consistent with the application;
· Compatibility with and adhesion to the reinforcing fiber; and
· Development of appropriate mechanical properties for the FRP composite.
3.1.1.1 Primer--The primer is used to penetrate the surface of the concrete, providing an improved adhesive bond for the saturating resin or adhesive.
3.1.1.2 Putty fillers--The putty is used to fill small surface voids in the substrate, such as bug holes, and to provide a smooth surface to which the FRP system can bond. Filled surface voids also prevent bubbles from forming during curing of the saturating resin.
3.1.1.3 Saturating resin--The saturating resin is used to impregnate the reinforcing fibers, fix them in place, and provide a shear load path to effectively transfer load between fibers. The saturating resin also serves as the adhesive for wet layup systems, providing a shear load path between the previously primed concrete substrate and the FRP system.
3.1.1.4 Adhesives--Adhesives are used to bond precured FRP laminate systems to the concrete substrate. The adhesive provides a shear load path between the concrete substrate and the FRP reinforcing laminate. Adhesives are also used to bond together multiple layers of precured FRP laminates.
3.1.1.5 Protective coatings--The protective coating is used to protect the bonded FRP reinforcement from potentially damaging environmental effects. Coatings are typically applied to the exterior surface of the cured FRP system after the adhesive or saturating resin has cured.
3.1.2 Fibers--Continuous glass, aramid, and carbon fibers are common reinforcements used with FRP systems. The fibers give the FRP system its strength and stiffness. Typical ranges of the tensile properties of fibers are given in Appendix A. A more detailed description of fibers is given in ACI 440R.

3.2--Physical properties 3.2.1 Density--FRP materials have densities ranging from
75 to 130 lb/ft3 (1.2 to 2.1 g/cm3), which is four to six times lower than that of steel (Table 3.1). The reduced density leads to lower transportation costs, reduces added dead load on the structure, and can ease handling of the materials on the project site.
3.2.2 Coefficient of thermal expansion--The coefficients of thermal expansion of unidirectional FRP materials differ in the longitudinal and transverse directions, depending on the types of fiber, resin, and volume fraction of fiber. Table 3.2 lists the longitudinal and transverse coefficients of thermal expansion for typical unidirectional FRP materials. Note that a negative coefficient of thermal expansion indicates that the material contracts with increased temperature and expands with decreased temperature. For reference, concrete has a coefficient of thermal expansion that varies from 4 × 10­6 to 6 × 10­6/°F (7 × 10­6 to 11 × 10­6/°C) and is usually assumed to be isotropic (Mindess and Young 1981). Steel has an isotropic coefficient of thermal expansion of 6.5 × 10­6/°F (11.7 × 10­6/°C). See Section 8.3.1 for design considerations regarding thermal expansion.
3.2.3 Effects of high temperatures--Beyond the Tg, the elastic modulus of a polymer is significantly reduced due to changes in its molecular structure. The value of Tg depends on the type of resin but is normally in the region of 140 to 180 °F (60 to 82 °C). In an FRP composite material, the fibers, which exhibit better thermal properties than the resin, can continue to support some load in the longitudinal direction until the temperature threshold of the fibers is reached. This can occur at temperatures near 1800 °F (1000 °C) for glass fibers and 350 °F (175 °C) for aramid fibers. Carbon fibers are capable of resisting temperatures in excess of 500 °F (275 °C). Due to a reduction in force transfer between fibers through bond to the resin, however, the tensile properties of the overall composite are reduced. Test results have indicated that temperatures of 480 °F (250 °C), much higher than the resin Tg, will reduce the tensile strength of GFRP and CFRP materials in excess of 20% (Kumahara et al. 1993). Other properties affected by the shear transfer through the resin, such as bending strength, are reduced significantly at lower temperatures (Wang and Evans 1995).
For bond-critical applications of FRP systems, the properties of the polymer at the fiber-concrete interface are essential in maintaining the bond between FRP and concrete. At a temperature close to its Tg, however, the mechanical properties of the polymer are significantly reduced, and the polymer begins to loose its ability to transfer stresses from the concrete to the fibers.
3.3--Mechanical properties and behavior 3.3.1 Tensile behavior--When loaded in direct tension,
FRP materials do not exhibit any plastic behavior (yielding) before rupture. The tensile behavior of FRP materials consisting of one type of fiber material is characterized by a linearly elastic stress-strain relationship until failure, which is sudden and can be catastrophic.
The tensile strength and stiffness of an FRP material is dependent on several factors. Because the fibers in an FRP material are the main load-carrying constituent, the type of fiber, the orientation of the fibers, and the quantity of fibers primarily govern the tensile properties of the FRP material. Due to the primary role of the fibers and methods of application, the properties of an FRP repair system are sometimes reported

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-11

www.afzir.com

based on the net-fiber area. In other instances, the reported properties are based on the gross-laminate area.
The gross-laminate area of an FRP system is calculated using the total cross-sectional area of the cured FRP system, including all fibers and resin. The gross-laminate area is typically used for reporting precured laminate properties where the cured thickness is constant and the relative proportion of fiber and resin is controlled.
The net-fiber area of an FRP system is calculated using the known area of fiber, neglecting the total width and thickness of the cured system; thus, resin is excluded. The net-fiber area is typically used for reporting properties of wet layup systems that use manufactured fiber sheets and field-installed resins. The wet layup installation process leads to a controlled fiber content and a variable resin content.
System properties reported using the gross-laminate area have higher relative thickness dimensions and lower relative strength and modulus values, whereas system properties reported using the net-fiber area have lower relative thickness dimensions and higher relative strength and modulus values. Regardless of the basis for the reported values, the load-carrying strength (ffu Af) and stiffness (Af Ef) remain constant. (The calculation of FRP system properties using both gross-laminate and net-fiber property methods is illustrated in Part 5.) Properties reported based on the net-fiber area are not the properties of the bare fibers. The properties of an FRP system should be characterized as a composite, recognizing not just the material properties of the individual fibers but also the efficiency of the fiber-resin system, the fabric architecture, and the method used to create the composite. The mechanical properties of all FRP systems, regardless of form, should be based on the testing of laminate samples with a known fiber content.
The tensile properties of some commercially available FRP strengthening systems are given in Appendix A. The tensile properties of a particular FRP system, however, should be obtained from the FRP system manufacturer. Manufacturers should report an ultimate tensile strength defined by this guide as the mean tensile strength of a sample of test specimens minus three times the standard deviation ( ffu* = ffu ­ 3) and, similarly, report an ultimate rupture strain (*fu = fu ­ 3). These statistically based ultimate tensile properties provide a 99.87% probability that the indicated values are exceeded (Mutsuyoshi et al. 1990). Young's modulus should be calculated as the chord modulus between 0.003 and 0.006 strain, in accordance with ASTM D 3039. A minimum number of 20 replicate test specimens should be used to determine the ultimate tensile properties. The manufacturer should provide a description of the method used to obtain the reported tensile properties, including the number of tests, mean values, and standard deviations.
3.3.2 Compressive behavior--Externally bonded FRP systems should not be used as compression reinforcement due to insufficient testing validating its use in this type of application. While it is not recommended to rely on externally bonded FRP systems to resist compressive stresses, the following section is presented to fully characterize the behavior of FRP materials.
Coupon tests on FRP laminates used for repair on concrete have shown that the compressive strength is lower than the tensile strength (Wu 1990). The mode of failure for FRP laminates subjected to longitudinal compression can include transverse tensile failure, fiber microbuckling, or shear failure. The mode of failure depends on the type of fiber,

the fiber-volume fraction, and the type of resin. Compressive strengths of 55, 78, and 20% of the tensile strength have been reported for GFRP, CFRP, and AFRP, respectively (Wu 1990). In general, compressive strengths are higher for materials with higher tensile strengths, except in the case of AFRP where the fibers exhibit nonlinear behavior in compression at a relatively low level of stress.
The compressive modulus of elasticity is usually smaller than the tensile modulus of elasticity of FRP materials. Test reports on samples containing a 55 to 60% volume fraction of continuous E-glass fibers in a matrix of vinyl ester or isophthalic polyester resin have reported a compressive modulus of elasticity of 5000 to 7000 ksi (34,000 to 48,000 MPa) (Wu 1990). According to reports, the compressive modulus of elasticity is approximately 80% for GFRP, 85% for CFRP, and 100% for AFRP of the tensile modulus of elasticity for the same product (Ehsani 1993).
3.4--Time-dependent behavior 3.4.1 Creep-rupture--FRP materials subjected to a constant
load over time can suddenly fail after a time period referred to as the endurance time. This type of failure is known as creep-rupture. As the ratio of the sustained tensile stress to the short-term strength of the FRP laminate increases, endurance time decreases. The endurance time also decreases under adverse environmental conditions, such as high temperature, ultraviolet-radiation exposure, high alkalinity, wet and dry cycles, or freezing-and-thawing cycles.
In general, carbon fibers are the least susceptible to creeprupture; aramid fibers are moderately susceptible, and glass fibers are most susceptible. Creep-rupture tests have been conducted on 0.25 in. (6 mm) diameter FRP bars reinforced with glass, aramid, and carbon fibers. The FRP bars were tested at different load levels at room temperature. Results indicated that a linear relationship exists between creeprupture strength and the logarithm of time for all load levels. The ratios of stress level at creep-rupture after 500,000 h (about 50 years) to the initial ultimate strength of the GFRP, AFRP, and CFRP bars were extrapolated to be 0.3, 0.47, and 0.91, respectively (Yamaguchi et al. 1997). Similar values have been determined elsewhere (Malvar 1998).
Recommendations on sustained stress limits imposed to avoid creep-rupture are given in the design section of this guide. As long as the sustained stress in the FRP is below the creep rupture stress limits, the strength of the FRP is available for nonsustained loads.
3.4.2 Fatigue--A substantial amount of data for fatigue behavior and life prediction of stand-alone FRP materials have been generated in the last 30 years (National Research Council 1991). During most of this period, aerospace materials were the primary subjects of investigation. Despite the differences in quality and consistency between aerospace and commercialgrade FRP materials, some general observations on the fatigue behavior of FRP materials can be made. Unless specifically stated otherwise, the following cases being reviewed are based on an unidirectional material with approximately 60% fibervolume fraction and subjected to tension-tension sinusoidal cyclic loading at: · A frequency low enough to not cause self-heating; · Ambient laboratory environments; · A stress ratio (ratio of minimum applied stress to
maximum applied stress) of 0.1; and · A direction parallel to the principal fiber alignment.

440.2R-12

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Test conditions that raise the temperature and moisture content of FRP materials generally degrade the ambient environment fatigue behavior.
Of all types of FRP composites for infrastructure applications, CFRP is the least prone to fatigue failure. An endurance limit of 60 to 70% of the initial static ultimate strength of CFRP is typical. On a plot of stress versus the logarithm of the number of cycles at failure (S-N curve), the downward slope of CFRP is usually about 5% of the initial static ultimate strength per decade of logarithmic life. At one million cycles, the fatigue strength is generally between 60 and 70% of the initial static ultimate strength and is relatively unaffected by the moisture and temperature exposures of concrete structures unless the resin or fiber/resin interface is substantially degraded by the environment.
In ambient-environment laboratory tests (Mandell and Meier 1983), individual glass fibers demonstrated delayed rupture caused by stress corrosion, which had been induced by the growth of surface flaws in the presence of even minute quantities of moisture. When many glass fibers are embedded into a matrix to form an FRP composite, a cyclic tensile fatigue effect of approximately 10% loss in the initial static strength per decade of logarithmic lifetime is observed (Mandell 1982). This fatigue effect is thought to be due to fiberfiber interactions and not dependent on the stress corrosion mechanism described for individual fibers. Usually, no clear fatigue limit can be defined. Environmental factors can play an important role in the fatigue behavior of glass fibers due to their susceptibility to moisture, alkaline, and acidic solutions.
Aramid fibers, for which substantial durability data are available, appear to behave reasonably well in fatigue. Neglecting in this context the rather poor durability of all aramid fibers in compression, the tension-tension fatigue behavior of an impregnated aramid fiber strand is excellent. Strength degradation per decade of logarithmic lifetime is approximately 5 to 6% (Roylance and Roylance 1981). While no distinct endurance limit is known for AFRP, twomillion-cycle endurance limits of commercial AFRP tendons for concrete applications have been reported in the range of 54 to 73% of the ultimate tensile strength (Odagiri et al. 1997). Based on these findings, Odagiri suggested that the maximum stress be set to 0.54 to 0.73 times the tensile strength. Because the slope of the applied stress versus logarithmic endurance time of AFRP is similar to the slope of the stress versus logarithmic cyclic lifetime data, the individual fibers appear to fail by a strain-limited, creeprupture process. This lifetime-limiting mechanism in commercial AFRP bars is accelerated by exposure to moisture and elevated temperature (Roylance and Roylance 1981; Rostasy 1997).
3.5--Durability Many FRP systems exhibit reduced mechanical properties
after exposure to certain environmental factors, including temperature, humidity, and chemical exposure. The exposure environment, duration of the exposure, resin type and formulation, fiber type, and resin-curing method are some of the factors that influence the extent of the reduction in mechanical properties. These factors are discussed in more detail in Section 8.3. The tensile properties reported by the manufacturer are based on testing conducted in a laboratory environment and do not reflect the effects of environmental

exposure. These properties should be adjusted in accordance with Section 8.4 to account for the anticipated service environment to which the FRP system may be exposed during its service life.
3.6--FRP system qualification FRP systems should be qualified for use on a project on the
basis of independent laboratory test data of the FRP-constituent materials and the laminates made with them, structural test data for the type of application being considered, and durability data representative of the anticipated environment. Test data provided by the FRP system manufacturer demonstrating the proposed FRP system meets all mechanical and physical design requirements including tensile strength, durability, resistance to creep, bond to substrate, and Tg should be considered but not used as the sole basis for qualification.
FRP composite systems that have not been fully tested should not be considered for use. Mechanical properties of FRP systems should be determined from tests on laminates manufactured in a process representative of their field installation. Mechanical properties should be tested in general conformance with the procedures listed in Appendix B. Modifications of standard testing procedures may be permitted to emulate field assemblies.
The specified material-qualification programs should require sufficient laboratory testing to measure the repeatability and reliability of critical properties. Testing of multiple batches of FRP materials is recommended. Independent structural testing can be used to evaluate a system's performance for the specific application.
PART 3--RECOMMENDED CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 4--SHIPPING, STORAGE, AND HANDLING
4.1--Shipping FRP system constituent materials must be packaged and
shipped in a manner that conforms to all applicable federal and state packaging and shipping codes and regulations. Packaging, labeling, and shipping for thermosetting resin materials are controlled by CFR 49. Many materials are classified as corrosive, flammable, or poisonous in subchapter C (CFR 49) under "Hazardous Materials Regulations."
4.2--Storage 4.2.1 Storage conditions--To preserve the properties and
maintain safety in the storage of FRP system constituent materials, the materials should be stored in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Certain constituent materials, such as reactive curing agents, hardeners, initiators, catalysts, and cleaning solvents, have safety-related requirements and should be stored in a manner as recommended by the manufacturer and OSHA. Catalysts and initiators (usually peroxides) should be stored separately.
4.2.2 Shelf life--The properties of the uncured resin components can change with time, temperature, or humidity. Such conditions can affect the reactivity of the mixed system and the uncured and cured properties. The manufacturer sets a recommended shelf life within which the properties of the resin-based materials should continue to meet or exceed stated performance criteria. Any component material that has exceeded its shelf life, has deteriorated, or has been contaminated should not be used. FRP materials deemed

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-13

www.afzir.com

unusable should be disposed of in a manner specified by the manufacturer and acceptable to state and federal environmental control regulations.
4.3--Handling 4.3.1 Material safety data sheets--Material safety data
sheets (MSDS) for all FRP constituent materials and components must be obtained from the manufacturers and must be accessible at the job site.
4.3.2 Information sources--Detailed information on the handling and potential hazards of FRP constituent materials can be found in information sources, such as ACI and ICRI reports, company literature and guides, OSHA guidelines, and other government informational documents. ACI 503R is specifically noted as a general guideline for the safe handling of epoxy compounds.
4.3.3 General handling hazards--Thermosetting resins describe a generic family of products that includes unsaturated polyesters, vinyl esters, epoxy, and polyurethane resins. The materials used with them are generally described as hardeners, curing agents, peroxide initiators, isocyanates, fillers, and flexibilizers. There are precautions that should be observed when handling thermosetting resins and their component materials. Some general hazards that may be encountered when handling thermosetting resins are listed as follows: · Skin irritation, such as burns, rashes, and itching; · Skin sensitization, which is an allergic reaction similar
to that caused by poison ivy, building insulation, or other allergens; · Breathing organic vapors from cleaning solvents, monomers, and diluents; · With a sufficient concentration in air, explosion or fire of flammable materials when exposed to heat, flames, pilot lights, sparks, static electricity, cigarettes, or other sources of ignition; · Exothermic reactions of mixtures of materials causing fires or personal injury; and · Nuisance dust caused by grinding or handling of the cured FRP materials (consult manufacturer's literature for specific hazards). The complexity of thermosetting resins and associated materials makes it essential that labels and MSDS are read and understood by those working with these products. CFR 16, Part 1500, regulates the labeling of hazardous substances and includes thermosetting-resin materials. ANSI Z-129.1 provides further guidance regarding classification and precautions. 4.3.4 Personnel safe handling and clothing--Disposable suits and gloves are suitable for handling fiber and resin materials. Disposable rubber or plastic gloves are recommended and should be discarded after each use. Gloves should be resistant to resins and solvents. Safety glasses or goggles should be used when handling resin components and solvents. Respiratory protection, such as dust masks or respirators, should be used when fiber fly, dust, or organic vapors are present, or during mixing and placing of resins if required by the FRP system manufacturer. 4.3.5 Workplace safe handling--The workplace should be well ventilated. Surfaces should be covered as needed to protect against contamination and resin spills. Each FRP system constituent material has different handling and storage requirements to prevent damage. Consult with the material manufacturer for guidance. Some resin systems are potentially dangerous during the mixing of the components.

Consult the manufacturer's literature for proper mixing procedures and MSDSs for specific handling hazards. Ambient cure resin formulations produce heat when curing, which in turn accelerates the reaction. Uncontrolled reactions, including fuming, fire, or violent boiling, may occur in containers holding a mixed mass of resin; therefore, containers should be monitored.
4.3.6 Clean-up and disposal--Clean-up can involve use of flammable solvents, and appropriate precautions should be observed. Clean-up solvents are available that do not present the same flammability concerns. All waste materials should be contained and disposed of as prescribed by the prevailing environmental authority.
CHAPTER 5--INSTALLATION Procedures for installing FRP systems have been developed by the system manufacturers and often differ between systems. In addition, installation procedures can vary within a system, depending on the type and condition of the structure. This chapter presents general guidelines for the installation of FRP systems. Contractors trained in accordance with the installation procedures developed by the system manufacturer should install FRP systems. Deviations from the procedures developed by the FRP system manufacturer should not be allowed without consulting with the manufacturer.
5.1--Contractor competency The FRP system installation contractor should demonstrate
competency for surface preparation and application of the FRP system to be installed. Contractor competency can be demonstrated by providing evidence of training and documentation of related work previously completed by the contractor or by actual surface preparation and installation of the FRP system on portions of the structure. The FRP system manufacturer or their authorized agent should train the contractor's application personnel in the installation procedures of their system and ensure they are competent to install the system.
5.2--Temperature, humidity, and moisture considerations
Temperature, relative humidity, and surface moisture at the time of installation can affect the performance of the FRP system. Conditions to be observed before and during installation include surface temperature of the concrete, air temperature, relative humidity, and corresponding dew point.
Primers, saturating resins, and adhesives generally should not be applied to cold or frozen surfaces. When the surface temperature of the concrete surface falls below a minimum level as specified by the FRP system manufacturer, improper saturation of the fibers and improper curing of the resin constituent materials can occur, compromising the integrity of the FRP system. An auxiliary heat source can be used to raise the ambient and surface temperature during installation. The heat source should be clean and not contaminate the surface or the uncured FRP system.
Resins and adhesives generally should not be applied to damp or wet surfaces unless they have been formulated for such applications. FRP systems should not be applied to concrete surfaces that are subject to moisture vapor transmission. The transmission of moisture vapor from a concrete surface through the uncured resin materials typically appears as surface bubbles and can compromise the bond between the FRP system and the substrate.

440.2R-14

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

5.3--Equipment Each FRP system has unique equipment designed specifically
for the application of the materials for that system. This equipment can include resin impregnators, sprayers, lifting/ positioning devices, and winding machines. All equipment should be clean and in good operating condition. The contractor should have personnel trained in the operation of all equipment. Personal protective equipment, such as gloves, masks, eye guards, and coveralls, should be chosen and worn for each employee's function. All supplies and equipment should be available in sufficient quantities to allow continuity in the installation project and quality assurance.
5.4--Substrate repair and surface preparation The behavior of concrete members strengthened or retrofitted
with FRP systems is highly dependent on a sound concrete substrate and proper preparation and profiling of the concrete surface. An improperly prepared surface can result in debonding or delamination of the FRP system before achieving the design load transfer. The general guidelines presented in this chapter should be applicable to all externally bonded FRP systems. Specific guidelines for a particular FRP system should be obtained from the FRP system manufacturer. Substrate preparation can generate noise, dust, and disruption to building occupants.
5.4.1 Substrate repair--All problems associated with the condition of the original concrete and the concrete substrate that can compromise the integrity of the FRP system should be addressed before surface preparation begins. ACI 546R and ICRI 03730 detail methods for the repair and surface preparation of concrete. All concrete repairs should meet the requirements of the design drawings and project specifications. The FRP system manufacturer should be consulted on the compatibility of the materials used for repairing the substrate with the FRP system.
5.4.1.1 Corrosion-related deterioration--Externally bonded FRP systems should not be applied to concrete substrates suspected of containing corroded reinforcing steel. The expansive forces associated with the corrosion process are difficult to determine and could compromise the structural integrity of the externally applied FRP system. The cause(s) of the corrosion should be addressed and the corrosion-related deterioration should be repaired before the application of any externally bonded FRP system.
5.4.1.2 Injection of cracks--Some FRP manufacturers have reported that the movement of cracks 0.010 in. (0.3 mm) and wider can affect the performance of the externally bonded FRP system through delamination or fiber crushing. Consequently, cracks wider than 0.010 in. (0.3 mm) should be pressure injected with epoxy in accordance with ACI 224.1R. Smaller cracks exposed to aggressive environments may require resin injection or sealing to prevent corrosion of existing steel reinforcement. Crack-width criteria for various exposure conditions are given in ACI 224R.
5.4.2 Surface preparation--Surface preparation requirements should be based on the intended application of the FRP system. Applications can be categorized as bond-critical or contactcritical. Bond-critical applications, such as flexural or shear strengthening of beams, slabs, columns, or walls, require an adhesive bond between the FRP system and the concrete. Contact-critical applications, such as confinement of columns, only require intimate contact between the FRP system and the concrete. Contact-critical applications do not require an

adhesive bond between the FRP system and the concrete substrate, although one is often provided to facilitate installation.
5.4.2.1 Bond-critical applications--Surface preparation for bond-critical applications should be in accordance with recommendations of ACI 546R and ICRI 03730. The concrete or repaired surfaces to which the FRP system is to be applied should be freshly exposed and free of loose or unsound materials. Where fibers wrap around the corners of rectangular cross sections, the corners should be rounded to a minimum 1/2 in. (13 mm) radius to prevent stress concentrations in the FRP system and voids between the FRP system and the concrete. Roughened corners should be smoothed with putty. Obstructions, reentrant corners, concave surfaces, and embedded objects can affect the performance of the FRP system and should be addressed. Obstructions and embedded objects may need to be removed before installing the FRP system. Reentrant corners and concave surfaces may require special detailing to ensure that the bond of the FRP system to the substrate is maintained. Surface preparation can be accomplished using abrasive or water-blasting techniques. All laitance, dust, dirt, oil, curing compound, existing coatings, and any other matter that could interfere with the bond of the FRP system to the concrete should be removed. Bug holes and other small surface voids should be completely exposed during surface profiling. After the profiling operations are complete, the surface should be cleaned and protected before FRP installation so that no materials that can interfere with bond are redeposited on the surface.
The concrete surface should be prepared to a minimum concrete surface profile (CSP) 3 as defined by the ICRIsurface-profile chips. The FRP system manufacturer should be consulted to determine if more aggressive surface profiling is necessary. Localized out-of-plane variations, including form lines, should not exceed 1/32 in. (1 mm) or the tolerances recommended by the FRP system manufacturer. Localized out-of-plane variations can be removed by grinding before abrasive or water blasting or can be smoothed over using epoxy putty if the variations are very small. Bug holes and voids should be filled with epoxy putty.
All surfaces to receive the strengthening system should be as dry as recommended by the FRP system manufacturer. Water in the pores can inhibit resin penetration and reduce mechanical interlocking. Moisture content should be evaluated in accordance with the requirements of ACI 503.4.
5.4.2.2 Contact-critical applications--In applications involving confinement of structural concrete members, surface preparation should promote continuous intimate contact between the concrete surface and the FRP system. Surfaces to be wrapped should, at a minimum, be flat or convex to promote proper loading of the FRP system. Large voids in the surface should be patched with a repair material compatible with the existing concrete.
Materials with low compressive strength and elastic modulus, like plaster, can reduce the effectiveness of the FRP system and should be removed.
5.5--Mixing of resins Mixing of resins should be done in accordance with the FRP
system manufacturer's recommended procedure. All resin components should be at a proper temperature and mixed in the correct ratio until there is a uniform and complete mixing of components. Resin components are often contrasting colors, so full mixing is achieved when color streaks are eliminated.

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-15

www.afzir.com

Resins should be mixed for the prescribed mixing time and visually inspected for uniformity of color. The material manufacturer should supply recommended batch sizes, mixture ratios, mixing methods, and mixing times.
Mixing equipment can include small electrically powered mixing blades or specialty units, or resins can be mixed by hand stirring, if needed. Resin mixing should be in quantities sufficiently small to ensure that all mixed resin can be used within the resin's pot life. Mixed resin that exceeds its pot life should not be used because the viscosity will continue to increase and will adversely affect the resin's ability to penetrate the surface or saturate the fiber sheet.
5.6--Application of constituent materials Fumes can accompany the application of some FRP resins.
FRP systems should be selected with consideration for their impact on the environment, including emission of volatile organic compounds and toxicology.
5.6.1 Primer and putty--Where required, primer should be applied to all areas on the concrete surface where the FRP system is to be placed. The primer should be placed uniformly on the prepared surface at the manufacturer's specified rate of coverage. The applied primer should be protected from dust, moisture, and other contaminants prior to applying the FRP system.
Putty should be used in an appropriate thickness and sequence with the primer as recommended by the FRP manufacturer. The system-compatible putty, which is typically a thickened epoxy paste, should be used only to fill voids and smooth surface discontinuities before the application of other materials. Rough edges or trowel lines of cured putty should be ground smooth before continuing the installation.
Prior to applying the saturating resin or adhesive, the primer and putty should be allowed to cure as specified by the FRP system manufacturer. If the putty and primer are fully cured, additional surface preparation may be required prior to the application of the saturating resin or adhesive. Surface preparation requirements should be obtained from the FRP system manufacturer.
5.6.2 Wet layup systems--Wet layup FRP systems are typically installed by hand using dry fiber sheets and a saturating resin, and the manufacturer's recommendations should be followed. The saturating resin should be applied uniformly to all prepared surfaces where the system is to be placed. The fibers can also be impregnated in a separate process using a resin-impregnating machine before placement on the concrete surface.
The reinforcing fibers should be gently pressed into the uncured saturating resin in a manner recommended by the FRP system manufacturer. Entrapped air between layers should be released or rolled out before the resin sets. Sufficient saturating resin should be applied to achieve full saturation of the fibers.
Successive layers of saturating resin and fiber materials should be placed before the complete cure of the previous layer of resin. If previous layers are cured, interlayer surface preparation, such as light sanding or solvent application as recommended by the system manufacturer, may be required.
5.6.3 Machine-applied systems--Machine-applied systems can use resin-preimpregnated tow or dry-fiber tows. Prepreg tows are impregnated with saturating resin off-site and delivered to the work site as spools of prepreg tow material.

Dry fibers are impregnated at the job site during the winding process.
Wrapping machines are primarily used for the automated wrapping of concrete columns. The tows can be wound either horizontally or at a specified angle. The wrapping machine is placed around the column and automatically wraps the tow material around the perimeter of the column while moving up and down the column.
After wrapping, prepreg systems should be cured at an elevated temperature. Usually a heat source is placed around the column for a predetermined temperature and time schedule in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Temperatures are controlled to ensure consistent quality. The resulting FRP jackets do not have any seams or welds because the tows are continuous. In all of the previous application steps, the FRP system manufacturer's recommendations should be followed.
5.6.4 Precured systems--Precured systems include shells, strips, and open grid forms that are typically installed with an adhesive. Adhesives should be uniformly applied to the prepared surfaces where precured systems are to be placed, except in certain instances of concrete confinement where adhesion of the FRP system to the concrete substrate may not be required.
Precured laminate surfaces to be bonded should be clean and prepared in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. The precured sheets or curved shells should be placed on or into the wet adhesive in a manner recommended by the FRP manufacturer. Entrapped air between layers should be released or rolled out before the adhesive sets. Adhesive should be applied at a rate recommended by the FRP manufacturer to ensure full bonding of successive layers.
5.6.5 Protective coatings--Coatings should be compatible with the FRP strengthening system and applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Typically, the use of solvents to clean the FRP surface prior to installing coatings is not recommended due to the deleterious effects solvents can have on the polymer resins. The FRP system manufacturer should approve any use of solvent-wipe preparation of FRP surfaces before the application of protective coatings.
The coatings should be periodically inspected and maintenance should be provided to ensure the effectiveness of the coatings.
5.7--Alignment of FRP materials The FRP-ply orientation and ply-stacking sequence should
be specified. Small variations in angle, as little as 5 degrees, from the intended direction of fiber alignment can cause a substantial reduction in strengthening. Deviations in ply orientation should only be made if approved by the engineer.
Sheet and fabric materials should be handled in a manner to maintain the fiber straightness and orientation. Fabric kinks, folds, or other forms of severe waviness should be reported to the engineer.
5.8--Multiple plies and lap splices Multiple plies can be used, provided all plies are fully
impregnated with the resin system, the resin shear strength is sufficient to transfer the shearing load between plies, and the bond strength between the concrete and FRP system is sufficient. For long spans, multiple lengths of fiber material or precured stock can be used to continuously transfer the

440.2R-16

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

load by providing adequate lap splices. Lap splices should be staggered, unless noted otherwise by the engineer. Lap splice details, including lap length, should be based on testing and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Due to the unique characteristics of some FRP systems, multiple plies and lap splices are not always possible. Specific guidelines on lap splices are given in Chapter 12.
5.9--Curing of resins Curing of resins is a time-temperature-dependent phenome-
non. Ambient-cure resins can take several days to reach full cure. Temperature extremes or fluctuations can retard or accelerate the resin curing time. The FRP system manufacturer may offer several prequalified grades of resin to accommodate these situations.
Elevated cure systems require the resin to be heated to a specific temperature for a specified period of time. Various combinations of time and temperature within a defined envelope should provide full cure of the system.
All resins should be cured according to the manufacturer's recommendation. Field modification of resin chemistry should not be permitted.
Cure of installed plies should be monitored before placing subsequent plies. Installation of successive layers should be halted if there is a curing anomaly.
5.10--Temporary protection Adverse temperatures; direct contact by rain, dust, or dirt;
excessive sunlight; high humidity; or vandalism can damage an FRP system during installation and cause improper cure of the resins. Temporary protection, such as tents and plastic screens, may be required during installation and until the resins have cured. If temporary shoring is required, the FRP system should be fully cured before removing the shoring and allowing the structural member to carry the design loads. In the event of suspected damage to the FRP system during installation, the engineer should be notified and the FRP system manufacturer consulted.
CHAPTER 6--INSPECTION, EVALUATION, AND ACCEPTANCE
Quality-assurance and quality-control (QA/QC) programs and criteria are to be maintained by the FRP system manufacturers, the installation contractors, and others associated with the project. The quality-control program should be comprehensive and cover all aspects of the strengthening project. The degree of quality control and the scope of testing, inspection, and record keeping depends on the size and complexity of the project.
Quality assurance is achieved through a set of inspections and applicable tests to document the acceptability of the installation. Project specifications should include a requirement to provide a quality-assurance plan for the installation and curing of all FRP materials. The plan should include personnel safety issues, application and inspection of the FRP system, location and placement of splices, curing provisions, means to ensure dry surfaces, quality-assurance samples, cleanup, and the required submittals listed in Section 13.3.
6.1--Inspection FRP systems and all associated work should be inspected
as required by the applicable codes. In the absence of such requirements, inspection should be conducted by or under

the supervision of a licensed engineer or a qualified inspector. Inspectors should be knowledgeable of FRP systems and be trained in the installation of FRP systems. The qualified inspector should require compliance with the design drawings and project specifications. During the installation of the FRP system, daily inspection should be conducted and should include: · Date and time of installation; · Ambient temperature, relative humidity, and general
weather observations; · Surface temperature of concrete; · Surface dryness per ACI 503.4; · Surface preparation methods and resulting profile using
the ICRI-surface-profile-chips; · Qualitative description of surface cleanliness; · Type of auxiliary heat source, if applicable; · Widths of cracks not injected with epoxy; · Fiber or precured laminate batch number(s) and
approximate location in structure; · Batch numbers, mixture ratios, mixing times, and
qualitative descriptions of the appearance of all mixed resins, including primers, putties, saturants, adhesives, and coatings mixed for the day; · Observations of progress of cure of resins; · Conformance with installation procedures; · Pull-off test results: bond strength, failure mode, and location; · FRP properties from tests of field sample panels or witness panels, if required; · Location and size of any delaminations or air voids; and · General progress of work. The inspector should provide the engineer or owner with the inspection records and witness panels. It is recommended that the records and witness panels be retained for a minimum of 10 years or a period specified by the engineer. The installation contractor should retain sample cups of mixed resin and maintain a record of the placement of each batch.
6.2--Evaluation and acceptance FRP systems should be evaluated and accepted/rejected
based on conformance/nonconformance with the design drawings and specifications. FRP system material properties, installation within specified placement tolerances, presence of delaminations, cure of resins, and adhesion to substrate should be included in the evaluation. Placement tolerances including fiber orientation, cured thickness, ply orientation, width and spacing, corner radii, and lap splice lengths should be evaluated.
Witness panel and pulloff tests are used to evaluate the installed FRP system. In-place load testing can also be used to confirm the installed behavior of the FRP strengthened member (Nanni and Gold 1998).
6.2.1 Materials--Before starting the project, the FRP system manufacturer should submit certification of specified material properties and identification of all materials to be used. Additional material testing can be conducted if deemed necessary based on the complexity and intricacy of the project. Evaluation of delivered FRP materials can include tests for tensile strength, infrared spectrum analysis, Tg, gel time, pot life, and adhesive shear strength. These tests are usually performed on material samples sent to a laboratory, according to the quality-control test plan. Tests for pot life of resins and curing hardness are usually conducted on-site.

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-17

www.afzir.com

Materials that do not meet the minimum requirements as specified by the engineer should be rejected.
Witness panels can be used to evaluate the tensile strength and modulus, lap splice strength, hardness, and Tg of the FRP system installed and cured on-site using installation procedures similar to those used to install and cure the FRP system. During installation, flat panels of predetermined dimensions and thickness can be fabricated on-site according to a predetermined sampling plan. After curing on-site, the panels can then be sent to a laboratory for testing. Witness panels can be retained or submitted to an approved laboratory in a timely manner for testing of strength, hardness, and Tg. Strength and elastic modulus of FRP materials can be determined in accordance with ASTM D 3039 and ISIS (1998). The properties to be evaluated by testing should be specified. The engineer may waive or alter the frequency of testing.
Some FRP systems, including precured and machinewound systems, do not lend themselves to the fabrication of small, flat, witness panels. For these cases, the engineer can modify the requirements to include test panels or samples provided by the manufacturer. Tension strength and elastic modulus, lap-splice strength of FRP materials can also be determined using burst testing of field fabricated ring specimens (ISIS 1998).
During installation, sample cups of mixed resin should be prepared according to a predetermined sampling plan and retained for testing to determine the level of cure (see Section 6.2.4).
6.2.2 Fiber orientation--Fiber or precured-laminate orientation should be evaluated by visual inspection. Fiber waviness--a localized appearance of fibers that deviate from the general straight-fiber line in the form of kinks or waves--should be evaluated for wet layup systems.
Fiber or precured laminate misalignment of more than 5 degrees from that specified on the design drawings (approximately 1 in./ft [80 mm/m]) should be reported to the engineer for evaluation and acceptance.
6.2.3 Delaminations--The cured FRP system should be evaluated for delaminations or air voids between multiple plies or between the FRP system and the concrete. Inspection methods should be capable of detecting delaminations of 2 in.2 (1300 mm2) or greater. Methods such as acoustic sounding (hammer sounding), ultrasonics, and thermography can be used to detect delaminations.
The effect of delaminations or other anomalies on the structural integrity and durability of the FRP system should be evaluated. Delamination size, location, and quantity relative to the overall application area should be considered in the evaluation.
General acceptance guidelines for wet layup systems are: · Small delaminations less than 2 in.2 each (1300 mm2)
are permissible as long as the delaminated area is less than 5% of the total laminate area and there are no more than 10 such delaminations per 10 ft2 (1 m2); · Large delaminations, greater than 25 in.2 (16,000 mm2), can affect the performance of the installed FRP and should be repaired by selectively cutting away the affected sheet and applying an overlapping sheet patch of equivalent plies; and · Delaminations less than 25 in.2 (16,000 mm2). may be repaired by resin injection or ply replacement, depending on the size and number of delaminations and their locations.

For precured FRP systems, each delamination should be evaluated and repaired in accordance with the engineer's direction. Upon completion of the repairs, the laminate should be re-inspected to verify that the repair was properly accomplished.
6.2.4 Cure of resins--The relative cure of FRP systems can be evaluated by laboratory testing of witness panels or resincup samples using ASTM D 3418. The relative cure of the resin can also be evaluated on the project site by physical observation of resin tackiness and hardness of work surfaces or hardness of retained resin samples. The FRP system manufacturer should be consulted to determine the specific resin-cure verification requirements. For precured systems, adhesive-hardness measurements should be made in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation.
6.2.5 Adhesion strength--For bond-critical applications, tension adhesion testing of cored samples should be conducted using the methods in ACI 503R or ASTM D 4541 or the method described by ISIS (1998). The sampling frequency should be specified. Tension adhesion strengths should exceed 200 psi (1.4 MPa) and exhibit failure of the concrete substrate. Lower strengths or failure between the FRP system and the concrete or between plies should be reported to the engineer for evaluation and acceptance.
6.2.6 Cured thickness--Small core samples, typically 0.5 in. (13 mm) diameter, may be taken to visually ascertain the cured laminate thickness or number of plies. Cored samples required for adhesion testing also can be used to ascertain the laminate thickness or number of plies. The sampling frequency should be specified. Taking samples from high-stress areas or splice areas should be avoided. For aesthetic reasons, the cored hole can be filled and smoothed with a repair mortar or the FRP system putty. If required, a 4 to 8 in. (100 to 200 mm) overlapping FRP sheet patch of equivalent plies may be applied over the filled and smoothed core hole immediately after taking the core sample. The FRP sheet patch should be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation procedures.
CHAPTER 7--MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR 7.1--General
As with any strengthening or retrofit repair, the owner should periodically inspect and assess the performance of the FRP system used for strengthening or retrofit repair of concrete members. The causes of any damage or deficiencies detected during routine inspections should be identified and addressed before performing any repairs or maintenance.
7.2--Inspection and assessment 7.2.1 General inspection--A visual inspection looks for
changes in color, debonding, peeling, blistering, cracking, crazing, deflections, indications of reinforcing-bar corrosion, and other anomalies. In addition, ultra-sonic, acoustic sounding (hammer tap), or thermographic tests may indicate signs of progressive delamination.
7.2.2 Testing--Testing can include pull-off tension tests (Section 6.2.5) or conventional structural loading tests.
7.2.3 Assessment--Test data and observations are used to assess any damage and the structural integrity of the strengthening system. The assessment can include a recommendation for repairing any deficiencies and preventing recurrence of degradation.

440.2R-18

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

7.3--Repair of strengthening system The method of repair of the strengthening system depends
on the causes of the damage, the type of material, the form of degradation, and the level of damage. Repairs to the FRP system should not be undertaken without first identifying and addressing the causes of the damage.
Minor damage should be repaired, including localized FRP laminate cracking or abrasions that affect the structural integrity of the laminate. Minor damage can be repaired by bonding FRP patches over the damaged area. The FRP patches should possess the same characteristics, such as thickness or ply orientation, as the original laminate. The FRP patches should be installed in accordance with the material manufacturer's recommendation. Minor delaminations can be repaired by epoxy-resin injection. Major damage, including peeling and debonding of large areas, may require removal of the affected area, reconditioning of the cover concrete, and replacing the FRP laminate.
7.4--Repair of surface coating In the event that the surface-protective coating should be
replaced, the FRP laminate should be inspected for structural damage or deterioration. The surface coating may be replaced using a process approved by the system manufacturer.
PART 4--DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS
CHAPTER 8--GENERAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
General design recommendations are presented in this chapter. The recommendations presented are based on the traditional reinforced concrete design principles stated in the requirements of ACI 318-99 and knowledge of the specific mechanical behavior of FRP reinforcement.
FRP strengthening systems should be designed to resist tensile forces while maintaining strain compatibility between the FRP and the concrete substrate. FRP reinforcement should not be relied upon to resist compressive forces. It is acceptable, however, for FRP tension reinforcement to experience compression due to moment reversals or changes in load pattern. The compressive strength of the FRP reinforcement, however, should be neglected.
8.1--Design philosophy These design recommendations are based on limit-states-
design principles. This approach sets acceptable levels of safety against the occurrence of both serviceability limit states (excessive deflections, cracking) and ultimate-limit states (failure, stress rupture, fatigue). In assessing the nominal strength of a member, the possible failure modes and subsequent strains and stresses in each material should be assessed. For evaluating the serviceability of a member, engineering principles, such as modular ratios and transformed sections, can be used.
FRP strengthening systems should be designed in accordance with ACI 318-99 strength and serviceability requirements, using the load factors stated in ACI 318-99. The strengthreduction factors required by ACI 318-99 should also be used. Additional reduction factors applied to the contribution of the FRP reinforcement are recommended by this guide to reflect lesser existing knowledge of FRP systems compared with reinforced and prestressed concrete. The engineer may wish to incorporate more conservative strength-reduction factors if there are uncertainties regarding existing material

strengths or substrate conditions greater than those discussed in these recommendations.
For the design of FRP systems for the seismic retrofit of a structure, it may be appropriate to use capacity design principles (Paulay and Priestley 1992), which assume a structure should develop its full capacity and require that members be capable of resisting the associated required shear strengths. These FRP systems, particularly when used for columns, should be designed to provide seismic resistance through energy dissipation and deflection capacity at the code-defined base shear levels. Unless additional performance objectives are specified by the owner, life safety is the primary performance objective of seismic designs with an allowance for some level of structural damage to provide energy dissipation. Consequently, retrofitted members may require some level of repair or replacement following a seismic event. Caution should be exercised upon re-entering a seismically damaged structure especially during or after a subsequent fire.

8.2--Strengthening limits
Careful consideration should be given to determine reasonable strengthening limits. These limits are imposed to guard against collapse of the structure should bond or other failure of the FRP system occur due to fire, vandalism, or other causes. Some designers and system manufacturers have recommended that the unstrengthened structural member, without FRP reinforcement, should have sufficient strength to resist a certain level of load. Using this philosophy, in the event that the FRP system is damaged, the structure will still be capable of resisting a reasonable level of load without collapse. It is the recommendation of the committee that the existing strength of the structure be sufficient to resist a level of load as described by Eq. (8-1).

(Rn)existing  (1.2SDL + 0.85SLL)new

(8-1)

More specific limits for structures requiring a fire endurance rating are given in Section 8.2.1.
8.2.1 Structural fire endurance--The level of strengthening that can be achieved through the use of externally bonded FRP reinforcement is often limited by the code-required fireresistance rating of a structure. The polymer resins used in wet layup and prepreg FRP systems and the polymer adhesives used in precured FRP systems lose structural integrity at temperatures exceeding the glass transition temperature Tg of the polymer. While the glass transition temperature can vary depending on the polymer chemistry, a typical range for field-applied resins and adhesives is 140 to 180 ºF (60 to 82 ºC). Due to the high temperatures associated with a fire and the low temperature resistance of the FRP system, the FRP system will not be capable of enduring a fire for any appreciable amount of time. Furthermore, it is most often not feasible to insulate the FRP system to substantially increase its fire endurance because the amount of insulation that would be required to protect the FRP system is far more than can be realistically applied.
Although the FRP system itself has a low fire endurance, combination of the FRP system with an existing concrete structure may still have an adequate level of fire endurance. This is attributable to the inherent fire endurance of the existing concrete structure alone. To investigate the fire endurance of an FRP-strengthened concrete structure, it is

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-19

www.afzir.com

important to recognize that the strength of traditional reinforced concrete structures is somewhat reduced during exposure to the high temperatures associated with a fire event as well. The yield strength of reinforcing steel is reduced, and the compressive strength of concrete is reduced. As a result, the overall resistance of a reinforced concrete member to load effects is reduced. This concept is used in ACI 216R to provide a method of computing the fire endurance of concrete members. ACI 216R suggests limits that maintain a reasonable level of safety against complete collapse of the structure in the event of a fire.
By extending the concepts established in ACI 216R to FRP-strengthened reinforced concrete, limits on strengthening can be used to ensure a strengthened structure will not collapse in a fire. A member's resistance to load effects, with reduced steel and concrete strengths and without the strength of the FRP reinforcement, can be computed. This resistance can then be compared with the load demand on the member to ensure the structure will not collapse under service loads and elevated temperatures.
The existing strength of a structural member with a fireresistance rating should satisfy the conditions of Eq. (8-2) if it is to be strengthened with an FRP system. The load effects, SDL and SLL, should be determined using the current load requirements for the structure. If the FRP system is meant to allow greater load-carrying strength, such as an increase in live load, the load effects should be computed using these greater loads.

(Rn)existing  SDL + SLL

(8-2)

The nominal resistance of the member at an elevated temperature Rn can be determined using the guidelines outlined in ACI 216R. This resistance should be computed for the time period required by the structure's fire-resistance rating--for example, a two-hour fire rating--and should disallow the contribution of the FRP system. Furthermore, if the FRP system is meant to address a loss in strength, such as deterioration, the resistance should reflect this loss.
The fire endurance of FRP materials can be improved through the use of certain polymers or methods of fire protection. Although these methods are typically impractical, these methods may become more effective in the future. If such methods can be shown through testing to increase the fire endurance of the FRP system to meet the fire resistance rating of a building structure, the criteria put forth in Eq. (8-2) can be modified to reflect the level of protection provided. The tests of these systems should, however, use end-point criteria defined by reaching the glass transition temperature of the polymer. That is, the fire endurance of the FRP system should be set to the measured amount of time required for the polymer resins or adhesives in the FRP system to reach their glass transition temperature under exposure to a fire. ASTM E 119 gives guidance on the types of fires (heats and durations) to be used in such tests.
8.2.2 Overall structural strength--While FRP systems are effective in strengthening members for flexure and shear and providing additional confinement, other modes of failure, such as punching shear and bearing capacity of footings, may be unaffected by FRP systems. It is important to ensure that all members of a structure are capable of withstanding the anticipated increase in loads associated with the strengthened members.

Additionally, analysis should be performed on the member strengthened by the FRP system to check that under overload conditions the strengthened member will fail in a flexure mode rather than in a shear mode.
8.2.3 Seismic applications--The majority of research into seismic strengthening of structures has dealt with strengthening of columns. FRP systems are used to confine columns to improve concrete compressive strength, reduce required splice length, and increase the shear strength (Priestley et al. 1996). Limited information is available for strengthening building frames in seismic zones. Chapter 11 identifies restrictions on the use of FRP for shear and flexural strengthening in seismic conditions.
When beams or floors in building frames in seismic risk Zones 3 and 4 are strengthened, the strength and stiffness of both the beam/floor and column should be checked to ensure the formation of the plastic hinge away from the column and the joint (Mosallam et al. 2000).
8.3--Selection of FRP systems 8.3.1 Environmental considerations--Environmental
conditions uniquely affect resins and fibers of various FRP systems. The mechanical properties (for example, tensile strength, strain, and elastic modulus) of some FRP systems degrade under exposure to certain environments, such as alkalinity, salt water, chemicals, ultraviolet light, high temperatures, high humidity, and freezing and thawing cycles. The material properties used in design should account for this degradation in accordance with Section 8.4.
The engineer should select an FRP system based on the known behavior of that system in the anticipated service conditions. Some important environmental considerations that relate to the nature of the specific systems are given as follows. Specific information can be obtained from the FRP system manufacturer. · Alkalinity/acidity: The performance of an FRP system
over time in an alkaline or acidic environment depends on the matrix material and the reinforcing fiber. Dry, unsaturated bare, or unprotected carbon fiber is resistant to both alkaline and acidic environments, while bare glass fiber can degrade over time in these environments. A properly applied resin matrix, however, should isolate and protect the fiber from the alkaline/acidic environment and retard deterioration. The FRP system selected should include a resin matrix resistant to alkaline and acidic environments. Sites with high alkalinity and high moisture or relative humidity favor the selection of carbon-fiber systems over glass-fiber systems. · Thermal expansion: FRP systems may have thermal expansion properties that are different from those of concrete. In addition, the thermal expansion properties of the fiber and polymer constituents of an FRP system can vary. Carbon fibers have a coefficient of thermal expansion near zero while glass fibers have a coefficient of thermal expansion similar to concrete. The polymers used in FRP strengthening systems typically have coefficients of thermal expansion roughly five times that of concrete. Calculation of thermally induced strain differentials are complicated by variations in fiber orientation, fiber volume fraction (ratio of the volume of fibers to the volume of fibers and resins in an FRP), and thickness of adhesive layers. Experience (Motavalli et al. 1993; Soudki and Green 1997;

440.2R-20

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Table 8.1--Environmental-reduction factor for various FRP systems and exposure conditions

Exposure conditions Fiber and resin type

Carbon/epoxy

Interior exposure

Glass/epoxy

Aramid/epoxy

Exterior exposure (bridges, piers, and unenclosed parking garages)

Carbon/epoxy Glass/epoxy Aramid/epoxy

Aggressive environment (chemical plants and waste
water treatment plants)

Carbon/epoxy Glass/epoxy Aramid/epoxy

Environmentalreduction factor CE
0.95 0.75 0.85 0.85 0.65 0.75 0.85 0.50 0.70

Green et al. 1998) indicates, however, that thermal expansion differences do not affect bond for small ranges of temperature change, such as ±50 °F (±28 °C). · Electrical conductivity: GFRP and AFRP are effective electrical insulators, while CFRP is conductive. To avoid potential galvanic corrosion of steel elements, carbonbased FRP materials should not come in direct contact with steel. 8.3.2 Loading considerations--Loading conditions uniquely affect different fibers of FRP systems. The engineer should select an FRP system based on the known behavior of that system in the anticipated service conditions. Some important loading considerations that relate to the nature of the specific systems are given below. Specific information should be obtained from material manufacturers. · Impact tolerance: AFRP and GFRP systems demonstrate better tolerance to impact than CFRP systems; and · Creep-rupture and fatigue: CFRP systems are highly resistive to creep-rupture under sustained loading and fatigue failure under cyclic loading. GFRP systems are more sensitive to both loading conditions. 8.3.3 Durability considerations--Durability of FRP systems is the subject of considerable ongoing research (Steckel et al. 1999a). The engineer should select an FRP system that has undergone durability testing consistent with the application environment. Durability testing may include hotwet cycling, alkaline immersion, freeze-thaw cycling, and ultraviolet exposure. Any FRP system that completely encases or covers a concrete section should be investigated for the effects of a variety of environmental conditions including those of freeze/ thaw, steel corrosion, alkali and silica aggregate reactions, water entrapment, vapor pressures, and moisture vapor transmission (Soudki and Green 1997; Christensen et al. 1996; Toutanji 1999). Many FRP systems create a moistureimpermeable layer on the surface of the concrete. In areas where moisture vapor transmission is expected, adequate means should be provided to allow moisture to escape the concrete structure. 8.3.4 Protective-coating selection considerations--A coating can be applied to the installed FRP system to protect it from exposure to certain environmental conditions. The thickness and type of coating should be selected based on the requirements of the composite repair; resistance to environmental effects, such as moisture, salt water, temperature extremes, fire, impact, and UV exposure; resistance to site specific effects; and resistance to vandalism. Coatings are relied upon to retard the degradation of the mechanical properties of the

FRP systems. The coatings should be periodically inspected and maintenance should be provided to ensure the effectiveness of the coatings.
External coatings or thickened coats of resin over fibers can protect them from damage due to impact or abrasion. In high-impact or traffic areas, additional levels of protection may be necessary. Portland-cement plaster and polymer coatings are commonly used for protection where minor impact or abrasion is anticipated.

8.4--Design material properties Unless otherwise stated, the material properties reported by
manufacturers, such as the ultimate tensile strength, typically do not consider long-term exposure to environmental conditions and should be considered as initial properties. Because longterm exposure to various types of environments can reduce the tensile properties and creep-rupture and fatigue endurance of FRP laminates, the material properties used in design equations should be reduced based on the environmental exposure condition.
Equations (8-3) through (8-5) give the tensile properties that should be used in all design equations. The design ultimate tensile strength should be determined using the environmentalreduction factor given in Table 8.1 for the appropriate fiber type and exposure condition.

ffu = CE ffu*

(8-3)

Similarly, the design rupture strain should also be reduced for environmental-exposure conditions.

 fu = CEf*u

(8-4)

Because FRP materials are linearly elastic until failure, the design modulus of elasticity can then be determined from Hooke's law. The expression for the modulus of elasticity, given in Eq. (8-5), recognizes that the modulus is typically unaffected by environmental conditions. The modulus given in this equation will be the same as the initial value reported by the manufacturer.

Ef

=

-f--f-ufu

(8-5)

The constituent materials, fibers, and resins of an FRP system affect its durability and resistance to environmental exposure. The environmental-reduction factors given in Table 8.1 are conservative estimates based on the relative durability of each fiber type. As more research information is developed and becomes available, these values will be refined. The methodology regarding the use of these factors, however, will remain unchanged. Durability test data for FRP systems with and without protective coatings may be obtained from the manufacturer of the FRP system under consideration.
As Table 8.1 illustrates, if the FRP system is located in a relatively benign environment, such as indoors, the reduction factor is closer to unity. If the FRP system is located in an aggressive environment where prolonged exposure to high humidity, freeze-thaw cycles, salt water, or alkalinity is expected, a lower reduction factor should be used. The reduction factor can reflect the use of a protective coating if the coating has been shown through testing to lessen the

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-21

www.afzir.com

effects of environmental exposure and the coating is maintained for the life of the FRP system.
CHAPTER 9--FLEXURAL STRENGTHENING Bonding FRP reinforcement to the tension face of a concrete flexural member with fibers oriented along the length of the member will provide an increase in flexural strength. Increases in overall flexural strength from 10 to 160% have been documented (Meier and Kaiser 1991; Ritchie et al. 1991; Sharif et al. 1994). When taking into account ductility and serviceability limits, however, increases of 5 to 40% are more reasonable. This chapter does not apply to FRP systems used to enhance the flexural strength of members in the expected plastic hinge regions of ductile moment frames resisting seismic loads. The design of such applications, if used, should examine the behavior of the strengthened frame, considering the strengthened sections have a much-reduced rotation and curvature capacities. In this case, the effect of cyclic load reversal on the FRP reinforcement should be investigated.
9.1--General considerations This chapter presents guidance on the calculation of the
flexural strengthening effect of adding longitudinal FRP reinforcement to the tension face of a reinforced concrete member. A specific illustration of the concepts in this chapter applied to strengthening existing rectangular sections reinforced in the tension zone with nonprestressed steel is given. The general concepts outlined here can, however, be extended to nonrectangular shapes (T-sections and I-sections) and to members with compression steel reinforcement. In the case of prestressed members, strain compatibility, with respect to the state of strain in the stressed member, should be used to evaluate the FRP contribution. Additional failure modes controlled by rupture of prestressing tendons should also be considered.
9.1.1 Assumptions--The following assumptions are made in calculating the flexural resistance of a section strengthened with an externally applied FRP system: · Design calculations are based on the actual dimensions,
internal reinforcing steel arrangement, and material properties of the existing member being strengthened; · The strains in the reinforcement and concrete are directly proportional to the distance from the neutral axis, that is, a plane section before loading remains plane after loading; · There is no relative slip between external FRP reinforcement and the concrete; · The shear deformation within the adhesive layer is neglected since the adhesive layer is very thin with slight variations in its thickness; · The maximum usable compressive strain in the concrete is 0.003; · The tensile strength of concrete is neglected; and · The FRP reinforcement has a linear elastic stress-strain relationship to failure. It should be understood that while some of these assumptions are necessary for the sake of computational ease, the assumptions do not accurately reflect the true fundamental behavior of FRP flexural reinforcement. For example, there will be shear deformation in the adhesive layer causing relative slip between the FRP and the substrate. The inaccuracy of the assumptions will not, however, significantly affect the computed flexural

strength of an FRP-strengthened member. An additional strength reduction factor (presented in Section 9.2) will conservatively compensate for any such discrepancies.
9.1.2 Section shear strength--When FRP reinforcement is being used to increase the flexural strength of a member, it is important to verify that the member will be capable of resisting the shear forces associated with the increased flexural strength. The potential for shear failure of the section should be considered by comparing the design shear strength of the section to the required shear strength. If additional shear strength is required, FRP laminates oriented transversely to the section can be used to resist shear forces as described in Chapter 10.
9.1.3 Existing substrate strain--Unless all loads on a member, including self-weight and any prestressing forces, are removed before installation of FRP reinforcement, the substrate to which the FRP is applied will be strained. These strains should be considered as initial strains and should be excluded from the strain in the FRP (Arduini and Nanni 1997; Nanni et al. 1998). The initial strain level on the bonded substrate bi can be determined from an elastic analysis of the existing member, considering all loads that will be on the member, during the installation of the FRP system. It is recommended that the elastic analysis of the existing member be based on cracked section properties.

9.2--Nominal strength The strength-design approach requires that the design
flexural strength of a member exceed its required moment
strength as indicated by Eq. (9-1). Design flexural strength Mn refers to the nominal strength of the member multiplied by a strength-reduction factor, and the required moment
strength Mu refers to the load effects calculated from factored loads (for example, DLMDL + LLMLL +...). This guide recommends that required moment strength of a section be
calculated by use of load factors as required by ACI 318-99.
Furthermore, this guide recommends the use of the strength reduction factors  required by ACI 318-99 with an additional strength reduction factor of 0.85 applied to the flexural contribution of the FRP reinforcement alone (f = 0.85). See Eq. (9-2) for an illustration of the use of the additional reduction
factor. This additional reduction factor is meant to account
for lower reliability of the FRP reinforcement, as compared
with internal steel reinforcement.

Mn  Mu

(9-1)

The nominal flexural strength of an FRP-strengthened concrete
member can be determined based on strain compatibility,
internal force equilibrium, and the controlling mode of failure.
9.2.1 Failure modes--The flexural strength of a section depends on the controlling failure mode. The following flexural failure modes should be investigated for an FRPstrengthened section (GangaRao and Vijay 1998): · Crushing of the concrete in compression before yielding of
the reinforcing steel; · Yielding of the steel in tension followed by rupture of
the FRP laminate; · Yielding of the steel in tension followed by concrete
crushing; · Shear/tension delamination of the concrete cover (cover
delamination); and · Debonding of the FRP from the concrete substrate

440.2R-22

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

(FRP debonding).
Concrete crushing is assumed to occur if the compressive strain in the concrete reaches its maximum usable strain (c = cu = 0.003). Rupture of the FRP laminate is assumed to occur if the strain in the FRP reaches its design rupture strain (f = fu) before the concrete reaches its maximum usable strain.
Cover delamination or FRP debonding can occur if the force
in the FRP cannot be sustained by the substrate. In order to
prevent debonding of the FRP laminate, a limitation should be
placed on the strain level developed in the laminate. Eq. (9-2) gives an expression for a bond-dependent coefficient m.

m

=

  

------1-----60fu

 

1



­

2----,-0--n-0--E-0---f,--0t--f-0---0-



0.90

for

nEf tf



1,000,000 (9-2)

U.S.

  

------1-----60fu

 

5---0-n---0E---,-0f--t-0-f--0--



0.90

for

nEf tf

>

1,000,000

m

=

  

------1-----60fu

 

1

­

3----6n---0E---,-0f--t-0-f--0--

 0.90

for

nEftf 

180,000



  

------1-----60fu

 

9---n0---E-,-0--f-0-t--f0--

 0.90 for nEf tf >

180,000

(9-2)

SI

The term m, expressed in Eq. (9-2), is a factor no greater than 0.90 that may be multiplied by the rupture strain of the FRP laminate to arrive at a strain limitation to prevent debonding. The number of plies n used in this equation is the number of plies of FRP flexural reinforcement at the location along the length of the member where the moment strength is being computed. This term recognizes that laminates with greater stiffnesses are more prone to delamination. Thus, as the stiffness of the laminate increases, the strain limitation becomes more severe. For laminates with a unit stiffness nEftf greater than 1,000,000 lb/in. (180,000 N/mm), m limits the force in the laminate as opposed to the strain level. This effectively places an upper bound on the total force that can be developed in an FRP laminate, regardless of the number of plies. The width of the FRP laminate is not included in the calculation of the unit stiffness, nEftf, because an increase in the width of the FRP results in a proportional increase in the bond area.
The m term is only based on a general recognized trend and on the experience of engineers practicing the design of bonded FRP systems. Further research into the mechanics of bond of FRP flexural reinforcement should result in more accurate methods for predicting delamination, resulting in refinement of Eq. (9-2). Further development of the equation will likely account not only for the stiffness of the laminate but also for the stiffness of the member to which the laminate is bonded. In the interim, the committee recommends the use of Eq. (9-2) to limit the strain in the FRP and prevent delamination.
9.2.2 Strain level in FRP reinforcement--It is important to determine the strain level in the FRP reinforcement at the ultimate-limit state. Because FRP materials are linearly elastic until failure, the level of strain in the FRP will dictate the level of stress developed in the FRP. The maximum strain level that can be achieved in the FRP reinforcement will be governed by either the strain level developed in the FRP at the point at which concrete crushes, the point at

which the FRP ruptures, or the point at which the FRP debonds from the substrate. This maximum strain or the effective strain level in the FRP reinforcement at the ultimate-limit state can be found from Eq. (9-3).

fe

=

cu

 

-h----c­-----c-

­ bi  mfu

(9-3)

where bi is the initial substrate strain as described in Section 9.1.3.
9.2.3 Stress level in the FRP reinforcement--The effective stress level in the FRP reinforcement is the maximum level of stress that can be developed in the FRP reinforcement before flexural failure of the section. This effective stress level can be found from the strain level in the FRP, assuming perfectly elastic behavior.

ffe = Effe

(9-4)

9.3--Ductility The use of externally bonded FRP reinforcement for
flexural strengthening will reduce the ductility of the original member. In some cases, the loss of ductility is negligible. Sections that experience a significant loss in ductility, however, should be addressed. To maintain a sufficient degree of ductility, the strain level in the steel at the ultimatelimit state should be checked. Adequate ductility is achieved if the strain in the steel at the point of concrete crushing or failure of the FRP, including delamination or debonding, is at least 0.005, according to the definition of a tensioncontrolled section as given in Chapter 2 of ACI 318-99.
The approach taken by this guide follows the philosophy of ACI 318-99 Appendix B, where a section with low ductility should compensate with a higher reserve of strength. The higher reserve of strength is achieved by applying a strengthreduction factor of 0.70 to brittle sections, as opposed to 0.90 for ductile sections.
Therefore, a strength-reduction factor given by Eq. (9-5) should be used, where s is the strain in the steel at the ultimatelimit state.

 

0.90



=

  0.70 

+

-0---.-2---0---(------s---­-------s--y--)0.005 ­ sy

 

0.70

for s  0.005 for sy < s < 0.005
for s  sy

(9-5)

This equation sets the reduction factor at 0.90 for ductile sections and 0.70 for brittle sections where the steel does not yield, and provides a linear transition for the reduction factor between these two extremes (Fig. 9.1).
9.4--Serviceability The serviceability of a member (deflections, crack widths)
under service loads should satisfy applicable provisions of ACI 318-99. The effect of the FRP external reinforcement on the serviceability can be assessed using the transformed section analysis.
To avoid inelastic deformations of the reinforced concrete members strengthened with external FRP reinforcement, the

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-23

www.afzir.com

Fig. 9.1--Graphical representation of the strength-reduction factor as a function of the ductility.

Fig. 9.2--Internal strain and stress distribution for a rectangular section under flexure at ultimate stage.

existing internal steel reinforcement should be prevented from yielding under service load levels. The stress in the steel under service load should be limited to 80% of the yield strength, as shown in Eq. (9-6).

fs,s  0.80fy

(9-6)

9.5--Creep-rupture and fatigue stress limits To avoid creep-rupture of the FRP reinforcement under
sustained stresses or failure due to cyclic stresses and fatigue of the FRP reinforcement, the stress levels in the FRP reinforcement under these stress conditions should be checked. Because these stress levels will be within the elastic response range of the member, the stresses can be computed by use of an elastic analysis.
In Section 3.4, the creep-rupture phenomenon and fatigue characteristics of FRP material were described and the resistance to its effects by various types of fibers was examined.

As stated in Section 3.4.1, research has indicated that glass, aramid, and carbon fibers can sustain 0.30, 0.47, and 0.91 times their ultimate strengths, respectively, before encountering a creep-rupture problem (Yamaguchi et al. 1997). To avoid failure of an FRP-reinforced member due to creep-rupture and fatigue of the FRP, stress limits for these conditions should be imposed on the FRP reinforcement. The stress level in the FRP reinforcement can be computed using an elastic analysis and an applied moment due to all sustained loads (dead loads and the sustained portion of the live load) plus the maximum moment induced in a fatigue loading cycle (Fig. 9.2). The sustained stress should be limited as expressed by Eq. (9-7) to maintain safety. Values for safe sustained plus cyclic stress levels are given in Table 9.1. These values are based on the stress limits previously stated in Section 3.4.1 with an imposed safety factor of 1/0.60.

Sustained plus cyclic stress limit  ff,s

(9-7)

440.2R-24

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT
Based on the strain level in the FRP reinforcement, the strain level in the nonprestressed tension steel can be found from Eq. (9-8) using strain compatibility.

www.afzir.com

s

=

(fe

+

bi)

 

dh-----­­-----cc-

(9-8)

Fig. 9.3--Elastic strain and stress distribution.

Table 9.1--Sustained plus cyclic service load stress limits in FRP reinforcement

Stress type
Sustained plus cyclic stress limit

Glass FRP 0.20ffu

Fiber type Aramid FRP
0.30ffu

Carbon FRP 0.55ffu

9.6--Application to a singly reinforced rectangular section
To illustrate the concepts presented in this chapter, this section describes the application of these concepts to a singly reinforced rectangular section (nonprestressed).
9.6.1 Ultimate strength--Figure 9.2 illustrates the internal strain and stress distribution for a rectangular section under flexure at the ultimate limit state.
The calculation procedure used to arrive at the ultimate strength should satisfy strain compatibility and force equilibrium and should consider the governing mode of failure. Several calculation procedures can be derived to satisfy these conditions. The calculation procedure described herein is one such procedure that illustrates a trial and error method.
The trial and error procedure involves selecting an assumed depth to the neutral axis, c; calculating the strain level in each material using strain compatibility; calculating the associated stress level in each material; and checking internal force equilibrium. If the internal force resultants do not equilibrate, the depth to the neutral axis must be revised and the procedure repeated.
For any assumed depth to the neutral axis c, the strain level in the FRP reinforcement can be computed from Eq. (9-3) presented in section 9.2.2 and reprinted as follows for convenience. This equation considers the governing mode of failure for the assumed neutral axis depth. If the first term in the equation controls, concrete crushing controls flexural failure of the section. If the second term controls, FRP failure (rupture or debonding) controls flexural failure of the section.

fe

=

c

 u

-h----c­-----c-

­ bi  mfu

(9-3)

The effective stress level in the FRP reinforcement can be found from the strain level in the FRP, assuming perfectly elastic behavior.

ffe = Ef fe

(9-4)

The stress in the steel is calculated from the strain level in the steel assuming elastic-plastic behavior.

fs = Ess  fy

(9-9)

With the strain and stress level in the FRP and steel reinforcement determined for the assumed neutral axis depth, internal force equilibrium may be checked using Eq. (9-10).

c = -A---s---f--s--+-----A----f---f-f-e  fc 1b

(9-10)

The terms  and 1 in Eq. (9-10) are parameters defining a rectangular stress block in the concrete equivalent to the actual nonlinear distribution of stress. If concrete crushing is the controlling mode of failure (before or after steel yielding),  and 1 can be taken as the values associated with the Whitney stress block ( = 0.85 and 1 from Section 10.2.7.3 of ACI 318-99). If FRP rupture, cover delamination, or FRP-debonding control failure occur, the Whitney stress block will give reasonably accurate results. A more accurate stress block for the actual strain level reached in the concrete at the ultimate-limit state may be used. Moreover, methods considering a nonlinear stress distribution in the concrete can also be used.
The actual depth to the neutral axis, c, is found by simultaneously satisfying Eq. (9-3), (9-4), (9-8), (9-9) and (9-10), thus establishing internal force equilibrium and strain compatibility.
The nominal flexural strength of the section with FRP external reinforcement can be computed from Eq. (9-11). An additional reduction factor f is applied to the flexuralstrength contribution of the FRP reinforcement. A factor f = 0.85 is recommended.

Mn

=

As

fs

 

d

­

---2-1---c-

+

fAf

ffe

 

h

­

---2-1---c-

(9-11)

9.6.2 Stress in steel under service loads--The stress level in the steel reinforcement can be calculated based on a cracked elastic analysis of the strengthened reinforced concrete section, as indicated by Eq. (9-12).

Ms + biAfEf h ­ k--3--d- (d ­ kd)Es

fs, s

=

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (9-12)

AsEs

 

d

­

k--3-d--

(d

­

kd)

+

AfEf

 

h

­

k--3--d-

(h

­

kd)

The distribution of strain and stress in the reinforced concrete section is shown in Fig. 9.3. Similar to conventional reinforced concrete, the depth to the neutral axis at service kd can be computed by taking the first moment of the areas of the transformed section. The transformed area of the FRP may

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-25

www.afzir.com

Fig. 10.1--Typical wrapping schemes for shear strengthening using FRP laminates.

Fig. 9.4--Illustration of the level of applied moment to be used to check the stress limits in the FRP reinforcement.
be obtained by multiplying the area of FRP by the modular ratio of FRP to concrete. Although this method ignores the difference in the initial strain level of the FRP, the initial strain level does not greatly influence the depth to the neutral axis in the elastic response range of the member.
The stress in the steel under service loads computed from Eq. (9-12) should be compared against the limits described in Section 9.4.
9.6.3 Stress in FRP under service loads--The stress level in the FRP reinforcement can be computed using Eq. (9-13) with fs,s from Eq. (9-12) and Ms (in Eq. (9-12)) equal to the moment due to all sustained loads (dead loads and the sustained portion of the live load) plus the maximum moment induced in a fatigue loading cycle as shown in Fig. 9.4. Equation (9-13) gives the stress level in the FRP reinforcement under an applied moment within the elastic response range of the member.

ff,s

=

fs,s

 

E-E----sf

-h----­----k---d-d ­ kd

­

biEf

(9-13)

The stress in the FRP under service loads computed from Eq. (9-13) should be compared against the limits described in Section 9.5.
CHAPTER 10--SHEAR STRENGTHENING FRP systems have been shown to increase the shear strength of existing concrete beams and columns by wrapping or partially wrapping the members (Malvar et al. 1995; Chajes et al. 1995; Norris et al. 1997; Kachlakev and McCurry 2000). Orienting the fibers transverse to the axis of the member or perpendicular to potential shear cracks is effective in providing additional shear strength (Sato et al. 1996). Increasing the shear strength can also result in flexural failures, which are relatively more ductile in nature as compared to shear failures.
10.1--General considerations This chapter presents guidance on the calculation of the
shear-strengthening effect of adding FRP shear reinforcement to a reinforced concrete beam or column. The additional shear strength that can be provided by the FRP system is based on many factors, including geometry of beam or column, wrapping scheme, and existing concrete strength, but should always be limited in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.

Fig. 10.2--Illustration of the dimensional variables used in shear-strengthening calculations for repair, retrofit, or strengthening using FRP laminates.
Shear strengthening using external FRP may be provided at locations of expected plastic hinges or stress reversal and for enhancing postyield flexural behavior of members in moment frames resisting seismic loads only by completely wrapping the section. For external FRP reinforcement in the form of discrete strips, the center-to-center spacing between the strips should not exceed the sum of d/4 plus the width of the strip.
10.2--Wrapping schemes The three types of FRP wrapping schemes used to increase
the shear strength of prismatic, rectangular beams, or columns are illustrated in Fig. 10.1. Completely wrapping the FRP system around the section on all four sides is the most efficient wrapping scheme and is most commonly used in column applications where access to all four sides of the column is usually available. In beam applications, where an integral slab makes it impractical to completely wrap the member, the shear strength can be improved by wrapping the FRP system around three sides of the member (U-wrap) or bonding to the two sides of the member.
Although all three techniques have been shown to improve the shear strength of a member, completely wrapping the section is the most efficient, followed by the three-sided U-wrap. Bonding to two sides of a beam is the least efficient scheme.
In all wrapping schemes, the FRP system can be installed continuously along the span length of a member or placed as discrete strips. As discussed in Section 8.3.3, consideration should be given to the use of continuous FRP reinforcement that completely encases the member and may prevent the migration of moisture.
10.3--Nominal shear strength The nominal shear strength of a concrete member
strengthened with an FRP system should exceed the required shear strength (Eq. (10-1)). The required shear strength on an FRP-strengthened concrete member should be computed with the load factors required by ACI 318-99. The shear strength should be calculated using the strength-reduction factor , required by ACI 318-99.

440.2R-26

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Table 10.1--Recommended additional reduction factors for FRP shear reinforcement

f = 0.95 f = 0.85

Completely wrapped members Three-sided U-wraps or bonded face piles

Vn  Vu

(10-1)

The nominal shear strength of an FRP-strengthened concrete
member can be determined by adding the contribution of the
FRP reinforcing to the contributions from the reinforcing steel
(stirrups, ties, or spirals) and the concrete (Eq. (10-2)). An additional reduction factor f is applied to the contribution of the FRP system.

Vn = (Vc + Vs + fVf)

(10-2)

It is suggested that an additional reduction factor f be applied to the shear contribution of the FRP reinforcement. For bond-critical shear reinforcement, an additional reduction factor
of 0.85 is recommended. For contact-critical shear reinforce-
ment, an additional reduction factor of 0.95 is recommended. These recommendations are given in Table 10.1.

10.4--FRP system contribution to shear strength Figure 10.2 illustrates the dimensional variables used in
shear-strengthening calculations for FRP laminates. The contribution of the FRP system to shear strength of a member is based on the fiber orientation and an assumed crack pattern (Khalifa et al. 1998). The shear strength provided by the FRP reinforcement can be determined by calculating the force resulting from the tensile stress in the FRP across the assumed crack. The shear contribution of the FRP shear reinforcement is then given by Eq. (10-3).

Vf

=

A----f-v---f--f--e--(---s--i--n--------+------c--o---s-------)---d---f sf

(10-3)

where

Afv = 2ntfwf

(10-4)

The tensile stress in the FRP shear reinforcement at ultimate is directly proportional to the level of strain that can be developed in the FRP shear reinforcement at ultimate.

ffe = feEf

(10-5)

10.4.1 Effective strain in FRP laminates--The effective strain is the maximum strain that can be achieved in the FRP system at the ultimate load stage and is governed by the failure mode of the FRP system and of the strengthened reinforced concrete member. The engineer should consider all possible failure modes and use an effective strain representative of the critical failure mode. The following subsections give guidance on determining this effective strain for different configurations of FRP laminates used for shear strengthening of reinforced concrete members.
10.4.1.1 Completely wrapped members--For reinforced concrete column and beam members completely wrapped by the

FRP system, loss of aggregate interlock of the concrete has been observed to occur at fiber strains less than the ultimate fiber strain. To preclude this mode of failure, the maximum strain used for design should be limited to 0.4% for applications that can be completely wrapped with the FRP system (Eq. [10-6(a)]).

fe = 0.004  0.75fu

(10-6(a))

(for completely wrapping around the member's cross section)

This strain limitation is based on testing (Priestley et al. 1996) and experience. Higher strains should not be used for FRP shear-strengthening applications.
10.4.1.2 Bonded U-wraps or bonded face plies--FRP systems that do not enclose the entire section (two- and three-sided wraps) have been observed to delaminate from the concrete before the loss of aggregate interlock of the section. For this reason, bond stresses should be analyzed to determine the usefulness of these systems and the effective strain level that can be achieved (Triantafillou 1998a). The effective strain is calculated using a bond-reduction coefficient v applicable to shear.

fe = vfu  0.004

(10-6(b))

(for U-wraps or bonding to two sides)
The bond-reduction coefficient is a function of the concrete strength, the type of wrapping scheme used, and the stiffness of the laminate. The bond-reduction coefficient can be computed from Eq. (10-7) through (10-10) (Khalifa et al. 1998).

v

=

k---1---k---2--L----e 468fu



0.75

(10-7) U.S.

v

=

----k---1--k---2---L---e---11,900fu



0.75

(10-7) SI

The active bond length Le is the length over which the majority of the bond stress is maintained. This length is
given by Eq. (10-8).

Le

=

-------2---5---0---0------( n t f Ef )0.58

(10-8) U.S.

Le

=

----2---3---,--3---0---0----( n t f E f ) 0.58

(10-8) SI

The bond-reduction coefficient also relies on two modifica-
tion factors, k1 and k2, that account for the concrete strength and the type of wrapping scheme used, respectively. Expressions for
these modification factors are given in Eq. (10-9) and (10-10).

k1

=

 

-4---0f--c-0---0-

2

/

3

(10-9) U.S.

k1

=

 

-2f--c7--

2

/

3

(10-9) SI

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-27

given for steel alone in ACI 318-99 Section 11.5.6.9. This limit is stated in Eq. (10-11).

Vs + Vf  8 fc bwd

(10-11) U.S.

www.afzir.com

Fig. 10.3--Comparison of experimental results to the results using the design procedure presented.

 

d----f--­-----L----e

for U-wraps

k2

=

 df



  

d----f--­-----2---L----e df

for two sides bonded

(10-10)

The methodology for determining v has been validated for members in regions of high shear and low moment, such as monotonically loaded simply supported beams. Although the methodology has not been confirmed for shear strengthening in areas subjected to combined high flexural and shear stresses or in regions where the web is primarily in compression (negative moment regions), v is suggested to be sufficiently conservative for such cases.
The design procedures outlined herein have been developed by a combination of analytical and empirical results. The design methodology has been compared to the results of many researchers in Fig. 10.3 (Khalifa et al. 1998).
Mechanical anchorages can be used at termination points to develop larger tensile forces (Khalifa et al. 1999). The effectiveness of such mechanical anchorages, along with the level of tensile stress they can develop, should be substantiated through representative physical testing. In no case, however, should the effective strain in FRP laminates exceed 0.004.
10.4.2 Spacing--Spaced FRP strips used for shear strengthening should be investigated to evaluate their contribution to the shear strength. Spacing should adhere to the limits as set by ACI 318-99 for internal steel shear reinforcement. The spacing of FRP strips is defined as the distance between the centerline of the strips. Structural testing should validate the use of discretely spaced FRP stirrups for shear strengthening (Hutchinson et al. 1998).
10.4.3 Reinforcement limits--The total shear reinforcement should be taken as the sum of the contribution of the FRP shear reinforcement and the steel shear reinforcement. The total shear reinforcement should be limited based on the criteria

Vs + Vf  0.66 fc bwd

(10-11) SI

CHAPTER 11--AXIAL COMPRESSION, TENSION, AND DUCTILITY ENHANCEMENT
Wrapping FRP systems completely around certain types of compression members will confine those members, leading to increases in axial compression strengths. Bonding FRP systems to concrete members can also increase the axial tension strength of the member. Confinement is also used to enhance the ductility of members subjected to combined axial and bending forces.

11.1--Axial compression FRP systems can be used to increase the axial compression
strength of a concrete member by providing confinement with an FRP jacket (Nanni and Bradford 1995, Toutanji 1999). Confining a concrete member is accomplished by orienting the fibers transverse to the longitudinal axis of the member. In this orientation, the hoop fibers are similar to conventional spiral or tie reinforcing steel. Any contribution of longitudinally aligned fibers to the axial compression strength of a concrete member should be neglected.
Confinement results in an increase in the apparent strength of the concrete and in the maximum usable compressive strain in the concrete (Seible et al. 1997). FRP jackets provide passive confinement to the compression member, remaining unstressed until dilation and cracking of the wrapped compression member occur. For this reason, intimate contact between the FRP jacket and the concrete member is critical.
The axial compressive strength of a nonslender, normalweight concrete member confined with an FRP jacket may be calculated using the confined concrete strength (Eq. (11-1)). For nonseismic applications, the increase in axial strength should be limited in accordance with Section 11.1.2. Vertical displacement, section dilation, cracking, and strain limitations in the FRP jacket can also limit the amount of additional compression strength that can be achieved with an FRP jacket. The axial demand on an FRP-strengthened concrete member should be computed with the load factors required by ACI 318-99 and the axial compression strength should be calculated using the strength-reduction factors  for spiral and tied members required by ACI 318-99.
For nonprestressed members with existing steel spiral reinforcement:

Pn = 0.85[0.85f fcc (Ag ­ Ast) + fy Ast] (11-1(a))

For nonprestressed members with existing steel-tie reinforcement:

Pn = 0.80[0.85f fcc (Ag ­ Ast) + fyAst ] (11-1(b))

It is recommended to take the additional reduction factor,
f = 0.95. The apparent confined concrete strength for a circular concrete member wrapped with an FRP jacket providing a

440.2R-28

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

confining pressure fl can be found from Eq. (11-2) (Mander et al. 1988) originally developed for confinement provided
by steel jackets.

fcc

= fc

2.25

1 + 7.9--f--l- ­ 2--f--l- ­ 1.25 fc fc

(11-2)

Because Eq. (11-2) was originally developed for confinement provided by steel jackets, it is important to note that this model originally considered a constant confining pressure corresponding to the yield stress of the steel. This equation has been shown to be applicable to FRP-confined concrete (Spoelstra and Monti 1999). The confining pressure, however, must be considered to be linearly variable such that an increase in the strain in the FRP jacket results in a proportional increase in the confining pressure. To determine the full stress-strain behavior of FRP-confined concrete, the compressive strain in the concrete (longitudinal strain) must be related to the strain developed in the FRP jacket (transverse strain). The strain in the FRP jacket may then be used to determine the confining pressure and the resulting increase in the compressive stress in the concrete. A simpler approach may be used to determine the peak value of confined concrete stress or the confined concrete strength. The confined concrete strength can be computed from Eq. (11-2) using a confining pressure given in Eq. (11-3) that is the result of the maximum effective strain that can be achieved in the FRP jacket.

fl

=

----a------f--f--f-e 2

=

----a------f------f-e--E---f 2

(11-3)

If the member is subjected to combined compression and shear, the effective strain in the FRP jacket should be limited based on the criteria given in Eq. (11-4).

fe = 0.004  0.75fu

(11-4)

11.1.1 Circular sections--FRP jackets are most effective at confining circular members. The FRP system provides a circumferentially uniform confining pressure to the radial expansion of the compression member when the fibers are aligned transverse to the longitudinal axis of the member. The confining pressure provided by an FRP jacket installed around a circular member with a diameter h can be found using the reinforcement ratio given in Eq. (11-5).

f

=

-4---n----t-f h

(11-5)

The efficiency factor a for circular sections can be taken as equal to 1.0.
11.1.2 Noncircular sections--Testing has shown that confining square and rectangular members with FRP jackets can provide marginal increases in the axial compression strength of the member. Given the many unknowns with this type of application, there are no recommendations provided at this time on the use of FRP. Applications of this nature should be closely scrutinized and evaluated. In no case

should FRP jackets with fibers running longitudinally be relied upon to resist compression.
11.1.3 Serviceability considerations--At load levels near ultimate, damage to the concrete in the form of significant cracking in the radial direction might occur. The FRP jacket contains the damage and maintains the structural integrity of the column. At service load levels, however, this type of damage should be avoided. In this way, the FRP jacket will only act during overloads that are temporary in nature.
To ensure that radial cracking will not occur under service loads, the transverse strain in the concrete should remain below its cracking strain at service load levels. This corresponds to limiting the stress in the concrete to 0.65fc . In addition, the stress in the steel should remain below 0.60fy to avoid plastic deformation under sustained or cyclic loads. By maintaining the specified stress in the concrete at service, the stress in the FRP jacket will be relatively low. The jacket is only stressed to significant levels when the concrete is transversely strained above the cracking strain and the rate of the transverse expansion becomes large. Because FRP jackets provide passive confinement, service load stresses in the FRP jacket should never exceed the creep-rupture stress limit.
In addition, axial deformations under service loads should be investigated to evaluate their effect on the performance of the structural member.

11.2--Tensile strengthening FRP systems can be used to provide additional tensile
strength to a concrete member. Due to the linear-elastic nature of FRP materials, the tensile contribution of the FRP system is directly related to its strain level and is calculated using Hooke's Law.
The level of tension provided by the FRP is limited by the design tensile strength of the FRP and the ability to transfer stresses into the substrate through bond (Nanni et al. 1997). The effective strain in the FRP can be determined based on the criteria given for shear strengthening in Eq. (10-6) through (10-9). The value of k1 in Eq. (10-7) can be taken as 1.0. A minimum bond length of 2Le (where Le is the active bond length defined previously in Eq. (10-8)) should be provided to develop this level of strain.

11.3--Ductility Increased ductility of a section results from the ability to
develop greater compressive strains in the concrete before compressive failure (Seible et al. 1997). The FRP jacket can also serve to delay buckling of longitudinal steel reinforcement in compression, and to clamp lap splices of longitudinal steel reinforcement.
For seismic applications, FRP jackets should be designed to provide a confining stress sufficient to develop concrete compression strains associated with the displacement demands. The maximum usable compressive strain in concrete for FRP-confined circular reinforced concrete members can be found by use of Eq. (11-6) (Mander et al. 1988).

cc

= -1---.-7---1----(--5---f--c--c------­----4----f--c----) Ec

(11-6)

Shear forces should also be evaluated in accordance with Chapter 10 to prevent brittle shear failure in accordance with ACI 318-99.

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-29

www.afzir.com

11.3.1 Circular members--The maximum usable com-
pressive strain for an FRP-confined circular member can be found from Eq. (11-6) with fcc from Eq. (11-2) to (11-5) and using a = 1.0.
11.3.2 Noncircular members--Confining square and
rectangular sections, while not effective in increasing axial
strength, is effective in improving the ductility of compression
members. The maximum usable compressive strain for an
FRP-confined square or rectangular member can be found from Eq. (11-6) with fcc from Eq. (11-2) to (11-4). The reinforcement ratio for rectangular sections can be found
from Eq. (11-7).

f

=

-2---n---t--f--(---b----+-----h---) bh

(11-7)

The efficiency factor for square and rectangular sections should be determined based on geometry, aspect ratio, and the configuration of steel reinforcement. Equation (11-8) can be used to determine this efficiency factor (Restrepo and DeVino 1996), where r is the radius of the edges of the section as described in the general guidelines of Chapter 12.

Fig. 12.1--Conceptual interfacial shear and normal stress distributions along the length of a bonded FRP laminate (Roberts and Haji-Kazemi 1989; Malek et al. 1998).

a

=

1 ­ (---b----­-----2---r---)--2----+-----(--h-----­----2----r--)---2 3bh(1 ­ g)

(11-8)

The confining effect of FRP jackets should be assumed to be negligible for rectangular sections with aspect ratios b/h exceeding 1.5, or face dimensions, b or h, exceeding 36 in. (900 mm), unless testing demonstrates their effectiveness.
CHAPTER 12--REINFORCEMENT DETAILS This chapter offers guidance for detailing externally bonded FRP reinforcement. Detailing will typically depend on the geometry of the structure, the soundness and quality of the substrate, and the levels of load that are to be sustained by the FRP sheets or laminates. Many bond-related failures can be avoided by following these general guidelines for detailing FRP sheets or laminates: · Do not turn inside corners; · Provide a minimum 1/2 in. (13 mm) radius when the
sheet is wrapped around outside corners; and · Provide sufficient overlap when splicing FRP plies.
12.1--Bond and delamination The actual distribution of bond stress in an FRP laminate
is complicated by cracking of the substrate concrete. The general elastic distribution of interfacial shear stress and normal stress along an FRP laminate bonded to uncracked concrete is shown in Fig. 12.1. The normal stress is normal with respect to the plane of the FRP laminate.
For an FRP system installed according to Part 3 of this guide, the weak link in the concrete/FRP interface is the concrete. The soundness and tensile strength of the concrete substrate will limit the overall effectiveness of the bonded FRP system.
12.1.1 FRP debonding--Debonding of a properly installed FRP laminate can result from a lack of bonded area of the FRP laminate to the concrete substrate. The concrete cannot maintain the interfacial shear and normal stresses, and the FRP laminate debonds from the substrate with a relatively thin layer of concrete attached to it.

Fig. 12.2--Delamination caused by tension failure of the concrete cover.
The interface bond area should be calculated based on the horizontal shear and tensile strength of the concrete substrate. Because interface delamination or interface bond failure modes are brittle, using a bond strength reduction factor of 0.50 is recommended. Analytical methods for computing the bond stress are available (Blaschko et al. 1998; Brosens and Van Gemert 1997; Maeda et al. 1997).
Mechanical anchorages can be effective in increasing stress transfer (Khalifa et al. 1999). The performance of any anchorage system should be substantiated through testing.
12.1.2 Concrete cover delamination--Concrete cover delamination can also result from the normal stresses developed in a bonded FRP laminate. With this type of delamination, the existing internal reinforcing steel essentially acts as a bond breaker in a horizontal plane, and the reduced area of bulk concrete pulls away from the rest of the beam (this may be exacerbated if epoxy-coated steel reinforcement was used in the existing member). The result is the entire concrete cover layer splitting at the level of the tensile reinforcement from the rest of the reinforced concrete member (Fig. 12.2).
The tensile concrete cover splitting failure mode is controlled, in part, by the level of stress at the termination point of the FRP laminate. Instead of a more detailed analysis, the following general guidelines for the location of cut-off points for the FRP laminate can be used to avoid this type of failure:
· For simply supported beams, the plies should extend a distance d past the point along the span corresponding to the cracking moment Mcr under factored loads. In addition, if the factored shear force at the termination point is greater than 2/3 the concrete shear strength (Vu > 0.67Vc), the FRP laminates should be anchored

440.2R-30

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Fig. 12.3 -- Graphical representation of the guidelines for allowable termination points of a three-ply FRP laminate.

with transverse reinforcement to prevent the concrete cover layer from splitting.
· For continuous beams, a single-ply FRP laminate should be terminated d/2 or 6 in. (150 mm) minimum beyond the inflection point (point of zero moment resulting from factored loads). For multiple-ply laminates, the termination points of the plies should be tapered. The outermost ply should be terminated no less than 6 in. (150 mm) beyond the inflection point. Each successive ply should be terminated no less than an additional 6 in. (150 mm) beyond the inflection point. For example, if a three-ply laminate is required, the ply directly in contact with the concrete substrate should be terminated at least 18 in. (460 mm) past the inflection point (Fig. 12.3). These guidelines apply for positive and negative moment regions.
12.2--Detailing of laps and splices Splices of FRP laminates should be provided only as
permitted on drawings or in specifications or as authorized by the engineer as recommended by the system manufacturer.
The fibers of FRP systems should be continuous and oriented in the direction of the largest tensile forces. Fiber continuity can be maintained with a lap splice. For FRP systems, a lap splice should be made by overlapping the fibers along their length. The required overlap, or lap-splice length, depends on the tensile strength and thickness of the FRP material system and on the bond strength between adjacent layers of FRP laminates. Sufficient overlap should be provided to promote the failure of the FRP laminate before debonding of the overlapped FRP laminates. The required overlap for an FRP system should be provided by the material manufacturer and substantiated through testing, independent of the manufacturer.
Jacket-type FRP systems used for column members should provide appropriate development area at splices,

joints, and termination points to ensure failure through the FRP jacket thickness rather than failure of the spliced sections.
For unidirectional FRP laminates, lap splices are required only in the direction of the fibers. Lap splices are not required in the direction transverse to the fibers. FRP laminates consisting of multiple unidirectional sheets oriented in more than one direction or multidirectional fabrics require lap splices in more than one direction to maintain the continuity of the fibers and the overall strength of the FRP laminates.
CHAPTER 13--DRAWINGS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND SUBMITTALS
13.1--Engineering requirements Although federal, state, and local codes for the design of
externally bonded FRP systems do not exist, other applicable code requirements may influence the selection, design, and installation of the FRP system. For example, code requirements related to fire or potable water may influence the selection of the coatings used with the FRP system. All design work should be performed under the guidance of a licensed engineer familiar with the properties and applications of FRPstrengthening systems.
13.2--Drawings and specifications The engineer should document calculations summarizing
the assumptions and parameters used to design the FRP strengthening and should prepare design drawings and project specifications. The drawings and specifications should show, at a minimum, the following information specific to externally applied FRP systems: · FRP system to be used; · Location of the FRP system relative to the existing
structure; · Dimensions and orientation of each ply; · Number of plies and the sequence of installation;

www.afzir.com

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-31

· Location of splices and lap length; · General notes listing design loads and allowable strains
in the FRP laminates; · Material properties of the FRP laminates and concrete
substrate; · Concrete surface preparation requirements, including
corner preparation and maximum irregularity limitations; · Installation procedures, including surface temperature
and moisture limitations, and application time limits between successive plies; · Curing procedures of FRP systems; · Protective coatings and sealants, if required; · Shipping, storage, handling, and shelf-life guidelines; · Quality control and inspection procedures, including acceptance criteria; and · In-place load testing of installed FRP system, if necessary.
13.3--Submittals Specifications should require the FRP system manufacturer;
installation contractor; inspection agency, if required; and all those involved with the project to submit product information and evidence of their qualifications and experience to the engineer for review.
13.3.1 FRP system manufacturer--Submittals required of the FRP system manufacturer should include: · Product data sheets indicating the physical, mechanical,
and chemical characteristics of the FRP system and all its constituent materials; · Tensile properties of the FRP system including the method of reporting properties (net fiber or gross laminate), test methods used, and the statistical basis used for determining the properties; · Installation instructions, maintenance instructions, and

general recommendations regarding each material to be used. Installation procedures should include surface preparation requirements;
· Manufacturer's Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all materials to be used;
· Quality-control procedure for tracking FRP materials and material certifications;
· Durability test data for the FRP system in the types of environments expected;
· Structural test reports pertinent to the proposed application; and
· Reference projects.
13.3.2 FRP system installation contractor--Submittals required of the FRP system installation contractor should include:
· Documentation from the FRP system manufacturer of having been trained to install the proposed FRP system;
· Project references, including installations similar to the proposed installation. For example, for an overhead application, the contractor should submit a list of previous installations involving the installation of the proposed FRP system in an overhead application;
· Evidence of competency in surface preparation techniques; and
· Quality-control procedures including the daily log or inspection forms used by the contractor.
13.3.3 FRP system inspection agency--If an independent inspection agency is used, submittals required of that agency should include:
· A list of inspectors to be used on the project and their qualifications;
· Sample inspection forms; and
· A list of previous projects inspected by the inspector.

PART 5--DESIGN EXAMPLES
CHAPTER 14--DESIGN EXAMPLES 14.1--Calculation of FRP system tensile strength
This example illustrates the derivation of material properties based on net-fiber area versus the properties based on gross-laminate area. As described in Section 3.3.1, both methods of determining material properties are valid. It is important, however, that any design calculations consistently use material properties based on only one of the two methods (for example, if the grosslaminate thickness is used in any calculation, the strength based on gross-laminate area should be used in the calculations as well).
A test panel is fabricated from two plies of a carbon fiber/epoxy unidirectional FRP system using the wet layup technique. Based on the known fiber content of this FRP system, the net-fiber area is 0.0065 in.2/in. width/ply. After the system has cured, five 2 in. (5.08 cm) wide test coupons are cut from the panel. The test coupons are tested in tension to failure in accordance with ASTM D 3039. Tabulated in Table 14.1 are the results of the tension testing.

Table 14.1--FRP-system tension test results

Coupon ID T-1 T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5
Average

Specimen width in. mm 2 50.8 2 50.8 2 50.8 2 50.8 2 50.8 2 50.8

Measured coupon thickness

in. mm

0.055

1.397

0.062

1.575

0.069

1.753

0.053

1.346

0.061

1.549

0.060

1.524

Measured rupture load kips kN 17.8 79.2 16.4 72.9 16.7 74.3 16.7 74.3 17.4 77.4 17.0 75.6

440.2R-32

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Net-fiber area property calculations

Gross-laminate area property calculations

Calculate Af using the known, net-fiber area ply thickness:
Af = ntfwf

Af

=

(2)

 

0.0065

-i-in-n--.-.-2

(2

in.)

= 0.026 in.2

Af

=

(2)

 

0.1651

-m-m---m-m----2

(50.8

mm)

= 16.774 mm2

Calculate Af using the average, measured laminate thickness:
Af = tfwf

Af = (0.060 in.)(2 in.) = 0.120 in.2
Af = (1.524 mm)(50.8 mm) = 77.419 mm2

Calculate the average FRP system tensile strength based on net-fiber area:

ffu

=

---1---7-----k---i--p---s--0.026 in.2

=

650 ksi

Calculate the average FRP system tensile strength based on gross-laminate area:

ffu

=

---1---7-----k---i--p---s--0.120 in.2

=

140 ksi

ffu =

A-----v---e--r--a---g---e----m-----e---a--s---u---r--e--d-----r--u---p---t--u---r--e----l-o---a---d-Af

ffu

=

-----7---5---.--6---2----k---N-----16.774 mm2

=

4.508 kN/mm2

ffu

=

A-----v---e--r--a---g---e----m-----e---a--s---u---r--e--d-----r--u---p---t--u---r--e----l-o---a---d-Af

ffu

=

-----7---5---.--6---2----k---N-----77.419 mm2

=

0.997 kN/mm2

Calculate the average FRP system tensile strength per unit width based on net-fiber area:

pfu

=

-f-f--u--A---f wf

pfu

=

-(--6---5---0----k---s---i-)--(--0---.--0---2---6-----i-n---.--2---) 2 in.

= 8.4 kips/in.

pfu

=

---4---.--5---0---8----m----k-----m-N---------2-----(--1---6---.--7---7---4-----m-----m-----2--) 50.8 mm

Calculate the average FRP system tensile strength per unit width based on laminate area:

pfu

=

f--f--u--A---f wf

pfu

=

(---1---4---0----k---s---i-)--(--0---.--1---2---0-----i-n---.--2---) 2 in.

= 8.4 kips/in.

pfu

=

---0---.--9---7---7----m----k-----m-N---------2-----(---7---7---.-4---1---9-----m-----m-----2--) 50.8 mm

= 1.49 kN/mm

= 1.49 kN/mm

14.2--Calculation of FRP system tensile strength
An engineer is considering two FRP systems for strengthening a reinforced concrete member and has obtained mechanical properties from the respective manufacturers. System A consists of dry, carbon-fiber unidirectional sheets and is installed with an epoxy resin using the wet layup technique. System B consists of precured carbon fiber/epoxy laminates that are bonded to the concrete surface with an epoxy resin. Excerpts from the data sheets provided by the FRP system manufacturers are given in Table 14.2. After reviewing the material data sheets sent by the FRP system manufacturers, the engineer compares the tensile strengths of the two systems.

Table 14.2--Material properties and description of two types of FRP system

System A (excerpts from data sheet)
System type: dry, unidirectional sheet

System B (excerpts from data sheet)
System type: precured, unidirectional laminate

Fiber type: high-strength carbon Polymer resin: epoxy

Fiber type: high-strength carbon Polymer resin: epoxy

System A is installed using a wet layup procedure where the dry carbon-fiber System B's precured laminates are bonded to the concrete substrate using

sheets are impregnated and adhered with an epoxy resin on-site.

System B's epoxy paste adhesive.

Mechanical properties*

Mechanical properties*

tf = 0.013 in. (0.330 mm)

tf = 0.050 in. (1.270 mm)

ffu* = 550 ksi (3792 N/mm2)

ffu* = 380 ksi (2620 N/mm2)

fu* = 1.7%

fu* = 1.7%

Ef = 33,000 ksi (227,527 N/mm2)

Ef = 22,000 ksi (151,724 N/mm2)

Notes on System A:

Notes on System B:

*Reported properties are based on a population of 20 or more coupons tested in accordance *Reported properties are based on a population of 20 or more coupons tested in accordance

with ASTM D 3039.

with ASTM D 3039.

Reported properties have been statistically adjusted by subtracting three standard deviations Reported properties have been statistically adjusted by subtracting three standard deviations

from the mean tensile stress and strain.

from the mean tensile stress and strain.

Thickness is based on the net-fiber area for one ply of the FRP system. Resin is

excluded. Actual installed thickness of cured FRP is 0.060 to 0.070 in. per ply.

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-33

Because the data sheets for both systems are reporting statistically based properties, it is possible to directly compare the tensile strength and modulus of both systems. The calculations are shown below:

www.afzir.com

Procedure

Calculation in inch-pound units

Calculation in SI metric units

Step 1A--Calculate the tensile strength per unit width of System A
pf*u = ff*u tf Step 1B--Calculate the tensile strength per unit width of System B
pf*u = ff*u tf Step 2A--Calculate the tensile modulus per unit width of System A
kf = Eftf Step 2B--Calculate the tensile modulus per unit width of System B
kf = Eftf Step 3--Compare the two systems
Compare the tensile strengths:

pf*u = (550 ksi)(0.013 in.) = 7.15 kips/in. pf*u = (380 ksi)(0.050 in.) = 19 kips/in.
kf = (33,000 ksi)(0.013 in.) = 429 kips/in. kf = (22,000 ksi)(0.050 in.) = 1100 kips/in.
-p---f*-u---(--S---y---s---t-e---m------B----)- = -1---9-----k---i--p---s--/--i-n---.- = 2.66 pf*u (System A) 7.5 kips/in.

pf*u = (3.79 kN/mm2)(0.330 mm) = 1.25 kN/mm pf*u = (2.62 kN/mm2)(1.27 mm) = 3.33 kN/mm kf = (227.5 kN/mm2)(0.330 mm) = 75.13 kN/mm kf = (151.7 kN/mm2)(1.27 mm) = 192.63 kN/mm
-p---f*-u---(--S---y---s---t-e---m------B----)- = ---3---.-3---3-----k---N----/--m-----m--- = 2.66 pf*u (System A) 75.13 kN/mm

pf*u (System A) pf*u (System B)

 three plies of System A are required for each ply  three plies of System A are required for each ply

of System B for an equivalent tensile strength

of System B for an equivalent tensile strength

Compare the stiffnesses:
kf (System A) kf (System B)

-k---f--(--S---y---s---t-e---m------B----) = -1---1---0---0----k---i--p---s--/--i-n---. = 2.56 kf (System A) 429 kips/in.

-k--f---(--S---y---s---t-e---m------A----) = --1---9---2---.--6---3----k---N----/--m-----m--- = 2.56 kf (System B) 75.13 kN/mm

 three plies of System A are required for each ply  three plies of System A are required for each ply

of System B for an equivalent stiffness

of System B for an equivalent stiffness

Because all the design procedures outlined in this document limit the strain in the FRP material, the full ultimate strength of the material is not utilized and should not be the basis of comparison between two material systems. When considering various FRP ma-
terial systems for a particular application, the FRP systems should be compared based on equivalent stiffness only. In addition,
each FRP system under consideration should have the ability to develop the strain level associated with the effective strain level required by the application without rupturing, fu > fe.
In many instances, it may be possible to vary the width of the FRP strip as opposed to the number of plies (use larger widths for systems with lower thicknesses and visa versa). In such instances, equivalent stiffness calculations typically will not yield
equivalent contributions to the strength of a member. In general, thinner (lower ntf) and wider (higher wf) FRP systems will provide a higher level of strength to a member due to lower bond stresses. The exact equivalency, however, can only be found by performing complete calculations (according to procedures described in Chapters 9, 10, and 11 of this guide) for each system.

14.3--Flexural strengthening of an interior beam
A simply supported concrete beam reinforced with three No. 9 bars (Fig. 14.1) is located in a unoccupied warehouse and is subjected to a 50% increase in its live-load carrying requirements. An analysis of the existing beam indicates that the beam still has sufficient shear strength to resist the new required shear strength and meets the deflection and crack control serviceability requirements. Its flexural strength, however, is inadequate to carry the increased live load.

Fig. 14.1--Schematic of the idealized simply supported beam with FRP external reinforcement.

Length of the beam l Width of the beam w
d h fc fv Mn without FRP Bars

24 ft 12 in. 21.5 in. 24 in. 5000 psi
60 ksi
266 k-ft No. 9

7.31 m 30.48 cm 54.61 cm 60.96 cm 34 N/mm2 414 N/mm2 355.3 kN × m
28

www.afzir.com

440.2R-34

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

Summarized in Table 14.3 are the existing and new loadings and associated midspan moments for the beam.

Table 14.3--Loadings and corresponding moments

Loading/moment
Dead loads wDL
Live load wLL
Unfactored loads (wDL + wLL)
Unstrengthened load limit (1.2wDL + 0.85wLL )
Factored loads (1.4wDL + 1.7wLL)
Dead-load moment MDL
Live-load moment MLL
Service-load moment Ms
Unstrengthened moment limit (1.2MDL + 0.85MLL)
Factored moment Mu

Existing loads

1.00 k/ft

14 N/mm

1.20 k/ft

17 N/mm

2.20 k/ft

32.1 N/mm

N/A N/A

3.44 k/ft 72 k-ft 86 k-ft 158 k-ft N/A 248 k-ft

50.2 N/mm 96.2 kN-m 114.9 kN-m 211.1 kN-m
N/A 331.3 kN-m

Anticipated loads

1.00 k/ft

14 N/mm

1.80 k/ft

26 N/mm

2.80 k/ft

40.9 N/mm

2.73 k/ft

39.8 N/mm

4.46 k/ft 72 k-ft 130 k-ft 202 k-ft 197 k-ft 321 k-ft

65.1 N/mm 96.2 kN-m 173.6 kN-m 269.8 kN-m 263.2 kN-m 428.8 kN-m

It is proposed to strengthen the existing reinforced concrete beam with the FRP system described in Table 14.4. Specifically, two 12 in. (25.4 mm) wide x 23.0 ft (7 m) long plies are to be bonded to the soffit of the beam using the wet layup technique.

Table 14.4--Manufacturer's reported FRP-system properties

Thickness per ply tf Ultimate tensile strength ffu* Rupture strain f*u Modulus of elasticity of FRP laminates Ef

0.040 in. 90 ksi
0.017 in./in. 5360 ksi

1.016 mm 0.62 kN/mm2 0.017 mm/mm 37 kN/mm2

By inspection, the level of strengthening is reasonable in that it does meet the strengthening limit criteria put forth in Eq. (8-1).
That is, the existing moment strength, (Mn)w/o FRP = 266 k-ft (355 kN-m), is greater than the unstrengthened moment limit, (1.2MDL + 0.85MLL)new = 197 k-ft (263 kN-m). The design calculations used to verify this configuration follow.

Procedure
Step 1--Calculate the FRP-system design material properties The beam is located in an interior space and a CFRP material will be used. Therefore, per Table 8.1, an environmental-reduction factor of 0.95 is suggested.
ffu = CEff*u fu = CEfu*
Step 2--Preliminary calculations Properties of the concrete:
1 from ACI 318-99, Section 10.2.7.3 Ec = 57,000fc
Properties of the existing reinforcing steel:

Calculation in inch-pound units
ffu = (0.95)(90 ksi) = 85 ksi fu = (0.95)(0.017 in./in.) = 0.0162 in./in.

1

=

1.05

­

0.05

----f--c----1000

= 0.80

Ec = 57,000 5000 psi = 4,030,000 psi

Calculation in SI metric units
ffu = (0.95)(620.53 N/mm2) = 589.5 N/mm2 fu = (0.95)(0.017 mm/mm) = 0.0162 mm/mm
1 = 1.09 ­ 0.08fc (N/mm2) = 0.81 Ec = 57,000 34.47 N/mm2 = 334,672 N/mm2

As = 3(1.00 in.2) = 3.00 in.2

As = 3(615.7 mm2) = 1935.48 mm2

s



-A----s bd

s =

-----------3---.--0---0----i--n---.--2----------(12 in.)(21.5 in.)

= 0.00116

s =

--------------1---9---3---5---.-4---8-----m-----m----2-------------(304.8 mm)(546.1 mm)

= 0.00116

Properties of the externally bonded FRP reinforcement:
Af = ntfwf

f

=

-A----f bd

Af = (2 plies)(0.040 in./ply)(12 in.) = 0.96 in.2 Af = (2 plies)(1.016 mm/ply)(304.8 mm) = 619.35 mm2

s =

-----------0---.--9---6-----i-n---.--2----------(12 in.)(21.5 in.)

= 0.00372

s =

---------------6---1---9---.--3---5-----m----m-----2--------------(304.8 mm)(546.1 mm)

= 0.00372

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-35

www.afzir.com

Procedure
Step 3--Determine the existing state of strain on the soffit The existing state of strain is calculated assuming the beam is cracked and the only loads acting on the beam at the time of the FRP installation are dead loads. A cracked section analysis of the existing beam gives k = 0.334 and Icr = 5905 in.4 = 2451 × 106 mm4

bi

=

-M-----D---L--(---h----­-----k---d----) IcrEc

Step 4--Determine the bond-dependent
coefficient of the FRP system The dimensionless bond-dependent coefficient for flexure m is calculated using Eq. (9-2)

Calculation in inch-pound units

bi

=

(---8---6---4----k--------i--n---.--)--[--2---4-----i--n---.---­----(---0---.-3---3---4---)---(--2---1---.--5-----i--n---.-)---] (5905 in.4)(4030 ksi)

bi = 0.00061

Compare nEftf to 1,000,000

(2)(5,360,000 psi)(0.040 in.) = 428,8000 < 1,000,000

Therefore,

m

=

-----1-----60fu

 

1

­

2---,--0--n-0--E-0---,f-t-0-f--0---0-



0.90

m =

-------------1-------------60 ( 0.0162 )

1 ­ -(--2---)---(--5---,--3---6---0---,-0---0---0-----p---s--i--)---(--0---.--0---4---0----i--n---.-)---) 2,000,000

Step 5--Estimate c, the depth to the neutral axis A reasonable initial estimate of c is 0.20d. The value of the c is adjusted after checking equilibrium.
c = 0.20d
Step 6--Determine the effective level of strain in the FRP reinforcement The effectiveness strain level in the FRP may be found from Eq. (9-3).

m = 0.82 < 0.9 c = (0.20)(21.5 in.) = 4.30 in.

Calculation in SI metric units

bi = (---9---7---,--6---3---2----k---N---------m-----m-----)--[---6---0---9---.-6-----m----m------­-----(--0---.--3---3---4---)---(--5---4---6---.--1----m-----m-----)--]-
(2451  106 mm4)(28 kN/mm2) bi = 0.00061

(2)(37 kN/mm2)(1.016 mm) = 75,184 < 175,336

m =

-------------1-------------60 ( 0.0162 )

1 ­ -(--2---)---(--3---7-----k---N----/--m-----m----2---)--(---1---.-0---1---6-----m----m------) 175,336

m = 0.588 < 0.6

c = (0.20)(546.1 mm) = 109.2 mm

fe

=

0.003

 

-h----­c----c--

­ bi  mfu

Note that for the neutral axis depth selected, concrete crushing would be the failure mode because the first expression in this equation controls. If the second (limiting) expression governed, then FRP failure would be in the failure mode.
Step 7--Calculate the strain in the existing reinforcing steel The strain in the reinforcing steel can be calculated using similar triangles according to Eq. (9-8).

fe

=

0.003

 

-2--4----4-­--.-3--4---.-3--

­

0.00061



0.82 ( 0.0162 )

fe = 0.0131  0.0133

fe

=

0.003

 

-6---1---7---.-2-----m1---0-m--9---.-2-­----m1---0--m-9---.--2----m-----m---

­

0.00061

 0.82(0.0162) fe = 0.0131  0.0133

s

=

(fe

+

bi)

 

-dh----­­----cc--

s

=

(0.0131

+

0.00061)

 

-2--21---4.--5--­---­--4--4-.-3-.--30---0-

= 0.012

s

=

(0.0131

+

0.00061)

 

-65--04---69---..--61-----­­----11---00---99---..--22-

= 0.012

Step 8--Calculate the stress level in the reinforcing steel and FRP The stresses are calculated using Eq. (9-9) and (9-4).

fs = Ess  fy
ffe = Effe Step 9--Calculate the internal force resultants and check equilibrium Force equilibrium is verified by checking the initial estimate of c with Eq. (9-10). (Because concrete crushing controls failure,  can be taken as 0.85.)
c = -A---s---f--s--+-----A----f---f-f-e fc 1b

fs = (29,000 ksi)(0.012)  60 ksi fs = 348 ksi  60 ksi
ffe = (5360 ksi)(0.0131) = 70.2 ksi
c = -(--3---.-0---0-----i-n---.--2---)--(---6---0----k---s---i--)---+-----(--0---.--9---6-----i-n---.--2--)---(--7---0---.--2----k---s---i--) (0.85)(5 ksi)(0.80)(12 in.)
c = 6.06 in.  4.030 in. n.g.

fs

=

(200 kN/mm2)(0.012)  fs = 2.4 kN/mm2  0.14

0.14 kN/mm2 kN/mm2

ffe = (37 kN/mm2)(0.0131) = 0.5 kN/mm2

c= -(--1---9---3---5---.-4---8-----m----m-----2---)--(---4---1---3---.-7-----N----/--m-----m----2---)---+-----(--6---1----9----m-----m-----2--)--(---4---8---4----N-----/-m-----m-----2--)
(0.85)(34.47 N/mm2)(0.81)(305 mm)
c = 152 mm  109 in. n.g.

 Revise estimate of c and repeat Steps 6 through 9  Revise estimate of c and repeat Steps 6 through 9 until

until equilibrium is achieved.

equilibrium is achieved.

440.2R-36

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Procedure
Step 10--Adjust c until force equilibrium is satisfied Steps 6 through 9 were repeated several times with different values of c until equilibrium was achieved. The results of the final iteration are
c = 5.58 in.; s = 0.0086; fs = fy = 60 ksi; fe = 0.0093; and ffe = 49.8 ksi
Step 11--Calculate design flexural strength of the section The design flexural strength is calculated using Eq. (9-11). An additional reduction factor, f = 0.85, is applied to the contribution of the FRP system. Because s = 0.0086 > 0.005, a strength-reduction factor of  = 0.90 is appropriate per Eq. (9-5).

Calculation in inch-pound units c = -(--3---.-0---0-----i-n---.--2---)--(---6---0----k---s---i--)---+-----(--0---.--9---6-----i-n---.--2--)---(--4---9---.--8----k---s---i--)
(0.85)(5 ksi)(0.80)(12 in.)
c = 5.58 in. = 5.58 in.  O.K.
 the value of c selected for the final iteration is correct.

Calculation in SI metric units c =-(--1---9---3---5---.-4---8-----m----m-----2---)--(---0---.-4---1-----k---N----/--m-----2--)---+-----(---6---1---9----m-----m-----2--)---(--0---.--3---4----k---N-----/--m----m-----2---)
(0.85)(0.03 kN/mm2)(0.81)(305 mm) c = -(--1---9---3---5----m-----m-----2--)---(--4---1---3---.--7----N-----/-m-----m-----2--)----+----(---6---1---9-----m----m-----2--)---(--3---4---3-----N----/--m-----m-----2--)-
(0.85)(34.47 N/mm2)(0.81)(305 mm) c = 142 mm = 142 mm  O.K.
 the value of c selected for the final iteration is correct.

Mn

=



As

fs

 

d

­

---2-1--c--

+

Af

f

f

 e

h

­

---2-1--c--

2
Mn = 0.90 (3.00 in. (60 ksi)

Mn = 0.90 (1935.48 mm2)(414 N/mm2)

21.5 in. ­ -(--0---.-8---0----)--(--2-5---.-5---8-----i--n---.-)- + (0.85)(0.96 in.2)

546 mm ­ -(--0---.-8---1----)--(---1-2--4---2-----m-----m-----) + (0.85)(546 mm2 )

(49.8 ksi)24 in. ­ -(--0---.-8---0----)--(---25---.-5---8-----i--n---.-)-

(343

N/mm2

)

 

607

mm

­

-(--0---.-8---1----)--(---1-2--4---2-----m----m------)

Mn = 3920 k  in. = 326 k  ft  Mu = 321 k  ft Mn = 435,329 N  mm = 435.3 N  mm  Mu = 428.7 N  m

 the strengthened section is capable of sustaining the new required moment strength.
Step 12--Check service stresses in the reinforcing steel and the FRP Calculate the elastic depth to the cracked neutral axis by adding the first moment of the areas of the transformed section. This can be simplified for a rectangular beam without compression reinforcement as follows:

 the strengthened section is capable of sustaining the new required moment strength.

k=

 



s

-E---s Ec

+

f -EE----cf

2

+

2

 

s

-E---s Ec

+

f

-E----f Ec

 

d-h-

 

­

 

s

-E----s Ec

+

f E-E----cf

*See EQUATION NOTE I (U.S.) below. k = 0.343
kd = (0.343)(21.5 in.) = 7.37 in.

**See EQUATION NOTE I (SI) below. k = 0.343
kd = (0.343)(546.1 mm) = 187.3 mm

Calculate the stress level in the reinforcing steel using Eq. (9-12) and verify that it is less than recommended limit per Eq. (9-6).

fs,s

=

Ms

+

b

i

Af

Ef

(

h

­

k----d-)
3

(d ­ kd)Es

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

AsEsd ­ -k-3--d- (d ­ kd) + AfEfh ­ -k-3--d- (h ­ kd)

fs,s  0.80fy

See EQUATION NOTE II (U.S.) below.
fs,s = 40.4 ksi  (0.80)(60 ksi) = 48 ksi
 the stress level in the reinforcing steel is within the recommended limit.

See EQUATION NOTE II (SI) below.
fs,s = 280 N/mm2  (0.80)(410 N/mm2) = 330 N/mm2
 the stress level in the reinforcing steel is within the recommended limit.

*EQUATION NOTE I (U.S.):

k=

 

0.0116

 -2--4-9--0-,-0-3--0-0--0--

+

0.00372

 

45----30---63---00-

 

2

+

20.0116 -2--49---0,--0-3--0-0--0-

+

0.00372

 

54----03---36---00-

 

2---21---4.--5--i--ni--n-.--.

 

­

 

0.0116

 -2--4-9--0-,-0-3--0-0--0--

+

0.00372  54----03---36---00- 

EQUATION NOTE I (SI):

k=

 

0.0116

 -2-2-0--8-0--

+

0.00372

 

2-3--87--

 

2

+

2

 

0.0116

 

-2-2--0-8--0-

+

0.00372

 

23---78--

 

-56---40---69---..-16-----mm-----mm---

 

­

 

0.0116 

-2-2-0--8-0--

+

0.00372 

3-2---87-

 

EQUATION NOTE II (U.S.):

2424 k



in.

+

(

0.00061)

(

0.96

in.2

)

(

5360

ksi

)

 

24

in.

­ -7---.-3---73-----i-n---.

(21.5 in. ­ 7.37 in.)(29,000 ksi)

fs,s

=

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(

3.00

in.2

)

(

29,000

ksi

)

 

21.5

in.

­ 7----.-3---73-----i-n---. (21.5 in. ­ 7.37 in.) +

(

0.96

in.2

)

(

5360

ksi

)

 

24

in.

­ -7---.-3---73-----i-n---. (24 in. ­ 7.37 in.)

EQUATION NOTE II (SI):

fs,=s

273,912 kN  mm + (0.00061)(619.35 mm2)(37 kN/mm2)609.6 mm ­ -1--8---7---.--23----m-----m--- (546.1 mm ­ 187.2 mm)(200 kN/mm2) -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(1847 mm2)(200 kN/mm2)546.1 mm ­ 1----8---7---.-23-----m----m--- (546.1 mm ­ 187.2 mm) + (619.35 mm2)(37 kN/mm2)609.6 mm ­ 1----8---7---.-23-----m----m--- (609.6 mm ­ 187.2 mm)

www.afzir.com

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-37

Procedure Step 12 (cont.)--

Calculation in inch-pound units

Calculation in SI metric units

Calculate the stress level in the FRP using Eq. (9-13) and verify that it is less than creep-rupture stress limit given in Table 9.1. Assume that the full service load is sustained.

ff,s

=

fs,s

 

-EE---sf

 

-hd----­­-----kk---dd-

­

biEf

ff, s

=

40.4

ksi

 

2---59---3,--0-6--0-0--0--k---ks---si--i

 

-2--21---4.--5--i--n-i-n-.--.-­--­--7---7.--3-.-3-7--7--i--n-i-n-.--.

ff, s

=

0.278

kN/mm2

 

2--3--0-7--0---k-k--N-N---/--/m-m---m--m---2--2

 

-56---40---69---..-16-----mm----mm------­­-----11---88---77---..-22-----mm-----mm---

For a carbon FRP system, the sustained

­ (0.00061)(5360 ksi)

plus cyclic stress limit is obtained from

Table 9.1:

Sustained plus cyclic stress limit = 0.55ffu

ff,s = 5.60 ksi  (0.55)(85 ksi) = 50 ksi

 the stress level in the FRP is within the recommended

sustained plus cyclic stress limit.

 

-56---40---69---..-16----mm-----mm------­­-----11---88---77---..-22-----mm-----mm---

­ (0.00061)(371 kN/mm2)

ff,s = 38.6 N/mm2  (0.55)(586 N/mm2) = 322.3 N/mm2
 the stress level in the FRP is within the recommended sustained plus cyclic stress limit.

In detailing the FRP reinforcement, the FRP should be terminated a minimum of d past the point on the moment diagram that represents cracking. The factored shear force at the termination should also be checked against 2/3 of the concrete shear strength. If the shear force is greater than 2/3 of the concrete shear strength, FRP U-wraps are recommended to reinforce against cover delamination.
14.4--Shear strengthening of an interior T-beam A reinforced concrete T-beam (fc = 3000 psi = 20.7 N/mm2), located inside of an office building, is subjected to an increase in
its live-load carrying requirements. An analysis of the existing beam indicates that the beam is still satisfactory for flexural strength; however, its shear strength is inadequate to carry the increased live load. Based on the analysis, the nominal shear strength provided by the concrete is Vc = 36.4 kips = 162 kN and the nominal shear strength provided by steel shear reinforcement is Vs = 19.6 kips = 87.2 kN. Thus, the design shear strength of the existing beam is Vn,existing = 0.85(36.4 kips + 19.6 kips) = 47.6 kips = 211.7 kN. The factored required shear strength, including the increased live load, at a distance d away from the support is Vu = 60 kips = 266.7 kN. Figure 14.2 shows the shear diagram with the locations where shear strengthening is required along the length of the beam.
Supplemental FRP shear reinforcement is designed as shown in Fig. 14.3 and summarized in Table 14.5. Each FRP strip consists of one ply (n = 1) of a flexible carbon sheet installed by wet layup. The FRP system manufacturer's reported material properties are shown in Table 14.6.

Table 14.5--Configuration of the supplemental FRP shear reinforcement

d df Width of each sheet wf Span between each sheet sf FRP strip length

22 in. 16 in. 10 in. 12 in. 70 in.

55.88 cm 40.64 cm 25.4 cm 30.48 cm 177.8 cm

Fig. 14.2--Shear diagram showing demand versus existing strength. The FRP reinforcement should correct the deficiency shown shaded.

Table 14.6--Manufacturer's reported FRP system properties

Thickness per ply, tf Ultimate tensile strength ff*u
Rupture strain f*u Modulus of elasticity Ef

0.0065 in. 550,000 psi 0.017 in./in. 33,000,000 psi

0.1651 mm 3792 N/mm2 0.017 mm/mm 227,527 N/mm2

Fig. 14.3--Configuration of the supplemental FRP shear reinforcement.

440.2R-38

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

The design calculations used to arrive at this configuration follow.

www.afzir.com

Procedure
Step 1--Compute the design material properties

Calculation in inch-pound units

Calculation in SI metric units

The beam is located in an enclosed and conditioned space and a CFRP material will be used. Therefore, per Table 8.1, an environmentalreduction factor of 0.95 is suggested.

ffu = CEff*u
fu = CEfu* Step 2--Calculate the effective strain level in the FRP shear reinforcement

ffu = (0.95)(550 ksi) = 522.5 ksi fu = (0.95)(0.017) = 0.016

ffu = (0.95)(3.79 kN/mm2) = 3.60 kN/mm2 fu = (0.95)(0.017) = 0.016

The effective strain in FRP U-wraps should be
determined using the bond-reduction coefficient v. This coefficient can be computed using Eq. (10-7) through (10-10).

Le

=

------2---5---0---0------(ntf Ef )0.58

Le =

-------------------------------------2---5---0---0------------------------------------[(1)(0.0065 in.)(33 × 106 psi)]0.58

= 2.0 in.

Le=

---------------------------------------------4---1---6---------------------------------------------[(1)(0.1651 mm )(227.53 kN/mm2)]0.58

=

50.8mm

k1

=

 

4----0f--c-0---0-

2

/

3

k1 =

 

-3---0-4--0-0--0-0---0p---s---i

2

/

3

= 0.82

k1 =

 

-2---0---.-6---8---2--k-5--N-4---/--m-----m-----2

2

/

3

= 0.82

k2

=

 

d----f--d­---f--L----e

k2

=

 

1----6----i--n-1--.-6--­---i-2n---..--0----i--n---.

=

0.875

k2

=

 

4---0---6---.--4---4--m-0---6-m--.--4--­--m--5---m0---.--8----m-----m---

=

0.875

v

=

-k--1---k---2--L----e 468 f u



0.75

v = -(--0---.-8---2--4--)-6-(--8-0--(-.-8-0--7-.-0-5--1--)-6-(---)2----i--n---.--) = 0.192  0.75

v = (---0---.-8---2----)--(-4--0-6--.-88---7-(--05---.-)-0-(--1-5--6-0--)-.-8-----m-----m-----) = 0.192  0.75

The effective strain can then be computed using Eq. (10-6b) as follows:
fe = vfu  0.004
Step 3--Calculate the contribution of the FRP reinforcement to the shear strength

fe = 0.192(0.016) = 0.0031  0.004

fe = 0.192(0.016) = 0.0031  0.004

The area of FRP shear reinforcement can be computed as follows:

Afv = 2ntf wf
The effective stress in the FRP can be computed from Hooke's law.
ffe = feEf
The shear contribution of the FRP can be then calculated from Eq. (10-3).

Afv = 2(1)(0.0065 in.)(10 in.) = 0.13 in.2 ffe = (0.0031)(33,000 ksi) = 102 ksi

Afv = 2(1)(0.1651 mm)(254 mm) = 83.87 mm2 ffe = (0.0031)(227.52 kN/mm2) = 0.703 kN/mm2

Vf

=

-A---f--v--f--f-e--(---s--i--n---------+-----c---o---s-------)---d--f sf

Step 4--Calculate the shear strength of the section

Vf

=

(---0---.--1---3----i--n---.-2---)--(---1---0---2----k---s--i--)---(--1----)--(---1---6----i--n---.--) (12 in.)

Vf = 17.7 kips

Vf

=

-(--8---3---.--8---7----m-----m----2---)--(---0---.-7---0---3-----k---N----/--m-----m----2--)---(--1----)--(---4---0---6---.-4-----m----m-----)(304.8 mm)

Vf = 78.73 kN

The design shear strength can be computed from Eq. (10-2) with f = 0.85 for U-wraps.
Vn = (Vc + Vs + fVf )

Vn = 0.85[36.4 + 19.6 + (0.85)(17.7)] Vn = 60.4 kips > Vn = 60 kips
 the strengthened section is capable of sustaining the required shear strength.

Vn = 0.85[162 + 87.2 + (0.85)(78.73)] Vn = 268.7 kN > Vn = 267 kN
 the strengthened section is capable of sustaining the required shear strength.

www.afzir.com

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-39

14.5--Shear strengthening of an exterior column A 24 x 24 in. square column requires an additional 60 kips of shear strength (Vu = 60 kips). The column is located in an
unenclosed parking garage and experiences wide variation in temperature and climate. A method of strengthening the column
using FRP is sought.
An E-glass/epoxy FRP complete wrap is selected to retrofit the column. The properties of the FRP system, as reported by the
manufacturer, are shown in Table 14.7. The design calculations to arrive at the number of complete wraps required follow.

Procedure Step 1--Compute the design material properties
The column is located in an exterior environment and a GFRP material will be used. Therefore, per Table 8.1, an environmental-reduction factor of 0.65 is suggested.
ffu =CEff*u
fu =CEf*u Step 2--Calculate the effective strain level in the FRP shear reinforcement
The effective strain in a complete FRP wrap can be determined from Eq. (10-6a):
fe = 0.004  0.75fu
Step 3--Determine the area of FRP reinforcement required The required shear contribution of the FRP reinforcement can be computed based on the increase in strength needed, the strengthreduction factor for shear, and a partialreduction factor of 0.95 for completely wrapped sections in shear.

Calculation in inch-pound units
ffu = (0.65)(80 ksi) = 52 ksi fu = (0.65)(0.020) = 0.013
fe = 0.004  0.75(0.013) = 0.010  use an effective strain of fe = 0.004.

Calculation in SI metric units
ffu = (0.65)(551.6 N/mm2) = 358.5 N/mm2 fu = (0.65)(0.020) = 0.013
fe = 0.004  0.75(0.013) = 0.010  use an effective strain of fe = 0.004.

Vf,

reqd

=

------V----u-()

Vf, reqd = -0---.-68---05---(-k--0-i--.p-9--s-5----) = 74.3 kips

Vf, reqd = 0--2--.-86---56---.(--9-0---.k-9--N-5----) = 330.5 kN

The required area of FRP can be determined by reorganizing Eq. (10-3). The required area is left in terms of the spacing.

Afv,

reqd

=

------------------V----f-,--r--e--q--d--s---f----------------feEfe( sin  + cos )df

Afv, reqd =

---------------------(--7---4---.--3----k---i--p---s---)--s---f------------------(0.004)(4000 ksi)(1)(24 in.)

= 0.194sf

Afv, reqd

=

--------------------------------(---3---3---0---.-5-----k---N----)---s--f-------------------------------(0.004)(27.6 kN/mm2)(1)(609.6 mm)

Step 4--Determine the number of plies and strip width and spacing The number of plies can be determined in terms of the strip width and spacing as follows:

= 4.91sf

n = A----f-,--r--e--q--d 2tfwf

n = ---------0---.--1---9---4---s---f-------- = 1.90-s---f

2(0.051 in.)wf

wf

n = -----------4---.-9---1----s--f---------- = 1.90-s---f

2(1.29 mm)wf

wf

 use two plies (n = 2) continuously along the height of  use two plies (n = 2) continuously along the height of the

the column (sf = wf).

column (sf = wf).

Table 14.7--Manufacturer's reported FRP system properties*

Thickness per ply tf

0.051 in.

1.29 mm

Guaranteed ultimate tensile strength ffu* 80,000 psi 551.6 N/mm2

Guaranteed rupture strain fu*

0.020 in./in. 0.020 mm/mm

Modulus of elasticity Ef

4,000,000 psi 27,579 N/mm2

*The reported properties are laminate properties.

440.2R-40

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

CHAPTER 15--REFERENCES 15.1--Referenced standards and reports
The standards and reports listed below were the latest editions at the time this document was prepared. Because these documents are revised frequently, the reader is advised to contact the proper sponsoring group if it is desired to refer to the latest version.

American Concrete Institute (ACI)

201.1R Guide for Making a Condition Survey of Concrete

in Service

216R

Guide for Determining Fire Endurance of Concrete

Elements

224R

Control of Cracking in Concrete Structures

224.1R Causes, Evaluation, and Repair of Cracks in Concrete Structures

318-99 Building Code Requirements for Structural

Concrete and Commentary

364.1R Guide for Evaluation of Concrete Structures Prior to Rehabilitation

437R

Strength Evaluation of Existing Concrete Buildings

440R-96 State-of-the-Art Report on Fiber Reinforced

Plastic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete

Structures

440.1R Guide for the Design and Construction of Concrete Reinforced with FRP Bars

503R

Use of Epoxy Compounds with Concrete

503.4 Standard Specification for Repairing Concrete

with Epoxy Mortars

546R

Concrete Repair Guide

American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
Z-129.1 Hazardous Industrial Chemicals Precautionary Labeling

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

D 696 Test Method for Coefficient of Linear Thermal

Expansion of Plastics Between ­30 °C and 30 °C

D 2240 Test Method for Rubber Hardness--Durometer Hardness

D 2583 Test Method for Indentation Hardness of Rigid Body Plastics by Means of a Barcol Impressor

D 3039 Test Method for Tensile Properties of Fiber Resin

Composites

D 3165 Test Method for Strength Properties of Adhesives in Shear by Tension Loading of Single Lap Joint

Laminated Assemblies

D 3418 Test Method for Transition Temperatures of Polymers by Thermal Analysis (DTA or DSC)

D 3528 Test Method for Strength Properties of Double

Lap Shear Adhesive Joints by Tension Loading

D 4065 Practice for Determining and Reporting Dynamic Mechanical Properties of Plastics

D 4541 Test Method for Pull off Strength of Coatings Using Portable Adhesion Tester

E 84 Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics

of Building Materials

E 119

Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials

Canadian Standards Association (CSA) CSA S806-02 Design and Construction of Building Compo-
nents with Fiber-Reinforced Polymers
Code of Federal Regulations CFR 16, Part 1500 Hazardous Substances and Articles;
Administration and Enforcement Regulations CFR 49, Chapter C Transportation
International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) AC125 Acceptance Criteria for Concrete and Reinforced
and Unreinforced Masonry Strengthening Using Fiber-Reinforced Composite Systems
International Concrete Repair Institute (ICRI) ICRI 03730Guide for Surface Preparation for the Repair of
Deteriorated Concrete Resulting from Reinforcing Steel Corrosion ICRI 03733Guide for Selecting and Specifying Materials for Repairs of Concrete Surfaces
International Federation for Structural Concrete FIB 2001 Externally Bonded FRP Reinforcement for
RC Structures
These publications may be obtained from these organizations:
American Concrete Institute P.O. Box 9094 Farmington Hills, MI 48333-9094
American National Standards Institute 11 West 42nd Street New York, NY 10036
ASTM 100 Barr Harbor Drive West Conshohocken, PA 19428
Canadian Standards Association 178 Rexdale Blvd. Toronto, ON M9W 1R3 Canada
Code of Federal Regulations Government Printing Office 732 N. Capitol St. N.W. Washington, D.C. 20402
International Conference of Building Officials 5360 Workman Mill Road Whittier, CA 90601-2298
International Concrete Repair Institute 3166 S. River Road Suite 132 Des Plains, IL 60018
International Federation for Structural Concrete Case Postale 88 CH­1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-41

www.afzir.com

15.2--Cited references Arduini, M., and Nanni, A., 1997, "Behavior of Pre-Cracked
RC Beams Strengthened with Carbon FRP Sheets," Journal of Composites in Construction, V. 1, No. 2, pp. 63-70.
Bakis, C. E.; Bank, L. C.; Brown, V. L.; Cosenza, E.; Davalos, J. F.; Lesko, J. J.; Machida, A.; Rizkalla, S. H.; and Triantifillou, T. C., 2002, "Fibre-Reinforced Polymer Composites for Construction-State-of-the-Art Review," Journal of Composites in Construction, V. 6, No. 2, pp. 73-87.
Benmokrane, B., and Rahman, H., eds., 1998, Durability of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Composites for Construction, University of Sherbrooke, Canada.
Blaschko, M.; Niedermeier, R.; and Zilch, K., 1998, "Bond Failure Modes of Flexural Members Strengthened with FRP," Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Composites in Infrastructure, V. 1, Jan., Tucson, Ariz., pp. 315-327.
Brosens, K., and Van Gemert, D., 1997, "Anchoring Stresses Between Concrete and Carbon Fibre Reinforced Laminates," Non-Metallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, Proceedings of the Third International Symposium, V. 1, Oct., pp. 271-278.
CALTRANS Division of Structures, 1996, Prequalification Requirements for Alternative Column Casings for Seismic Retrofit (Composites), Section 10.1, California Department of Transportation.
Chajes, M.; Januska, T.; Mertz, D.; Thomson, T.; and Finch, W., 1995, "Shear Strengthening of Reinforced Concrete Beams Using Externally Applied Composite Fabrics," ACI Structural Journal, V. 92, No. 3, May-June, pp. 295-303.
Christensen, J. B.; Gilstrap, J. M.; and Dolan, C. W., 1996, "Composite Materials Reinforcement of Masonry Structures," Journal of Architectural Engineering, V. 2, No. 12, pp. 63-70.
Dolan, C., 1999, "FRP Prestressing in the USA," Concrete International, V. 21, No. 10, Oct., pp. 29-32.
Dolan, C. W.; Rizkalla, S.H.; and Nanni, A., eds, 1999, Fourth International Symposium on Fiber Reinforced Polymer Reinforcement for Reinforced Concrete Structures, SP-188, American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, Mich.
Ehsani, M. R., 1993, "Glass-Fiber Reinforcing Bars," Alternative Materials for the Reinforcement and Prestressing of Concrete, J.L. Clarke, Blackie Academic & Professional, London, England, pp. 35-54.
Ehsani, M.; Saadatmanesh, H.; and Al-Saidy, A., 1997, "Shear Behavior of URM Retrofitted with FRP Overlays," Journal of Composites for Construction, V. 1, No. 1, pp. 17-25.
Fardis, M. N., and Khalili, H., 1981, "Concrete Encased in Fiberglass Reinforced Plastic," ACI JOURNAL, 78(6), pp. 440-446.
Fleming, C. J., and King, G. E. M., 1967, "The Development of Structural Adhesives for Three Original Uses in South Africa," RILEM International Symposium, Synthetic Resins in Building Construction, Paris, pp.75-92.
Fukuyama, H., 1999, "FRP Composites in Japan," Concrete International, V. 21, No. 10, Oct., pp. 29-32.
GangaRao, H. V. S., and Vijay, P. V., 1998, "Bending Behavior of Concrete Beams Wrapped with Carbon Fabric," Journal of Structural Engineering, V. 124, No. 1, pp. 3-10.
Green, M.; Bisby, L.; Beaudoin, Y.; and Labossiere, P., 1998, "Effects of Freeze-Thaw Action on the Bond of FRP Sheets to Concrete," Proceedings of the First International Conference on Durability of Composites for Construction, Oct., Sherbrooke, Quebec, pp. 179-190.

Hassan, T., and Rizkalla, S., 2002, "Flexural Strengthening of Prestressed Bridge Slabs with FRP Systems" PCI Journal, V. 47, No. 1, pp. 76-93.
Hawkins, G. F.; Steckel, G. L.; Bauer, J. L.; and Sultan, M., 1998, "Qualification of Composites for Seismic Retrofit of Bridge Columns," Proceedings of the First International Conference on Durability of Composites for Construction, Aug., Sherbrooke, Quebec, pp. 25-36.
Hutchinson, R.; Abdelrahman, A.; Rizkalla, S.; and Rihal, S., 1998, Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Composites in Infrastructure, V. 1, Tucson, Ariz., Jan., pp. 261-275.
ISIS, 1998, ISIS Standard Test Methods, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Japan Concrete Institute (JCI), 1997, Non-Metallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, 1 and 2, Tokyo, Japan.
Jones, R.; Swamy, R. N.; and Charif, A., 1988, "Plate Separation and Anchorage of Reinforced Concrete Beams Strengthened by Epoxy-Bonded Steel Plates," Structural Engineering, 66(5), pp. 85-94.
Kachlakev, D., and McCurry, D., 2000, "Testing of Full-Size Reinforced Concrete Beams Strengthened with FRP Composites: Experimental Results and Design Methods Verification," Report No. FHWA-OR-00-19, U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration.
Katsumata, H.; Kobatake, Y.; and Takeda, T., 1987, "A Study on the Strengthening with Carbon Fiber for Earthquake-Resistant Capacity of Existing Concrete Columns," Proceedings from the Workshop on Repair and Retrofit of Existing Structures, U.S.-Japan Panel on Wind and Seismic Effects, U.S.-Japan Cooperative Program in Natural Resources, Tsukuba, Japan, pp. 1816-1823.
Khalifa, A.; Alkhrdaji, T.; Nanni, A.; and Lansburg, S., 1999, "Anchorage of Surface Mounted FRP Reinforcement," Concrete International: Design and Construction, V. 21, No. 10, Oct., pp. 49-54.
Khalifa, A.; Gold, W.; Nanni, A.; and Abel-Aziz M., 1998, "Contribution of Externally Bonded FRP to the Shear Capacity of RC Flexural Members," Journal of Composites in Construction, V. 2, No. 4, pp. 195-203.
Kumahara, S.; Masuda, Y.; and Tanano, Y., 1993, "Tensile Strength of Continuous Fiber Bar Under High Temperature," International Symposium on Fiber-Reinforced Plastic Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, SP-138, American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, Mich., pp. 731-742.
Maeda, T.; Asano, Y.; Sato, Y.; Ueda, T.; and Kakuta, Y., 1997, "A Study on Bond Mechanism of Carbon Fiber Sheet," Non-Metallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, Proceedings of the Third Symposium, V. 1, Oct., pp. 279-286.
Malek, A.; Saadatmanesh, H.; and Ehsani, M., 1998, "Prediction of Failure Load of R/C Beams Strengthened with FRP Plate Due to Stress Concentrations at the Plate End," ACI Structural Journal, V. 95, No. 1, Jan.-Feb., pp. 142-152.
Malvar, L., 1998, "Durability of Composites in Reinforced Concrete," Proceedings of the First International Conference on Durability of Composites for Construction, Aug., Sherbrooke, Canada, pp. 361-372.
Malvar, L.; Warren, G.; and Inaba, C., 1995, "Rehabilitation of Navy Pier Beams With Composite Sheets," Second FRP International Symposium on Non-Metallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, Aug., Gent, Belgium, pp. 533-540.

440.2R-42

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

www.afzir.com

Mandell, J. F., 1982, "Fatigue Behavior of Fibre-Resin Composites," Developments in Reinforced Plastics, V. 2, Applied Science Publishers, London, England, pp. 67-107.
Mandell, J. F., and Meier, U., 1983, "Effects of Stress Ratio Frequency and Loading Time on the Tensile Fatigue of Glass-Reinforced Epoxy," Long Term Behavior of Composites, ASTM STP 813, American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, Pa., pp. 55-77.
Mander, J. B.; Priestley, M. J. N.; and Park, R., 1988, "Theoretical Stress-Strain Model for Confined Concrete," Journal of Structural Engineering, V. 114, No. 8, pp. 1804-1826.
Marshall, O. S.; Sweeney, S. C.; and Trovillion, J. C., 1999, "Seismic Rehabilitation of Unreinforced Masonry Walls," Fourth International Symposium on Fiber Reinforced Polymer Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, SP-188, C. W. Dolan, S. H. Rizkalla, and A. Nanni, eds., American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, Mich., pp. 287-295.
Meier, U., 1987, "Bridge Repair with High Performance Composite Materials," Material und Technik, V. 4, pp. 125-128 (in German).
Meier, U., and Kaiser, H., 1991, "Strengthening of Structures with CFRP Laminates," Advanced Composite Materials in Civil Engineering Structures, ASCE Specialty Conference, pp. 224-232.
Mindess, S., and Young, J., 1981, Concrete, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 671 pp.
Mosallam, A.; Chakrabarti, R.; Sim, S.; and Elasnadedy, H., 2000, "Seismic Response of Reinforced Concrete Moment Connections Repaired and Upgraded with FRP Composites," Innovative Systems for Seismic Repair and Rehabilitation of Structures, Proceedings, SRRS2 Conference, A. Mosallam, ed., Fullerton, Calif., Mar. 20-21, pp. 59-72.
Motavalli, M.; Terrasi, G. P.; and Meier, U., 1993, "On the Behavior of Hybrid Aluminum/CFRP Box Beams at Low Temperatures," Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Testing and Research (EMPA), Switzerland.
Mutsuyoshi, H.; Uehara, K.; and Machida, A., 1990, "Mechanical Properties and Design Method of Concrete Beams Reinforced with Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastics," Transaction of the Japan Concrete Institute, V. 12, Japan Concrete Institute, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 231-238.
Nanni, A., 1995, "Concrete Repair with Externally Bonded FRP Reinforcement," Concrete International, V. 17, No. 6, June, pp. 22-26.
Nanni, A.; Bakis, C. E.; Boothby, T. E.; Lee, Y. J.; and Frigo, E. L., 1997, "Tensile Reinforcement by FRP Sheets Applied to RC," 9C/1-8, ICE 97 International Composites Exposition, Jan., Nashville, Tenn., pp. 9C/1 to 8.
Nanni, A., and Bradford, N., 1995, "FRP Jacketed Concrete Under Uniaxial Compression," Construction and Building Materials, V. 9, No. 2, pp. 115-124.
Nanni, A.; Focacci, F.; and Cobb, C. A., 1998, "Proposed Procedure for the Design of RC Flexural Members Strengthened with FRP Sheets," Proceedings, ICCI-98, V. 1, Jan., Tucson, Ariz, pp. 187-201.
Nanni, A., and Gold, W., 1998, "Strength Assessment of External FRP Reinforcement," Concrete International, V. 20, No. 6, June, pp. 39-42.
National Research Council, 1991, "Life Prediction Methodologies for Composite Materials," Committee on Life Prediction Methodologies for Composites, NMAB-460, National Materials Advisory Board, Washington, D.C.

Neale, K. W., 2000, "FRPs for Structural Rehabilitation: A Survey of Recent Progress," Progress in Structural Engineering and Materials, V. 2, No. 2, pp. 133-138.
Neale, K. W., and Labossière, P., 1997, "State-of-the-Art Report on Retrofitting and Strengthening by Continuous Fibre in Canada," Non-Metallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, V. 1, Japan Concrete Institute, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 25-39.
Norris, T.; Saadatmanesh, H.; and Ehsani, M., 1997, "Shear and Flexural Strengthening of R/C Beams with Carbon Fiber Sheets," Journal of Structural Engineering, V. 123, No. 7, pp. 903-911.
Odagiri, T.; Matsumoto, K.; and Nakai H., 1997, "Fatigue and Relaxation Characteristics of Continuous Aramid Fiber Reinforced Plastic Rods," Third International Symposium on Non-Metallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures (FRPRCS-3), V. 2, Japan Concrete Institute, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 227-234.
Paulay, T., and Priestley, M., 1992, Seismic Design of Reinforced Concrete and Masonry Buildings, John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y., 744 pp.
Priestley, M.; Seible, F.; and Calvi, G., 1996, Seismic Design and Retrofit of Bridges, John Wiley and Sons, New York, N.Y.
Ritchie, P.; Thomas, D.; Lu, L.; and Conneley, G., 1991, "External Reinforcement of Concrete Beams Using Fiber Reinforced Plastics," ACI Structural Journal, V. 88, No. 4, July-Aug., pp. 490-500.
Restrepo, J., and DeVino, B., 1996, "Enhancement of the Axial Load-Carrying Capacity of Reinforced Concrete Columns by Means of Fiber-glass Epoxy Jackets," Proceedings of the Advanced Composite Materials in Bridges and Structures II, Montreal, Quebec, pp. 547-553.
Roberts, T. M., and Haji-Kazemi, H., 1989, "Theoretical Study of the Behavior of Reinforced Concrete Beams Strengthened by Externally Bonded Steel Plates," Proceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers, Part 2, V. 87, No. 9344, pp. 39-55.
Rostasy, F. S., 1987, "Bonding of Steel and GFRP Plates in the Area of Coupling Joints. Talbrucke Kattenbusch," Research Report No. 3126/1429, Federal Institute for Materials Testing, Braunschweig, Germany (in German).
Rostasy, F. S., 1997, "On Durability of FRP in Aggressive Environments," Third International Symposium on NonMetallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures (FRPRCS-3), V. 2, Japan Concrete Institute, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 107-114.
Roylance, M., and Roylance, O., 1981, "Effect of Moisture on the Fatigue Resistance of an Aramid-Epoxy Composite," Organic Coatings and Plastics Chemistry, V. 45, American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C., pp. 784-788.
Saadatmanesh, H., and Ehsani, M., ed., 1998, Second International Conference on Composites in Infrastructure, ICCI, V. 1 and 2, Tucson, Ariz., 1506 pp.
Saadatmanesh, H., and Tannous, F., 1999a, "Relaxation, Creep, and Fatigue Behavior of Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic Tendons," ACI Materials Journal, V. 96, No. 2, Mar.-Apr., pp. 143-153.
Sato, Y.; Ueda, T.; Kakuta, Y.; and Tanaka, T., 1996, "Shear Reinforcing Effect of Carbon Fiber Sheet Attached to Side of Reinforced Concrete Beams," Advanced Composite Materials in Bridges and Structures, M. M. El-Badry, ed., pp. 621-627.
Seible, F.; Priestley, M. J. N.; Hegemier, G. A.; and Innamorato, D., 1997, "Seismic Retrofit of RC Columns with

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-43

www.afzir.com

Continuous Carbon Fiber Jackets," Journal of Composites for Construction, No. 1, pp. 52-62.
Sharif, A.; Al-Sulaimani, G.; Basunbul, I.; Baluch, M.; and Ghaleb, B., 1994, "Strengthening of Initially Loaded Reinforced Concrete Beams Using FRP Plates," ACI Structural Journal, V. 91, No. 2, Mar.-Apr., pp. 160-168.
Sheheta, E.; Morphy, R.; and Rizkalla, S., 1999, Fourth International Symposium on Fiber Reinforced Polymer Reinforcement for Concrete Structures, SP-188, C. W. Dolan, S. H. Rizkalla, and A. Nanni, eds., American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, Mich., pp. 157-167.
Soudki, K. A., and Green, M. F., 1997, "Freeze-Thaw Response of CFRP Wrapped Concrete," Concrete International, V. 19, No. 8, Aug., pp. 64-67.
Spoelstra, M. R., and Monti, G., 1999, "FRP-Confined Concrete Model," Journal of Composites for Construction, V. 3, No. 3, pp. 143-150.
Steckel, G.; Hawkins, G.; and Bauer, J., 1999a, "Durability Issues for Composites in Infrastructure," 44th International SAMPE Symposium, May, Long Beach, Calif., pp. 2194-2208.
Steckel, G.; Hawkins, G.; and Bauer, J., 1999b, "Qualifications for Seismic Retrofitting of Bridge Columns Using Composites," V. 1, 2, and 3, Aerospace Corporation Report ATR-99(7524)-2.
Toutanji, H., 1999, "Stress-Strain Characteristics of Concrete Columns Externally Confined with Advanced Fiber Composite Sheets," ACI Materials Journal, V. 96, No. 3, May-June, pp. 397-404.
Triantafillou, T. C., 1998a, "Shear Strengthening of Reinforced Concrete Beams Using Epoxy-Bonded FRP Composites," ACI Structural Journal, V. 95, No. 2, Mar.-Apr., pp. 107-115.
Triantafillou, T. C., 1998b, "Strengthening of Masonry Structures Using Epoxy-Bonded FRP Laminates," Journal of Composites for Construction, No. 2, pp. 96-104.
Wang, N., and Evans, J. T., 1995, "Collapse of Continuous Fiber Composite Beam at Elevated Temperatures," Composites, V. 26, No. 1, pp. 56-61.
Wolf, R., and Miessler, H. J., 1989, HLV-Spannglieder in der Praxis, Erfahrungen Mit Glasfaserverbundstaben, Beton, 2, pp. 47-51.
Wu, W., 1990, "Thermomechanical Properties of Fiber Reinforced Plastics (FRP) Bars," PhD dissertation, West Virginia University, Morgantown, W.Va., 292 pp.
Yamaguchi, T.; Kato, Y.; Nishimura, T.; and Uomoto, T., 1997, "Creep Rupture of FRP Rods Made of Aramid, Carbon and Glass Fibers," Third International Symposium on NonMetallic (FRP) Reinforcement for Concrete Structures (FRPRCS-3), V. 2, Japan Concrete Institute, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 179-186.
15.3--Other references Baumert, M.; Green, M.; and Erki, M., 1996, "Low
Temperature Behaviour of Concrete Beams Strengthened with FRP Sheets," Proceedings of the 1996 CSCE Annual Conference, Edmonton, Alberta, pp. 179-190.
Brosens, K., and Van Gemert, D., 2001, "Anchorage of Externally Bonded Reinforcements Subjected to Combined Shear/Bending Action," Proceedings of the International Conference on FRP Composites in Civil Engineering, Hong Kong, China, pp. 589-596.
Dutta, P. K., 1988, "Structural Fiber Composite Materials for Cold Regions," Journal of Cold Regions Engineering, V. 2, No.3, pp. 124-132.

Fyfe, E. R.; Gee, D. J.; and Milligan, P. B., 1998, "Composite Systems for Seismic Applications," Concrete International, V. 20, No. 6, June, pp. 31-33.
Hormann, M.; Seible, F.; Karbhari, V.; and Seim, W., 1998, "Preliminary Structural Tests for Strengthening of Concrete Slabs Using FRP Composites," Structural Systems Research Project, Report No. TR-98/13, University of California, San Diego, Calif., Sept.
Irwin, C. A. K., 1975, "The Strengthening of Concrete Beams by Bonded Steel Plates," Technical Report, TRRL Supplemental Report 160UC, Transport and Road Research Laboratory, Department of the Environment, Crowthrone, England.
ISIS Canada Design Manuals, 2001, "Strengthening Reinforced Concrete Structures with Externally-Bonded Fibre Reinforced Polymers," The Canadian Network of Centres of Excellence on Intelligent Sensing for Innovative Structures, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, 86 pp.
ISIS-Canada, 1998, Standard Test Methods for FRP Rod and Sheet, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Japan Concrete Institute (JCI), 1998, "Technical Report on Continuous Fiber Reinforced Concrete," TC 952: Committee on Continuous Fiber Reinforced Concrete, Tokyo.
Japan Society of Civil Engineers (JSCE), 2001, "Recommendations for Upgrading of Concrete Structures with Use of Continuous Fiber Sheets," Concrete Engineering Series, No. 41, Tokyo, Japan, 250 pp.
Khalifa, A.; Alkhrdaji, T.; Nanni, A.; and Lansburg, S., 1999, "Anchorage of Surface Mounted FRP Reinforcement," Concrete International, V. 21, No. 10, Oct., pp. 49-54.
MacDonald, M. D., and Calder, A. J. J., 1982, "Bonded Steel Plating for Strengthening Concrete Structures," International Journal of Adhesion and Adhesives, pp. 119-127.
MacGregor, J., 1997, Reinforced Concrete: Mechanics and Design, 3rd Edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 939 pp.
Mil Handbook 17, 1999, The Composite Materials Handbook--Mil-17, V. 2, Materials Properties, Technomic Publication, Lancaster, Pa.
Railway Technical Research Institute (RTRI), 1996, "Design and Construction Guidelines for Seismic Retrofitting of Railway Viaduct Columns Using Aramid Fiber Sheets," Tokyo. (in Japanese)
Saadatmanesh, J.; Ehsani, M. R.; and Jin, L., 1997, "Repair of Earthquake-Damaged RC Columns with FRP Wraps," ACI Structural Journal, V. 95, No. 6, Nov.-Dec., pp. 206-215.
Saadatmanesh, H., and Tannous, F., 1999b, "LongTerm Behavior of Aramid Reinforced Plastic (AFRP) Tendons," ACI Materials Journal, V. 96, No. 3, MayJune, pp. 297-305.
Suppliers of Advanced Composite Materials Association, 1994, SACMA Recommended Methods, SRM 16-90, Arlington, Va.
Thomas, J., 1978, "FRP Strengthening--Experimental or Mainstream Technology," Concrete International, V. 20, No. 6, June, pp. 57-58.
Todeschini, C.; Bianchini, A; and Kesler, C., 1964, "Behavior of Concrete Columns Reinforced with High Strength Steels," ACI JOURNAL, Proceedings, V. 61, No. 6, pp. 701-716.
Triantafillou, T. C., 1998, "Strengthening of Structures with Advanced FRPs," Progress in Structural Engineering and Materials, V. 1, pp. 126-134.

www.afzir.com

440.2R-44

ACI COMMITTEE REPORT

Table A1.1--Typical tensile properties of fibers used in FRP systems

Fiber type Carbon
General purpose High strength
Ultra-high strength High modulus
Ultra-high modulus Glass E-glass S-glass Aramid
General purpose High performance

Elastic modulus

103 ksi

GPa

32 to 34 32 to 34 32 to 34 50 to 75 75 to 100

220 to 240 220 to 240 220 to 240 340 to 520 520 to 690

10 to 10.5 12.5 to 13

69 to 72 86 to 90

10 to 12 16 to 18

69 to 83 110 to 124

Ultimate strength

103 ksi

GPa

Rupture strain, minimum, %

300 to 550 550 to 700 700 to 900 250 to 450 200 to 350

2050 to 3790 3790 to 4820 4820 to 6200 1720 to 3100 1380 to 2400

1.2 1.4 1.5 0.5 0.2

270 to 390 500 to 700

1860 to 2680 3440 to 4140

4.5 5.4

500 to 600 500 to 600

3440 to 4140 3440 to 4140

2.5 1.6

Table A1.2--Tensile properties of FRP laminates with fiber volumes of 40 to 60%

Young's modulus

Ultimate Tensile strength

FRP-system description (fiber orientation)

Property at 0 degrees Property at 90 degrees

103 ksi (GPa)

103 ksi (MPa)

Property at 0 degrees ksi (MPa)

Property at 90 degrees ksi (MPa)

Rupture strain at 0 degrees, %

High-strength carbon/epoxy, degrees

0

15 to 21 (100 to 140) 0.3 to 1 (2 to 7) 150 to 350 (1020 to 2080)

5 to 10 (35 to 70)

1.0 to 1.5

0/90

8 to 11 (55 to 76) 8 to 11 (55 to 75) 100 to 150 (700 to 1020) 100 to 150 (700 to 1020)

1.0 to 1.5

+45/­45

2 to 4 (14 to 28)

2 to 4 (14 to 28)

25 to 40 (180 to 280)

25 to 40 (180 to 280)

1.5 to 2.5

E-glass/epoxy, degrees

0

3 to 6 (20 to 40)

0.3 to 1 (2 to 7)

75 to 200 (520 to 1400)

5 to 10 (35 to 70)

1.5 to 3.0

0/90

2 to 5 (14 to 34)

2 to 5 (14 to 35)

75 to 150 (520 to 1020)

75 to 150 (520 to 1020)

2.0 to 3.0

+45/­45

2 to 3 (14 to 21)

2 to 3 (14 to 20)

25 to 40 (180 to 280)

25 to 40 (180 to 280)

2.5 to 3.5

High-performance aramid/ epoxy, degrees

0

7 to 10 (48 to 68)

0.3 to 1 (2 to 7) 100 to 250 (700 to 1720)

5 to 10 (35 to 70)

2.0 to 3.0

0/90

4 to 5 (28 to 34)

4 to 5 (28 to 35)

40 to 80 (280 to 550)

40 to 80 (280 to 550)

2.0 to 3.0

+45/­45

1 to 2 (7 to 14)

1 to 2 (7 to 14)

20 to 30 (140 to 210)

20 to 30 (140 to 210)

2.0 to 3.0

Notes: FRP composite properties are based on FRP systems having an approximate fiber volume of 50% and a composite thickness of 0.1 in. (2.5 mm). In general, precured systems have fiber volumes of 40 to 60%, while wet layup systems have fiber volumes of 25 to 40%. Because the fiber volume influences the gross-laminate properties, precured laminates usually have higher mechanical properties than laminates created using the wet layup technique.

Zero degrees represents unidirectional fiber orientation.

Zero/90 degrees (or +45/­45 degrees) represents fiber balanced in two orthogonal directions, where 0 degrees is the direction of loading, and 90 degrees is normal to the direction of loading.

Tension is applied to 0 degrees direction.

APPENDIXES
APPENDIX A--MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF CARBON, GLASS, AND ARAMID FIBERS
Table A1.1 presents ranges of values for the tensile properties for carbon, glass, and aramid fibers. The tabulated values are based on the testing of impregnated fiber yarns or strands in accordance with Suppliers of Advanced Composite Materials Association test method 16-90. The strands or fiber yarns are impregnated with resin, cured, and then tested in tension. The tabulated properties are calculated using the area of the fibers; the resin area is ignored. Hence, the properties listed in Table A1.1 are representative of unidirectional FRP systems whose properties are reported using net-fiber area (Section 3.3.1).
Table A1.2 presents ranges of tensile properties for CFRP, GFRP, and AFRP laminates with fiber volumes of

approximately 40 to 60%. Properties are based on grosslaminate area (Section 3.3.1). The properties are shown for unidirectional, bidirectional, and +45/­45 degree fabrics. Table A1.2 also shows the effect of varying the fiber orientation on the 0 degree strength of the laminate.
Table A1.3 gives the tensile strengths of some commercially available FRP systems. The strength of unidirectional laminates is dependent on fiber type and dry fabric weight.
These tables are not intended to provide ultimate strength values for design purposes.
APPENDIX B--SUMMARY OF STANDARD TEST METHODS
ASTM test methods that quantify the structural behavior of FRP systems bonded to concrete are in preparation. Certain existing ASTM test methods are applicable to the

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXTERNALLY BONDED FRP SYSTEMS

440.2R-45

www.afzir.com

Table A1.3--Ultimate tensile strength* of some commercially available FRP systems

Fabric weight FRP-system description (fiber type/saturating resin/fabric type) oz/yd3 g/m3

General purpose carbon/epoxy unidirectional sheet

6 200 12 400

High-strength carbon/epoxy unidirectional sheet

7 230 9 300 18 620

High-modulus carbon/epoxy unidirectional sheet

9 300

General-purpose carbon/epoxy balanced sheet

9 300

E-glass/epoxy unidirectional sheet

27 900 10 350

E-glass/balanced fabric

9 300

Aramid/epoxy unidirectional sheet

12 420

High-strength carbon/epoxy precured, unidirectional laminate

70

2380

E-glass/vinyl ester precured, unidirectional shell

50 1700

*Values shown should not be used for design. Ultimate tensile strength per unit width of sheet or fabric. Precured laminate weight.

Ultimate strength

lb/in. 2600 3550 1800 4000 5500

kN/mm 500 620 320 700 960

3400 600

1000 180

4100 1300 680 4000

720 230 120 700

19,000 3300

9000 1580

FRP material. FRP materials can be tested in accordance with the methods listed in Table B1.1 as long as all exceptions to the method are listed in the test report. Durability-related tests use the same test methods but require application specific preconditioning of specimens. Acceptance of the data generated by the listed test methods can be the basis for FRP-material system qualification and acceptance.

APPENDIX C--AREAS OF FUTURE RESEARCH As pointed out in the body of the document, future research is needed to provide information in areas that are still unclear or are in need of additional evidence to validate performance. The list of topics presented in this appendix has the purpose of providing a summary. Materials · Confirmation of normal (Gaussian) distribution repre-
senting the tensile strength of a population of FRP strengthening systems; · Methods of fireproofing FRP strengthening systems; · Behavior of FRP strengthened members under elevated temperatures; · Behavior of FRP strengthened members under cold temperatures; · Fire rating of concrete members reinforced with FRP bars; · Effect of different coefficients of thermal expansion between FRP systems and member substrates; · Creep-rupture behavior and endurance times of FRP systems; and · Strength and stiffness degradation of FRP systems in harsh environments. Flexure/axial force · Compression behavior of noncircular members wrapped with FRP systems; · Behavior of members strengthened with FRP systems oriented in the direction of the applied axial load; · Refinement of effective strain for flexure;

Table B1.1--Test methods for FRP-material systems

FRP form

Property

Test method

Tensile strength, strain elastic modulus

ISIS, ASTM D 3039

Sheet to sheet-adhesive shear

ISIS

Sheet to concrete-adhesive shear

ISIS

Sheet and Sheet to concrete-adhesive tension prepreg Coefficient of thermal expansion

ISIS ASTM D 696

Glass-transition temperature

ASTM D 4065

Surface hardness

ASTM D 2583, D 2240, D 3418

Hoop-ring strength

ISIS

Tensile strength, strain, elastic modulus

ISIS, ASTM D 3039

Flatstock to flatstock-adhesive shear

ISIS, ASTM D 3165, D 3528

Flatstock to concrete-adhesive shear Flat stock Flatstock to concrete-adhesive tension

ISIS ISIS

Coefficient of thermal expansion

ASTM D 696

Glass-transition temperature

ASTM D 4065

Surface hardness

ASTM D 2583, D 2240, D 3418

Tensile strength, strain, elastic modulus

ISIS, ASTM D 3039

Premolded
shell

Shell to shell-adhesive shear
Shell to concrete-adhesive shear Shell to concrete-adhesive tension

ISIS, ASTM D 3165, D 3528
ISIS
ISIS

Coefficient of thermal expansion

ASTM D 696

Glass-transition temperature

ASTM D 4065

· Effects of concrete strength on behavior of FRP strengthened members;
· Effects of lightweight concrete on behavior of FRP strengthened members;
· Behavior of flexural members with tension and compression FRP reinforcement;
· Maximum crack width and deflection prediction and control of concrete reinforced with FRP systems; and
· Long-term deflection behavior of concrete flexural members reinforced with FRP systems.
Shear · Concrete contribution to shear resistance of members
strengthened with FRP systems; · Effective strain of FRP systems that do not completely
wrap around the section; and · Use of FRP systems for punching shear reinforcement
in two-way systems. Detailing · Performance of FRP anchors. The design guide specifically indicated that test methods are needed to determine the following properties of FRP bars: · Bond characteristics and related bond-dependent
coefficients; · Creep-rupture and endurance times; · Fatigue characteristics; · Coefficient of thermal expansion; · Shear strength; and · Compressive strength.

