Measurements of Mouse Pulmonary Artery Biomechanics

Journal of Biomechanical Engineering

Naomi C. Chesler* Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI and Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT

John Thompson-Figueroa and Ken Millburne Department of Internal Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT

Background: Robust techniques for characterizing the biomechanical properties of mouse pulmonary arteries will permit exciting gene-level hypotheses regarding pulmonary vascular disease to be tested in genetically engineered animals. In this paper, we present the first measurements of the biomechanical properties of mouse pulmonary arteries. Method of Approach: In an isolated vessel perfusion system, transmural pressure, internal diameter and wall thickness were measured during inflation and deflation of mouse pulmonary arteries over low (5-40 mmHg) and high (10-120 mmHg) pressure ranges representing physiological pressures in the pulmonary and systemic circulations, respectively. Results: During inflation, circumferential stress versus strain showed the nonlinear "J"-shape typical of arteries. Hiidetz's incremental elastic modulus ranged from 27 ±13 kPa (n=7) during low-pressure inflation to 2,700 ±1,700 kP a (n=9) during high-pressure inflation. The low and high-pressure testing protocols yielded quantitatively indistinguishable stress-strain and modulus-strain results. Histology performed to assess the state of the tissue after mechanical testing showed intact medial and adventitial architecture with some loss of endothelium, suggesting that smooth muscle cell contractile strength could also be measured with these techniques. Conclusions: The measurement techniques described demonstrate the feasibility of quantifying mouse pulmonary artery biomechanical properties. Stress-strain behavior and incremental modulus values are presented for normal, healthy arteries over a wide pressure range. These techniques will be useful for investigations into biomechanical abnormalities in pulmonary vascular disease. [DOI: 10.1115/1.1695578]

* Corresponding author: Department of Biomedica! Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2146 Engineering Centers Building, 1550 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706-1609. Phone: 608 265-8920; Fax: 608 265-9239; e-mail: Chesler@engr.wisc.edu.
Contributed by the Bioengineering Division for publication in the JOURNAL OF BIOMECHANICAL ENGINEERING, Manuscript received by the Bioengineering Division May 27, 2003; revision received September 23, 2003. Associate Editor: M. S. Sacks.

/

copyright © 2004 by ASME

APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 / 309

Introduction
Primary pulmonary hypertension PPH is a rapidly progressing and deadly disease that induces substantial pulmonary vascular remodeling 1. Large and small pulmonary vessels exhibit thickening in all three layers of the blood vessel wall by both hypertrophy and hyperplasia of smooth muscle cells and by increased extracellular matrix protein deposition 2. These biological changes have a significant effect on tissue biomechanical properties. For example, Young's modulus and residual stresses in rat pulmonary arteries have been shown to change with hypoxiainduced pulmonary hypertension 3,4. Stress and strain distribution, compliance and impedance also have been estimated for the normal pulmonary vasculature of rats, cats, dogs, minipigs and newborn pigs 5≠9. However, there are no reported measurements of pulmonary artery biomechanical properties in mice.
Mice are useful models for studying diseases with known or suspected genetic defects since they are the only species for which genetically engineered mutants are widely available. For example, mice that have been genetically engineered to lack or over-express the gene for endothelial nitric oxide synthase are increasingly being used to study the effects of nitric oxide availability on the progression of hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension 10≠12. Furthermore, a genetic basis for many familial and sporadic cases of primary pulmonary hypertension has recently been discovered: heterozygous missense, nonsense and frameshift mutations in the bone morphogenetic protein type II receptor gene of the transforming growth factor beta cell-signaling superfamily 13,14. Thus, the technical challenges of using such small animals for investigating pulmonary vascular remodeling are superseded by the exciting potential to explore molecular-level mechanisms in disease processes with genetically-engineered mice.
The goal of this study was to measure normal mouse pulmonary artery biomechanical properties in order to validate methods that could be applied to the pulmonary arteries of genetically engineered animals. Isolated vessel experiments were chosen for several reasons. First, this method allows good control of the mechanical environment, including transmural pressure, axial strain and vessel curvature. Also, since the vessel is isolated from its natural surroundings, the mechanical effects of tethering, which vary with vessel size and bifurcation level in the pulmonary vascular tree, can be neglected. Second, it allows excellent control of the biochemical environment, including pH, O2 , CO2 , temperature, and the absence of immunological or hormonal factors that could affect smooth muscle contraction or vascular tone. Finally, in arteries as small as the mouse pulmonary, the vessel inner diameter ID can be measured optically by transillumination. This well-described technique has led to many significant contributions in the field of resistance vessel physiology for example, see 15≠18.
Materials and Methods
Left main pulmonary arteries were isolated from young age: 7 weeks C57BL6 mice after euthanasia as approved by the University of Vermont and University of Wisconsin Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees. The aorta, pulmonary veins, trachea, main bronchi and connective tissue were carefully removed after identification by specific anatomic location and morphology. The left pulmonary artery was then excised and mounted in an arteriograph chamber Living Systems Instrumentation LSI. The arteriograph chamber consists of a bath for superfusion and a set of proximal and distal glass microcannulas (tip400 m) on which the artery is mounted and secured with single strands of nylon suture (diameter10 m). Thus mounted, vessels were perfused gently with Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium DMEM, Sigma Chemical Co. through the proximal microcannula driven by a multi-roller pump. Pressure transducers were situated immediately up- and downstream of the vessel (Pup and Pdown , respectively. An upstream in-line pressure servomechanism LSI continually adjusted the computed average transmural pressure (Pave

Fig. 1 Isolated mouse pulmonary artery sutured to glass microcannulas, pre-stretched and pressurized to 5 mmHg. The interrupted white line is the VDA scan-line, which shows the axial position of measurements. The short sections of the scan-line that overlap the vessel wall boundaries are the LWT and RWT measured by analog edge detection. ID is the distance between the inner boundaries of the detected walls ,,shown in yellow.... Scale bar shows 400 m.



1 2

(

Pup

Pdown)

)

via

computer

control

LabView,

National

Instru-

ments. The distal microcannula was then closed off to flow and a

static transmural pressure was applied to the vessels as previously

described for rat middle cerebral arteries 19.

The vessel was visualized through transillumination on an in-

verted microscope CX40, Olympus with a 10x objective.

Through a trinocular observation tube with a 1.5x lens, the image

was digitized in real time with a digital camera C2020, Olym-

pus. A video dimensional analyzer VDA, LSI electronically de-

termined the ID and left and right wall thicknesses LWT and

RWT, respectively. Vessel dimensions were measured by the

video scan line, which detects the optical contrast of the vessel

wall and generates a voltage ramp within the VDA, the amplitude

of which is proportional to length. A sample image with white

scan line is shown in Fig. 1 for a vessel at 10 mmHg. The preci-

sion of the VDA is approximately 2.0 m for this optical path

after appropriate calibration. Inaccuracies can result from the ar-

tery centerline moving out of the plane of focus or loose connec-

tive tissue obscuring the edges of the vessel. The output of the

VDA and up- and downstream pressure sensors were sent to a

portable data acquisition computer Latitude C800, Dell.

Two experimental protocols were used to measure tissue me-

chanical properties using a step history to approximate a constant

load rate, as in 20. These were low-pressure cyclic inflation and

deflation (n7) and high-pressure cyclic inflation and deflation

(n9) as detailed below. In particular, three of the vessels were

subjected to the low-pressure protocol only, four were subjected to

the low- and then the high-pressure protocol, and five were sub-

jected to the high-pressure protocol only. No differences were

observed between those vessels that were subjected to both the

low and high-pressure protocols and those that were subjected to

one only; thus, the data were grouped. In all cases, vessels were

first slowly inflated to 40 mmHg at approx. 10 mmHg/s and

pre-stretched so that no axial bending occurred at 40 mmHg. Typi-

cally, the amount of pre-stretch imposed was 50 to 100 m, or

310 ’ Vol. 126, APRIL 2004

Transactions of the ASME

m were cut at 20∞C on a cryostat Richard-Allan Scientific
and stained with hematoxylin and eosin Sigma Chemical Co.. Sections were imaged on an inverted microscope TE-2000, Nikon and captured using a spot camera and software for image capture and analysis MetaVue, Optical Analysis Systems.

Fig. 2 Representative raw data for OD and Pave versus time during the second cycle of the low pressure cyclic inflation’ deflation protocol. Note occasional pressure over’undershoots during step changes, and some creep and creep recovery during inflation and deflation, respectively.
2.5% to 5%. Then, vessels were deflated and preconditioned with at least two cycles of low-pressure inflation and deflation identical to the low-pressure cyclic testing protocol. Tissue deformation in response to low-pressure inflation was consistent after the first cycle in general.
The peak pressure for the low-pressure protocol was chosen based on hypoxia-induced hypertensive pulmonary artery pressures in mice. The normal mean pulmonary artery pressure in C57BL6 wild type mice 20≠30 g is approximately 16 mmHg with peak systolic pressure up to 30 mmHg 21. In response to hypoxia-induced hypertension, peak systolic pressure is 45 mmHg in the pulmonary circulation 10. During low-pressure cyclic testing, average transmural pressure was stepped by 5 mmHg increments from 5 to 40 mmHg and then back down to 5 mmHg by 5 mmHg decrements five times in sequence, with each pressure held for 30 s one minute at 40 mmHg. Five mmHg was chosen as the baseline pressure for this protocol since this was the lowest pressure at which vessels consistently did not collapse. Previous experiments on rat middle cerebral arteries were able to use baseline pressures closer to 0 mmHg 19; however, the pulmonary arteries are relatively more thin-walled and thus more collapsible than cerebral arteries. The peak pressure for the high-pressure protocol was chosen based on normal systemic pressures in mice peak systolic pressure is 120 mmHg 21. During high-pressure inflation, pressure was incremented by 10 mmHg from 10 to 120 mmHg and decremented to 10 mmHg, with each pressure level held for one minute two minutes at 120 mmHg. Axial bending was occasionally observed at the highest pressures.
Pup, Pdown and average transmural pressure (Pave), ID, LWT and RWT were sampled at 1 Hz and recorded continuously. Outer diameter OD was calculated as the sum of ID, LWT and RWT. Representative data for OD and Pave during the second cycle of the low-pressure cyclic protocol are shown in Fig. 2. To compute static tissue behavior, data points collected midway through the constant-pressure step were used to control for the effects of the occasional pressure overshoot during the step increase and any viscoelastic effects. That is, for the low-pressure protocol, points were taken 15 s after the step change in pressure, and for the high-pressure protocol, points were taken 30 s after the step. Preliminary results demonstrated that with these protocols hysteresis was minimal between inflation and deflation, and no significant plastic deformation was evident.
After testing, mouse pulmonary arteries were preserved for histology to assess the state of the tissue after mechanical testing. Tissue was slow frozen in tissue freezing medium surrounded by 2-methyl butane cooled by liquid nitrogen. Thin sections 5≠10

Calculations

The Cauchy stress in the circumferential direction was calculated at the inner wall using:





Pave OD2ID2 OD2  ID2



(1)

22 and the Almansi circumferential strain for large deformations

using:

 1 1

e2

1





2 

(2)

23 where the circumferential stretch ratio is  ID/ ID0 at the inner wall and ID0 is the inner diameter at the baseline pressure. This approach is incrementally nonlinear in the sense that
nonlinear effects due to large deformations are included and the
material is only assumed to have a constant elastic modulus be-
tween states of incremental deformation. An incremental elastic modulus developed by Hudetz 24 for
arteries subjected to step changes in pressure at fixed length,
which also assumes globally nonlinear, but incrementally linear
behavior between adjacent states of deformation, was calculated
using:

Einc

 Pave  ID

2ID OD2 OD2  ID2



2 PaveOD2 OD2  ID2

(3)

24,25 where P is an incremental change in average transmural pressure, ID is the corresponding change in internal diameter,
and ID, OD and Pave are taken at the beginning of the increment. This incremental elastic modulus calculation further assumes the
wall material is orthotropic, incompressible and homogeneous. In the absence of reliable residual stress opening angle and longi-
tudinal force data, parameters for a fully three-dimensional model of tissue mechanics such as have been suggested in the literature and concisely reviewed in 26 were not estimated.

Results
Pulmonary artery arterial diameter increased and decreased sig-
moidally in response to increasing and decreasing transmural pressures for the low-pressure cycles Fig. 3a. At the initial pressure of 5 mmHg, the OD was 62839 m and ID/WT was 7 4. At the highest pressure of 40 mmHg, the vessels dilated to 118358 m OD with ID/WT equal to 235. In response to increasing and decreasing transmural pressures for the high-
pressure cycles, the diameter increased and decreased roughly logarithmically Fig. 3b. At the initial pressure of 10 mmHg, the average OD was 63850 m and ID/WT was 74; at the highest pressure of 120 mmHg, the vessels dilated to 125873 m with ID/WT equal to 308.
The stress-strain behavior of the arteries in both pressure groups showed the ``J''-shape typical of arteries Fig. 4a. Einc also increased with increasing strain with a ``J''-shape during inflation in both pressure groups Fig. 4b. For both calculations, the low- and high-pressure testing protocols yielded quantitatively in-
distinguishable results where the strain values overlapped.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed some intact endothelial
cells and many medial smooth muscle and adventitial fibroblast cells in a representative mechanically tested artery Fig. 5.

Discussion
Synchronous pressure-diameter measurements in an isolated vessel perfusion system were used to quantify the biomechanical properties of normal, healthy mouse pulmonary arteries. Diameter

Journal of Biomechanical Engineering

APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 ’ 311

Fig. 3 Outer diameter versus pressure for ,,a... low and ,,b... high pressure inflation ,,gray boxes... and deflation ,,open triangles... of isolated left main pulmonary arteries. Values are mean ¡SD ,,¿SD for inflation, øSD for deflation....

Fig. 4 ,,a... Cauchy stress and ,,b... Hudetz's incremental elastic modulus versus Almansi strain during inflation for low pressure ,,gray boxes... and high pressure ,,black boxes... testing protocols. Values are mean ¡SD, with Einc values on a log scale.

change as a function pressure was sigmoidal in shape, as has been observed in other vessel types 20,27≠29. Langewouters and coauthors, in particular, used a three-parameter arctangent function
to describe the outer cross-sectional area change of human aorta
subjected to an inflation and deflation protocol similar to ours 20. We used this arctangent function to model our pressurediameter data and obtained comparable parameter values for the low and high-pressure groups with good degrees of fit data not shown.
Stress-strain behavior and the incremental modulus with respect
to strain were calculated to characterize the mouse pulmonary artery elastic behavior. Einc values ranged from 2713 kPa during low-pressure inflation to 2,7001,700 kPa during high-pressure inflation. These data fall well within the range of Einc values reported in the literature for other vessel types 24,25,30≠33. In particular, in rat middle cerebral arteries with experimental and
analytical methods identical to those used here, Einc increased from 25 to 3,667 kPa with increasing pressure from 5 to 150 mmHg 25. The shapes of the stress-strain and Einc-strain relationships are consistent with a two component model of the artery
where the low modulus properties of elastin dominate at low
stretch and high modulus recruited collagen fibers dominate at
high stretch. The pattern of variation of Einc with strain or pressure may be a useful indicator of vessel structural composition, and may change significantly with vascular remodeling 32.
Histology on a representative mouse pulmonary artery demon-
strated intact medial and adventitial cells and architecture with
some endothelial cell stripping. Endothelial cells are not expected
to contribute significantly to arterial mechanical properties, but
their absence suggests that assays for vessel reactivity that rely on
an intact endothelium should not be pursued. In contrast, the

collagen-rich adventitia is expected to contribute to tissue mechanical properties. Indeed, the relatively equal sizes of the media and adventitia support our conjecture above that collagen plays a significant role in pulmonary artery biomechanical properties. The presence of ample smooth muscle cells suggests that contractile strength could be measured with the techniques presented here by adding to the bath vasoconstrictors such as norepinephrine and potassium chloride, or vasodilators such as sodium nitroprusside and papaverine, as described with other vessel types 25.
Limitations of the isolated vessel technique with mouse pulmonary arteries include experimental error in the transillumination measurements, in particular LWT and RWT. At the highest pressures, the wall thicknesses are small but have sharp contrast with the surrounding fluid. As the pressure decreases, the walls thicken and lose the sharply defined contrast that is easily detectable optically. Our data from the low high-pressure testing protocol diverge on average 20% 15% from the incompressible, constant axial length assumption. A solution to this problem suggested by Faury et al. is to measure the wall thickness optically at the highest pressure and then compute average wall thickness at lower pressures based on conservation of wall cross-sectional area that is, assuming incompressibility and no axial strain 34. The assumption of zero axial strain is reasonable since the total sutureto-suture vessel length is fixed suture slippage would catastrophically end the experiment, but some changes in the distribution of axial strain may occur. The absence of a local axial strain measurement is another limitation of this study. Differences in axial strain between normal and transgenic mice may be an important measure of the functional effects of the transgene in the vasculature.

312 ’ Vol. 126, APRIL 2004

Transactions of the ASME

Fig. 5 Representative mouse pulmonary artery in crosssection stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Intact medial smooth muscle cells ,,SMC... and adventitial cells are visible; a few intact endothelial cells ,,EC... are visible.
Also, we were not able to measure pulmonary artery length in vivo and so were not able to mount the vessels at their in vivo length. However, with arteries mounted in the system as described above, we performed low-pressure cyclic inflation/deflation testing at three levels of axial extension 20, 40 and 60 m, representing approximately 2% to 6% axial stretch past the prestretched length and did not see differences in deformation data not shown. Stretch ratios on the order 1.4 to 1.7, as suggested by Huang et al. 4 for pulmonary arterial segments from rats, resulted in the vessel detaching from the microcannulas. If the vessels are understretched axially as compared to the in vivo condition, the measured deformations most likely overestimate, and incremental moduli underestimate, the in vivo response. Finally, given the small aspect ratio length/width of these vessels when cannulated see Fig. 1, and especially when pressurized, end effects may have influenced the measured properties. At the highest pressures tested, the aspect ratio fell as low as 1.5 in some cases.
In these experiments, we have measured the biomechanical properties of isolated mouse pulmonary arteries and described their behavior over a wide pressure range. The techniques to quantify stress-strain and modulus-strain relationships described here serve as a basis for experiments to quantify the biomechanical aspects of pulmonary vascular remodeling in mice. In the future, these methods could be applied to the pulmonary vasculature of genetically-engineered mice to investigate gene-level molecular mechanisms in pulmonary vascular remodeling, which may be applicable to pulmonary vascular disease in humans.
Acknowledgments
Funding support from NIH COBRE grant P20RR15557 is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also wish to thank Daniel Sidney, Ray Vanderby, Rod Lakes and Ryan Kobs for helpful discussions.
References
1 Gaine, S. P., and Rubin, L. J., 1998, ``Primary Pulmonary Hypertension Published Erratum Appears in Lancet 1999 Jan 2;3539146:74,'' Lancet, 3529129, p. 719≠25.
2 Jeffery, T. K., and Wanstall, J. C., 2001, ``Pulmonary Vascular Remodeling: A Target for Therapeutic Intervention in Pulmonary Hypertension,'' Pharmacological Therapies, 921, p. 1≠20.
3 Huang, W., Sher, Y. P., Delgado-West, D., Wu, J. T., Peck, K., and Fung, Y. C., 2001, ``Tissue Remodeling of Rat Pulmonary Artery in Hypoxic Breathing. I.

Changes of Morphology, Zero-Stress State, and Gene Expression,'' Ann. Biomed. Eng., 297, p. 535≠51. 4 Huang, W., Delgado-West, D., Wu, J. T., and Fung, Y. C., 2001, ``Tissue Remodeling of Rat Pulmonary Artery in Hypoxic Breathing. II. Course of Change of Mechanical Properties,'' Ann. Biomed. Eng., 297, p. 552≠ 62. 5 Chen, E. P., Bittner, H. B., Craig, D. M., Davis, Jr., R. D., and Van Trigt, 3rd, P., 1997, ``Pulmonary Hemodynamics and Blood Flow Characteristics in Chronic Pulmonary Hypertension,'' Ann. Thorac. Surg., 633, p. 806 ≠13. 6 Domkowski, P. W., Messier, Jr., R. H., Cockerham, J. T., Kot, P. A., Diodato, L. H., and Hopkins, R. A., 2001, ``Relationship of Hydraulic Impedance and
Elasticity in the Pulmonary Artery of Maturing Newborn Pigs,'' J. Surg. Res., 1001, p. 116 ≠26. 7 Segers, P., Brimioulle, S., Stergiopulos, N., Westerhof, N., Naeije, R., Maggiorini, M., and Verdonck, P., 1999, ``Pulmonary Arterial Compliance in Dogs
and Pigs: The Three-Element Windkessel Model Revisited,'' Am. J. Physiol., 2772 Pt 2, p. H725≠31. 8 Yen, R. T., Fung, Y. C., and Bingham, N., 1980, ``Elasticity of Small Pulmonary Arteries in the Cat,'' J. Biomech. Eng., 1022, p. 170≠7. 9 Zhao, J., Day, J., Yuan, Z. F., and Gregersen, H., 2002, ``Regional Arterial Stress-Strain Distributions Referenced to the Zero-Stress State in the Rat,'' American Journal of Physiology-Heart & Circulatory Physiology, 2822, p. H622≠9. 10 Fagan, K. A., Fouty, B. W., Tyler, R. C., Morris, Jr., K. G., Hepler, L. K., Sato, K., LeCras, T. D., Abman, S. H., Weinberger, H. D., Huang, P. L., McMurtry,
I. F., and Rodman, D. M., 1999, ``The Pulmonary Circulation of Homozygous
or Heterozygous eNOS-Null Mice Is Hyperresponsive to Mild Hypoxia,'' J. Clin. Invest., 1032, p. 291≠9. 11 Fagan, K. A., Tyler, R. C., Sato, K., Fouty, B. W., Morris, Jr., K. G., Huang, P. L., McMurtry, I. F., and Rodman, D. M., 1999, ``Relative Contributions of
Endothelial, Inducible, and Neuronal NOS to Tone in the Murine Pulmonary Circulation,'' Am. J. Physiol., 2773 Pt 1, p. L472≠ 8. 12 Yamashita, T., Kawashima, S., Ohashi, Y., Ozaki, M., Rikitake, Y., Inoue, N., Hirata, K., Akita, H., and Yokoyama, M., 2000, ``Mechanisms of Reduced
Nitric Oxide/cGMP-Mediated Vasorelaxation in Transgenic Mice Overexpressing Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase,'' Hypertension, 361, p. 97≠102. 13 Thomson, J. R., Machado, R. D., Pauciulo, M. W., Morgan, N. V., Humbert, M., Elliott, G. C., Ward, K., Yacoub, M., Mikhail, G., Rogers, P., Newman, J.,
Wheeler, L., Higenbottam, T., Gibbs, J. S., Egan, J., Crozier, A., Peacock, A.,
Allcock, R., Corris, P., Loyd, J. E., Trembath, R. C., and Nichols, W. C., 2000,
``Sporadic Primary Pulmonary Hypertension Is Associated with Germline Mu-
tations of the Gene Encoding BMPR-II, a Receptor Member of the TGF-beta Family,'' J. Med. Genet., 3710, p. 741≠5. 14 Machado, R. D., Pauciulo, M. W., Thomson, J. R., Lane, K. B., Morgan, N. V., Wheeler, L., Phillips, 3rd, J. A., Newman, J., Williams, D., Galie, N., Manes,
A., McNeil, K., Yacoub, M., Mikhail, G., Rogers, P., Corris, P., Humbert, M.,
Donnai, D., Martensson, G., Tranebjaerg, L., Loyd, J. E., Trembath, R. C., and
Nichols, W. C., 2001, ``BMPR2 Haploinsufficiency as the Inherited Molecular
Mechanism for Primary Pulmonary Hypertension,'' Am. J. Hum. Genet., 681, p. 92≠102. 15 Mulvany, M. J., and Halpern, W., 1977, ``Contractile Properties of Small Arterial Resistance Vessels in Spontaneously Hypertensive and Normotensive Rats,'' Circ. Res., 411, p. 19≠26. 16 Warshaw, D. M., Mulvany, M. J., and Halpern, W., 1979, ``Mechanical and Morphological Properties of Arterial Resistance Vessels in Young and Old Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats,'' Circ. Res., 452, p. 250≠9. 17 Cipolla, M. J., Harker, C. T., and Porter, J. M., 1996, ``Endothelial Function and Adrenergic Reactivity in Human Type-II Diabetic Resistance Arteries,'' J. Vasc. Surg., 235, p. 940≠9. 18 Mandala, M., Gokina, N., and Osol, G., 2002, ``Contribution of Nonendothelial Nitric Oxide to Altered Rat Uterine Resistance Artery Serotonin Reactivity During Pregnancy,'' Am. J. Med. Electron., 1872, p. 463≠ 8. 19 Coulson, R. J., Cipolla, M. J., Vitullo, L., and Chesler, N. C., 2004, ``Mechanical Properties of Rat Middle Cerebral Arteries NOS 3 With and Without Myogenic Tone,'' J. Biomech. Eng. 1261, p. 76 ≠ 81. 20 Langewouters, G. J., Wesseling, K. H., and Goedhard, W. J., 1984, ``The Static Elastic Properties of 45 Human Thoracic and 20 Abdominal Aortas in Vitro and the Parameters of a New Model,'' J. Biomech., 176, p. 425≠35. 21 Steudel, W., Ichinose, F., Huang, P. L., Hurford, W. E., Jones, R. C., Bevan, J. A., Fishman, M. C., and Zapol, W. M., 1997, ``Pulmonary Vasoconstriction
and Hypertension in Mice with Targeted Disruption of the Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase NOS 3 Gene,'' Circ. Res., 811, p. 34 ≠ 41. 22 Timoshenko, S., 1934, Theory of Elasticity. First ed. 1934, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. 23 Fung, Y. C., 1990, Biomechanics: Motion, Flow, Stress and Growth. 1990, New York City: Springer-Verlag New York Inc. 24 Hudetz, A. G., 1979, ``Incremental Elastic Modulus for Orthotropic Incompressible Arteries,'' J. Biomech., 129, p. 651≠5. 25 |Coulson, R. J., Chesler, N. C., Vitullo, L., and Cipolla, M. J., 2002, ``Effects of Ischemia and Myogenic Activity on Active and Passive Mechanical Prop-
erties of Rat Cerebral Arteries,'' American Journal of Physiololgy: Heart and Circulation Physiolology, 2836, p. H2268 ≠75. 26 Humphrey, J. D., 1999, ``An Evaluation of Pseudoelastic Descriptors Used in Arterial Mechanics,'' J. Biomech. Eng., 1212, p. 259≠ 62. 27 Kornet, L., Jansen, J. R., Nijenhuis, F. C., Langewouters, G. J., and Versprille, A., 1998, ``The Compliance of the Porcine Pulmonary Artery Depends on Pressure and Heart Rate,'' J. Physiol. London, 512Pt 3, p. 917≠26. 28 Caputo, L., Tedgui, A., Poitevin, P., and Levy, B. I., 1992, ``In Vitro Assess-

Journal of Biomechanical Engineering

APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 ’ 313

ment of Diameter-Pressure Relationship in Carotid Arteries from Normotensive and Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats," J. Hypertens. Suppl., 10(6), p. S27-30. [29] Stefanadis, C., Demellis, J., Tsiamis, E., Diamantopoulos, L., Michaelides, A., and Toutouzas, P., 2000, "Assessment of Aortic Line of Elasticity Using Polynomial Regression Analysis," Circulation, 101(15), p. 1819-25. [30] Hayashi, K., Handa, H., Nagasawa, S., Okumura, A., and Moritake, K., 1980, "Stirfness and Elastic Behavior of Human Intracranial and Extracranial Arteries," J. Biomech., 13(2), p. 175-84. [31] Bank, A. J., Wang, H., Holte, J. E., Mullen, K., Shaimnas, R., and Kubo, S. H., 1996, "Contribution of Collagen, Elastin, and Smooth Muscle to in Vivo Human Brachial Artery Wall Stress and Elastic Modulus," Circulation, 94(12), p. 3263-70. [32] Zulliger, M. A., Montorzi, G., and Stergiopulos, N., 2002, "Biomechamcal Adaptation of Porcine Carotid Vascular Smooth Muscle to Hypo and Hypertension in Vitro," J. Biomech., 35(6), p. 757-65. [33] Hayashi, K., Takamizawa, K., Nakamura, T, Kato, T., and Tsushima, N., 1987, "Effects of Elastase on the StifTness and Elastic Properties of Arterial Walls in Cholesterol-Fed Rabbits," Atherosclerosis, 66(3), p. 259-67. [34] Faury, G., Maher, G. M., Li, D. Y., Keating, M. T., Mecham, R. P., and Boyle, W. A., 1999, "Relation between Outer and Luminal Diameter in Cannulated Arteries," Am. J. Physiol., 277(5 Pt 2), p. H1745-53.

314 / Vol. 126, APRIL 2004

Copyright © 2004 by ASME

Transactions of the ASME

