Textbook of Gastroenterology

Companion CD-ROM
A companion CD-ROM is included on the inside front cover of Volume 1. The CD contains: · All chapters from both volumes of this book · A full-text search feature · A print function The CD is suitable for both PC and Mac.

Textbook of Gastroenterology
EDITED BY
Tadataka Yamada, MD
President, Global Health Program Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Seattle, Washington; Adjunct Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
ASSOCIATE EDITORS
David H. Alpers, MD
William B. Kountz Professor of Medicine Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Anthony N. Kalloo, MD
Professor of Medicine Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; Director, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Johns Hopkins Hospital Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Neil Kaplowitz, MD
Thomas H. Brem Chair, Professor of Medicine, Chief Division of Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases Director, Liver Disease Research Center Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA
Chung Owyang, MD
Professor of Internal Medicine H. Marvin Pollard Collegiate Professor and Chief Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Don W. Powell, MD
The Bassel and Frances Blanton Distinguished Professor of Internal Medicine Professor, Neuroscience and Cell Biology Program Director, General Clinical Research Center Director, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, Texas, USA
Fifth Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition first published 2009, © 2009 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Textbook of gastroenterology / edited by Tadataka Yamada ; associate editors, David H. Alpers . . . [et al.]. -- 5th ed.
p. ; cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0 1. Gastroenterology. 2. Gastrointestinal system--Diseases. I. Yamada, Tadataka. [DNLM: 1. Gastrointestinal Diseases. WI 140 T3551 2009] RC801.T496 2009 616.3'3--dc22
2008015531
ISBN: 978-1-4051-6911-0
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 9/12pt Meridien/Frutiger by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong Printed in Singapore by Fabulous Printers Pte Ltd
1 2009

Contents

Contributors, x Preface, xxi
VOLUME 1
Part 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function
A Components
1 Integrative responses of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal, 3 Stephen J. Pandol, Helen E. Raybould, Hal F. Yee Jr
2 The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections, 15 John B. Furness, Trung V. Nguyen, Kulmira Nurgali, Yasutake Shimizu
3 Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract, 40 John B. Furness
4 Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors, 56 Laurence J. Miller
5 The brain­gut axis, 86 Graham J. Dockray
6 Smooth muscle of the gut, 103 Gabriel M. Makhlouf, Karnam S. Murthy
7 The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation, 133 Fabio Cominelli, Kristen O. Arseneau, Richard S. Blumberg, William F. Stenson, Theresa T. Pizarro
8 Epithelia: biological principles of organization, 169 Jerrold R. Turner, James L. Madara
B Motility
9 Esophageal motor function, 187 Peter J. Kahrilas, John E. Pandolfino
10 The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying, 207 William L. Hasler

11 Motility of the small intestine and colon, 231 William L. Hasler
12 Motility of the biliary tract, 264 Gary M. Mawe, Peter L. Moses, Gino T.P. Saccone, Maria J. Pozo
C Secretion and absorption
13 Gastric secretion, 284 John Del Valle, Andrea Todisco
14 Electrolyte secretion and absorption: small intestine and colon, 330 Stephen J. Keely, Marshall H. Montrose, Kim E. Barrett
15 Pancreatic secretion, 368 Chung Owyang, John A. Williams
16 Bile secretion and cholestasis, 401 Steven A. Weinman, Sajid Jalil
D Nutrition
17 Carbohydrate assimilation, 429 Eric Sibley
18 Intestinal lipid absorption, 445 William Sun, Chun-Min Lo, Patrick Tso
19 Protein digestion and assimilation, 464 Vadivel Ganapathy, Malliga E. Ganapathy, Frederick H. Leibach
20 Vitamins and minerals, 478 Charles H. Halsted, Mark A. Levine, Bo L. Lönnerdal, Robert B. Rucker
21 General nutritional principles, 508 David H. Alpers, Beth Taylor, Samuel Klein
E Miscellaneous
22 Gastrointestinal blood flow, 540 Philip T. Nowicki, D. Neil Granger
23 Development of the gastrointestinal system, 567 Ben Z. Stanger, Daniel K. Podolsky

v

Contents

24 Neoplasia of the gastrointestinal tract, 603 Barbara H. Jung, C. Richard Boland, John M. Carethers
25 The human intestinal microbiota and microbiome, 635 Ruth E. Ley, Jeffrey I. Gordon
26 Drug metabolism and transport in the liver and intestine, 645 Paul B. Watkins
27 Pathogenesis of hepatic fibrosis, 658 Ramón Bataller, David A. Brenner
28 Hepatic regeneration, 680 George K. Michalopoulos, Marie C. DeFrances
29 Molecular biological approaches to the diagnosis and treatment of gastrointestinal diseases, 703 David A. Brenner, Robert Schwabe, Christoph Oesterreicher
Part 2 Gastrointestinal diseases
A Esophagus
30 Esophagus: anatomy and developmental and structural anomalies, 719 Ikuo Hirano
31 Motility disorders of the esophagus, 740 Peter J. Kahrilas, John E. Pandolfino
32 Gastroesophageal reflux disease, 772 Joel E. Richter
33 Eosinophilic esophagitis, 802 Marc E. Rothenberg, Glenn T. Furuta
34 Esophageal infections and disorders associated with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, 813 C. Mel Wilcox
35 Barrett esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma, 826 Stuart Jon Spechler, Rhonda F. Souza
36 Esophageal neoplasms, 849 Weijing Sun, Anil K. Rustgi
37 Miscellaneous diseases of the esophagus: foreign bodies, physical injury, and systemic and dermatological diseases, 871 Evan S. Dellon, Nicholas J. Shaheen
B Stomach
38 Stomach and duodenum: anatomy and structural anomalies, 889 Jean-Pierre Raufman, Eric Goldberg
39 Disorders of gastric emptying, 903 Henry P. Parkman, Frank K. Friedenberg, Robert S. Fisher

40 Peptic ulcer disease, 936 Andrew H. Soll, David Y. Graham
41 Zollinger­Ellison syndrome, 982 John Del Valle
42 Gastritis and gastropathy, 1005 Mary Kay Washington, Richard M. Peek Jr
43 Tumors of the stomach, 1026 Wai K. Leung, Enders K.W. Ng, Joseph J.Y. Sung
44 Surgery for peptic ulcer disease and postgastrectomy syndromes, 1054 Robert E. Glasgow, Sean J. Mulvihill
45 Miscellaneous diseases of the stomach, 1071 John C. Rabine, Timothy T. Nostrant
C Small intestine
46 Small intestine: anatomy and structural anomalies, 1085 Deborah C. Rubin
47 Dysmotility of the small intestine and colon, 1108 Michael Camilleri, Lawrence Szarka
48 Bacterial, viral, and toxic causes of diarrhea, gastroenteritis, and anorectal infections, 1157 Phillip I. Tarr, Dorsey M. Bass, Gail A. Hecht
49 Chronic infections of the small intestine, 1225 George T. Fantry, Lori E. Fantry, Stephen P. James
50 Celiac disease, 1245 Peter H.R. Green, Anne R. Lee
51 Disorders of epithelial transport in the small intestine, 1259 Martín G. Martín, Ernest M. Wright
52 Bacterial overgrowth, 1284 Philip M. Sherman, Karen L. Madsen
53 Short bowel syndrome, 1295 Richard N. Fedorak, Lana Bistritz
54 Tumors of the small intestine, 1322 Robert S. Bresalier, Sharmila Anandasabapathy
55 Miscellaneous diseases of the small intestine, 1343 Marc S. Levin, C. Prakash Gyawali
D Colon (for colonic infections see Chapter 48)
56 Colon: anatomy and structural anomalies, 1369 Steven M. Cohn, Elisa H. Birnbaum, Charles M. Friel
57 Inflammatory bowel disease, 1386 William F. Stenson, Stephen B. Hanauer, Russell D. Cohen

vi

Contents

58 Surgical treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, 1473 Emily Finlayson, Fabrizio Michelassi
59 Miscellaneous inflammatory and structural disorders of the colon, 1507 Meredythe A. McNally, Thomas C. Smyrk, William J. Tremaine
60 Irritable bowel syndrome, 1536 Chung Owyang
61 Diverticular disease of the colon, 1574 Tonia M. Young-Fadok, Michael G. Sarr
62 Colorectal cancer screening, 1598 Graeme P. Young, James E. Allison
63 Neoplastic and nonneoplastic polyps of the colon and rectum, 1611 Finlay A. Macrae, Graeme P. Young
64 Polyposis syndromes, 1640 Randall W. Burt, Russell F. Jacoby
65 Malignant tumors of the colon, 1669 Francis M. Giardiello, Stanley R. Hamilton
66 Anorectal diseases, 1717 Adil E. Bharucha, Arnold Wald
Index
VOLUME 2
E Pancreas
67 Pancreas: anatomy and structural anomalies, 1745 David G. Heidt, Michael W. Mulholland, Diane M. Simeone
68 Acute pancreatitis, 1761 Mark Topazian, Stephen J. Pandol
69 Chronic pancreatitis, 1811 Chung Owyang, Matthew J. DiMagno
70 Nonendocrine tumors of the pancreas, 1853 James J. Farrell, Howard A. Reber
71 Endocrine neoplasms of the pancreas, 1875 Robert T. Jensen
72 Hereditary diseases of the pancreas, 1921 Jonathan A. Cohn
F Gallbladder and biliary tract
73 Gallbladder and biliary tract: anatomy and structural anomalies, 1940 Theodore H. Welling, Diane M. Simeone
74 Gallstones, 1952 Cynthia W. Ko, Sum P. Lee
75 Primary sclerosing cholangitis and other cholangiopathies, 1978 Kymberly D.S. Watt, Jayant A. Talwalkar, Russell H. Wiesner

76 Cystic diseases of the liver and biliary tract, 2009 Jung W. Suh, Albert J. Chang, Shelly C. Lu
77 Tumors of the biliary tract, 2022 Christopher J. Smolock, Jeffrey A. Drebin
78 Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (postcholecystectomy syndrome), 2043 John O. Clarke, Anthony N. Kalloo
G Liver
79 Liver: anatomy, microscopic structure, and cell types, 2057 Gary C. Kanel
80 Acute viral hepatitis, 2073 Marc G. Ghany, T. Jake Liang
81 Chronic hepatitis B viral infection, 2112 Robert G. Gish, Stephen Locarnini
82 Hepatitis C virus infection, 2139 Aijaz Ahmed, Emmet B. Keeffe
83 Drug-induced liver disease, 2167 William M. Lee, Emmanuel Seremba
84 Autoimmune hepatitis, 2184 E. Jenny Heathcote
85 Primary biliary cirrhosis, 2193 Marlyn J. Mayo, Dwain L. Thiele
86 Hemochromatosis, 2211 Jacob Alexander, Kris V. Kowdley
87 Metabolic diseases of the liver, 2223 Ronald J. Sokol
88 Alcoholic liver diseases, 2247 Suthat Liangpunsakul, David W. Crabb
89 Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 2274 Arun J. Sanyal
90 Ascites and its complications, 2302 Guadalupe Garcia-Tsao
91 Central nervous system and pulmonary complications of end-stage liver disease, 2327 Javier Vaquero, Andres T. Blei, Roger F. Butterworth
92 Liver transplantation, 2352 Francis Y.K. Yao, Sandy Feng, Nathan M. Bass
93 Hepatocellular carcinoma, 2386 Lewis R. Roberts, Gregory J. Gores
94 Liver abscess, 2412 David S. Raiford
95 Vascular diseases of the liver, 2418 Laurie D. DeLeve

vii

Contents

96 Experimental therapies: hepatocyte transplantation, gene therapy, and liver assist devices, 2432 Jayanta Roy-Chowdhury, Namita Roy-Chowdhury, Simon P. Horslen, Ira J. Fox
97 Liver biopsy and histopathological diagnosis, 2449 Sugantha Govindarajan, Maurizio Bonacini
H Abdominal cavity
98 Abdominal cavity: anatomy, structural anomalies, and hernias, 2480 Sareh Parangi, Richard A. Hodin
99 Intraabdominal abscesses and fistulae, 2494 Paul Knechtges, Ellen M. Zimmermann
100 Diseases of the peritoneum, retroperitoneum, mesentery, and omentum, 2505 Shawn D. Larson, B. Mark Evers
I Miscellaneous
101 Nutritional supplementation, 2525 David H. Alpers, Beth Taylor, Samuel Klein
102 Obesity, 2561 Louis A. Chaptini, Steven R. Peikin
103 Eating disorders, 2574 Henry C. Lin, Eric E. Stone
104 Complications of AIDS and other immunodeficiency states, 2588 Phillip D. Smith, Edward N. Janoff
105 Gastrointestinal manifestations of immunological disorders, 2612 Fergus Shanahan
106 Parasitic diseases: protozoa, 2632 Ellen Li, Samuel L. Stanley Jr
107 Parasitic diseases: helminths, 2651 Carlos Seas, Martin Montes, A. Clinton White Jr
108 Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestations of specific genetic disorders, 2672 Elizabeth M. Petty
109 Gastrointestinal manifestations of systemic diseases, 2711 Joel S. Levine
110 Skin lesions associated with gastrointestinal and liver diseases, 2755 Matilde Iorizzo, Joseph L. Jorizzo
111 Oral manifestations of gastrointestinal diseases, 2774 John C. Rabine, Timothy T. Nostrant

112 Gastrointestinal vascular malformations or neoplasms: arterial, venous, arteriovenous, and capillary, 2785 Mitchell S. Cappell
113 Intestinal ischemia, 2811 Julián Panés, Josep M. Piqué
114 Radiation injury in the gastrointestinal tract, 2831 Steven M. Cohn, Stephen J. Bickston
115 Complementary and alternative medicine in gastroenterology, 2844 Craig J. McClain, Gerald W. Dryden, Kristine Krueger
Part 3 Diagnostic and therapeutic modalities in gastroenterology
A Endoscopic
116 Reprocessing of gastrointestinal endoscopes and accessories, 2863 Gregory Zuccaro Jr
117 Sedation and monitoring for gastrointestinal endoscopy, 2875 Hala Fatima, Douglas K. Rex
118 Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, 2888 William R. Brugge
119 Capsule and small bowel endoscopy, 2903 C. Paul Swain
120 Colonoscopy and flexible sigmoidoscopy, 2917 Jerome D. Waye, Christopher B. Williams, Sharmila Anandasabapathy
121 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic sphincterotomy and stone removal, and endoscopic biliary and pancreatic drainage, 2933 Tony E. Yusuf, Daniel K. Mullady, David L. Carr-Locke
122 Gastrointestinal dilation and stent placement, 2958 James D. Lord, Richard A. Kozarek
123 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy, 2974 Brian J. Dunkin, Jeffrey L. Ponsky
124 Management of upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage related to portal hypertension, 2987 Paul J. Thuluvath
125 Endoscopic diagnosis and treatment of nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 3018 David J. Bjorkman
126 Endoscopic therapy for polyps and tumors, 3032 Sergey V. Kantsevoy
127 Laparoscopy and laparotomy, 3049 Wenliang Chen, David W. Rattner

viii

B Imaging
128 Plain and contrast radiology, 3061 Marc S. Levine, Stephen E. Rubesin, Hans Herlinger, Igor Laufer
129 Diagnostic sonography, 3083 Philip W. Ralls, R. Brooke Jeffrey Jr, Robert A. Kane, Michelle L. Robbin
130 Endoscopic ultrasonography, 3113 Sanjay B. Jagannath, Marcia I. Canto
131 Applications of computed tomography to the gastrointestinal tract, 3140 Karen M. Horton, Pamela T. Johnson, Elliot K. Fishman, Alec J. Megibow
132 Magnetic resonance imaging, 3173 Diane Bergin, Donald G. Mitchell
133 Positron emission tomography, 3212 Uri Ladabaum, Satoshi Minoshima
134 Applications of radionuclide imaging in gastroenterology, 3226 Harvey A. Ziessman

Contents
135 Angiography, 3246 Kyung J. Cho
136 Interventional radiology, 3269 Kyung J. Cho
C Pathology
137 Endoscopic mucosal biopsy: histopathological interpretation, 3299 Elizabeth Montgomery, Anthony N. Kalloo
D Gastrointestinal function studies
138 Evaluation of gastrointestinal motility: emerging technologies, 3393 John W. Wiley, Chung Owyang
139 Tests of gastric and exocrine pancreatic function and absorption, 3414 William D. Chey, Matthew J. DiMagno, William Y. Chey
140 Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES), 3431 Samuel A. Giday, Anthony N. Kalloo
Index

A companion CD-ROM with a searchable version of the full text is included in the inside front cover of Volume 1.

ix

Contributors

Aijaz Ahmed, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Stanford University Medical Center Stanford, California, USA

Ramón Bataller, MD
Liver Unit, Institut de Malalties Digestives i Metabòliques
Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain

Jacob Alexander, MD, DM
Senior Research Fellow Division of Gastroenterology University of Washington Seattle, Washington, USA
James E. Allison, MD, FACP, AGAF
Clinical Professor of Medicine Emeritus University of California, San Francisco; Division of Gastroenterology San Francisco General Hospital; Adjunct Investigator, Kaiser Division of Research San Francisco, California, USA

Diane Bergin, MD
Department of Radiology University College Hospital Galway, Ireland
Adil E. Bharucha, MD
Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Clinical Enteric Neuroscience Translational and
Epidemiological Research Program Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Rochester, Minnesota, USA

Sharmila Anandasabapathy, MD
Assistant Professor Department of Gastroenterology The M.D. Anderson Cancer Center Houston, Texas, USA
Kristen O. Arseneau, MS
Digestive Health Research Center University of Virginia Health System Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
Kim E. Barrett, PhD
Professor of Medicine and Dean of Graduate Studies University of California, San Diego La Jolla, California, USA
Dorsey M. Bass
Associate Professor of Pediatrics Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology,
and Nutrition Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA
Nathan M. Bass, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine Medical Director, Liver Transplantation Program Division of Gastroenterology University of California, San Francisco; San Francisco, California, USA

Stephen J. Bickston, MD
Associate Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology; Medical Director, Inpatient Digestive Health
Center of Excellence University of Virginia Health System Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
Elisa H. Birnbaum, MD
Associate Professor Department of Surgery Section of Colon and Rectal Surgery Washington University School of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Lana Bistritz, MD, FRCPC
Gastroenterology Fellow Division of Gastroenterology University of Alberta Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
David J. Bjorkman, MD, MSPH,
SM(Epid) Professor of Medicine and Dean University of Utah School of Medicine Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

Andres T. Blei, MD
Professor of Medicine Division of Hepatology Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University Chicago, Illinois, USA
Richard S. Blumberg, MD
Professor of Medicine Harvard Medical School; Chief, Gastroenterology Division Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA
C. Richard Boland, MD
Chief of Gastroenterology Baylor University Medical Center Dallas, Texas, USA
Maurizio Bonacini, MD
Associate Clinical Professor Department of Medicine University of California, San Francisco; Director, HIV-Liver Clinic California Pacific Medical Center San Francisco, California, USA
David A. Brenner, MD
Vice Chancellor for Health Sciences; Dean, UCSD School of Medicine La Jolla, California, USA
Robert S. Bresalier
Chairman and Professor Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine and
Nutrition University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center Houston, Texas, USA
William R. Brugge, MD
Director, Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Massachusetts General Hospital; Professor of Medicine Harvard Medical School Boston, Massachusetts, USA

x

Contributors

Randall W. Burt, MD
Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Utah School of Medicine; Senior Director for Prevention and Outreach Huntsman Cancer Institute University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
Roger F. Butterworth, PhD, DSc
Director, Neuroscience Research Unit Hôpital Saint-Luc University of Montreal Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Michael Camilleri, MD
Atherton and Winifred W. Bean Professor of Medicine and Physiology College of Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Marcia I. Canto, MD, MHS
Associate Professor Departments of Medicine (Gastroenterology)
and Oncology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Mitchell S. Cappell, MD, PhD
Chief, Division of Gastroenterology William Beaumont Hospital Royal Oak, Michigan, USA
John M. Carethers, MD
Professor of Medicine Chief, Division of Gastroenterology University of California, San Diego La Jolla, California, USA
David L. Carr-Locke, MB, BChir, FRCP,
FASGE Director, The Endoscopy Institute Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Albert J. Chang, MD
Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA
Louis A. Chaptini, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Liver
Diseases Cooper University Hospital Robert Wood Johnson Medical School University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey Camden, New Jersey, USA

Wenliang Chen, MD
Advanced Laparoscopic Surgery Fellow 2006 Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA
William D. Chey, MD
Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
William Y. Chey, MD
Professor of Internal Medicine Konar Center for Digestive and Liver Diseases University of Rochester Medical Center Rochester, New York, USA
Kyung J. Cho, MD
Professor Division of Interventional Radiology Department of Radiology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
John O. Clarke, MD
Assistant Professor Division of Gastroenterology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Russell D. Cohen, MD, FACG, AGAF
Associate Professor of Medicine Co-director, Clinical Inflammatory Bowel Disease The University of Chicago Medical Center Chicago, Illinois, USA
Jonathan A. Cohn, MD
Professor of Medicine and Associate Professor of Cell Biology
Duke University Medical Center Durham, North Carolina, USA
Steven M. Cohn, MD, PhD
Paul Janssen Professor of Medicine and Immunology Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department of Medicine University of Virginia Health System Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
Fabio Cominelli, MD
Professor of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology
Director, Digestive Health Research Center and Training Program
University of Virginia Health System Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
David W. Crabb, MD
John B. Hickam Professor and Chair Department of Medicine

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
Marie C. DeFrances, MD, PhD
Department of Pathology University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
Laurie D. DeLeve, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine USC Research Center for Liver Diseases and
Division of Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases Los Angeles, California, USA
Evan S. Dellon, MD, MPH
Assistant Professor Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing,
and Center for Gastrointestinal Biology and Disease University of North Carolina, School of Medicine Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
John Del Valle, MD
Professor and Senior Associate Chair Department of Internal Medicine University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Matthew J. DiMagno, MD
Assistant Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Graham J. Dockray, FRS
Professor, Physiological Laboratory University of Liverpool Liverpool, UK
Jeffrey A. Drebin, MD, PhD
William M. Measey Professor Vice Chair for Research Chief, Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery Department of Surgery University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Gerald W. Dryden, MD
Assistant Professor Department of Internal Medicine University of Louisville, Kentucky, USA
Brian J. Dunkin, MD, FACS
Head, Section of Endoscopic Surgery; Medical Director, MITIE (The Methodist Institute
for Technology, Innovation, and Education) The Methodist Hospital Houston, Texas, USA

xi

Contributors
B. Mark Evers, MD
Professor, Departments of Surgery and Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
Robertson-Poth Distinguished Chair in General Surgery
Director, Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology Director, UTMB Comprehensive Cancer Center The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, Texas, USA
George T. Fantry, MD
Associate Professor Director, Heartburn and Dyspepsia Program Department of Medicine University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Lori E. Fantry, MD, MPH
Associate Professor Department of Medicine University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
James J. Farrell, MD
Director of Pancreaticobiliary Endoscopy Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Digestive Diseases David Geffen School of Medicine University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA
Hala Fatima, MD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
Richard N. Fedorak
Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Alberta Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Sandy Feng, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Surgery Transplant Division University of California, San Francisco San Francisco, California, USA
Emily Finlayson, MD, MS
Assistant Professor Department of Surgery University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Robert S. Fisher, MD
University of California, San Francisco San Francisco, California, USA
Elliot K. Fishman, MD
Professor of Radiology Department of Radiology Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions Baltimore, Maryland, USA

Ira J. Fox, MD
Professor, Department of Surgery University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska, USA
Frank K. Friedenberg, MD, MS(Epi)
Gastroenterology Section Department of Medicine Temple University Hospital Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Charles M. Friel, MD
Associate Professor of Surgery Chief, Section of Colon and Rectal Surgery University of Virginia Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
John B. Furness, PhD, FAA
Professor, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology University of Melbourne Parkville, Victoria, Australia

Samuel A. Giday, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Robert G. Gish, MD
Associate Professor Department of Medicine University of California, San Francisco; Medical Director, Liver Disease Management
and Transplant Program California Pacific Medical Center San Francisco, California, USA
Robert E. Glasgow, MD
Associate Professor Department of Surgery University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

Glenn T. Furuta, MD
Associate Professor Department of Pediatrics University of Colorado Denver, School of Medicine; Director, Gastrointestinal Eosinophilic Diseases
Program The Children's Hospital, Denver National Jewish Medical and Research Center Aurora, Colorado, USA
Malliga E. Ganapathy, MD
Professor, Department of Medicine Medical College of Georgia Augusta, Georgia, USA
Vadivel Ganapathy, PhD
Regents' Professor and Chair Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical College of Georgia Augusta, Georgia, USA

Eric Goldberg, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Jeffrey I. Gordon, MD
Professor and Director Center for Genome Sciences Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Gregory J. Gores, MD
Ruben R. Eisenberg Professor of Medicine and Physiology
College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic; Chair, Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota, USA

Guadalupe Garcia-Tsao, MD
Professor of Medicine Section of Digestive Diseases Yale School of Medicine New Haven, Connecticut; Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System West Haven, Connecticut, USA
Marc G. Ghany, MD
Staff Physician, Liver Diseases Branch National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Francis M. Giardiello, MD
Professor of Medicine and Oncology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA

Sugantha Govindarajan, MD
Professor, Department of Pathology Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA
David Y. Graham, MD
Professor of Medicine and Molecular Virology and Microbiology
Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center
Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Texas, USA
D. Neil Granger, PhD
Boyd Professor and Head, Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology
Louisiana State University Health Science Center Shreveport, Louisiana, USA

xii

Peter H.R. Green
Professor of Clinical Medicine Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons New York, USA
C. Prakash Gyawali, MD, MRCP
Associate Professor of Medicine Associate Program Director Division of Gastroenterology Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Charles H. Halsted, MD
Professor of Internal Medicine and Nutrition University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA
Stanley R. Hamilton, MD
Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center Houston, Texas, USA
Stephen B. Hanauer, MD
Professor of Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology
Chief, Section of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition
University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois, USA
William L. Hasler, MD
Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
E. Jenny Heathcote, MB, BS, MD,
FRCP, FRCPC Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine University of Toronto; Staff Gastroenterologist Department of Medicine Toronto Western Hospital Toronto, Canada
Gail A. Hecht, MD, MS
Professor of Medicine; Microbiology & Immunology
Chief, Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition
University of Illinois Chicago, Illinois, USA
David G. Heidt, MD
Department of Surgery University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

Contributors

Hans Herlinger, MD
Professor of Gastrointestinal Radiology Late of University of Pennsylvania Health System Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Ikuo Hirano, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine Chicago, Illinois, USA
Richard A. Hodin, MD
Professor of Surgery, Harvard Medical School; Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Simon P. Horslen, MB, ChB, FRCPCH
Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington Medical Director, Liver & Intestine Transplantation Children's Hospital & Regional Medical Center Seattle, Washington, USA
Karen M. Horton, MD
Associate Professor of Radiology Department of Radiology Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Matilde Iorizzo, MD, PhD
Clinical Fellow Department of Dermatology University of Bologna, Italy
Russell F. Jacoby, MD
Director, Colon Cancer Prevention Program University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer
Center; Associate Professor of Medicine Section of Gastroenterology University of Wisconsin Medical School Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Sanjay B. Jagannath, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Sajid Jalil, MB, BS, MS
Clinical Assistant Professor University of North Dakota MeritCare Health System Fargo, North Dakota, USA
Stephen P. James, MD
Director, Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland, USA

Edward N. Janoff, MD
Chief, Infectious Diseases; Director, Colorado Center for AIDS Research University of Colorado at Denver and Health
Sciences Center Denver, Colorado, USA
R. Brooke Jeffrey Jr, MD
Professor Department of Radiology Associate Dean for Academic Medicine Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA
Robert T. Jensen, MD
Chief, Cell Biology, Digestive Diseases Branch National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney
Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Pamela T. Johnson, MD
Assistant Professor of Radiology Department of Radiology Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Joseph L. Jorizzo, MD
Professor and Former (Founding) Chair Department of Dermatology Wake Forest University School of Medicine Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA
Barbara H. Jung, MD
Assistant Professor Division of Gastroenterology University of California, San Diego La Jolla, California, USA
Peter J. Kahrilas, MD
Gilbert H. Marquardt Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University Chicago, Illinois, USA
Robert A. Kane, MD
Professor Department of Radiology Harvard Medical School; Director, Ultrasound Section Radiology Department Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Gary C. Kanel, MD
Professor of Clinical Pathology Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California; Associate Pathologist LAC+USC Medical Center and USC University
Hospital Los Angeles, California, USA

xiii

Contributors
Sergey V. Kantsevoy, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Emmet B. Keeffe, MD, MACP
Professor of Medicine Emeritus Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology Stanford University Medical Center Stanford, California, USA
Stephen J. Keely, PhD
Senior Lecturer Department of Molecular Medicine RCSI Education and Research Centre Dublin, Ireland
Samuel Klein, MD
William H. Danforth Professor of Medicine and Nutritional Science
Center for Human Nutrition Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Paul Knechtges, MD
Chinical Assistant Professor Associate Chair of Quality Assurance Department of Radiology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Cynthia W. Ko, MD, MS
Associate Professor Department of Medicine University of Washington Seattle, Washington, USA
Kris V. Kowdley, MD, FACP
Clinical Professor of Medicine Director, Center for Liver Disease Virginia Mason Medical Center University of Washington School of Medicine Seattle, Washington, USA
Richard A. Kozarek, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine University of Washington; Executive Director Digestive Disease Institute Virginia Mason Medical Center Seattle, Washington, USA
Kristine Krueger, MD
Associate Professor Department of Internal Medicine University of Louisville Louisville, Kentucky, USA

Uri Ladabaum, MD, MS
Associate Professor of Clinical Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Department of Medicine University of California, San Francisco San Francisco, California, USA

Marc S. Levine, MD
Professor of Radiology Chief, Gastrointestinal Radiology Advisory Dean University of Pennsylvania Medical Center Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA

Shawn D. Larson, MB, ChB
General Surgery Resident Department of General Surgery University of South Florida Tampa, Florida, USA
Igor Laufer, MD
Professor of Radiology University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA

Mark A. Levine, MD
Chief, Molecular and Clinical Nutrition Section Senior Staff Physician, DDB, NIDDK, NIH Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Ruth E. Ley, PhD
Assistant Professor Center for Genome Sciences Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA

Anne R. Lee, MSEd, RD, CDN
Nutritionist Celiac Disease Center Columbia University New York, USA

Ellen Li, MD, PhD
Professor Department of Microbiology Cornell University Ithaca, New York, USA

Sum P. Lee, MD, PhD
Chair, Professor of Medicine, and Dean University of Hong Kong Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine Hong Kong
William M. Lee, MD, FACP
Professor of Internal Medicine The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas Dallas, Texas, USA
Frederick H. Leibach, PhD
Professor and Chair Emeritus Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical College of Georgia Augusta, Georgia, USA

T. Jake Liang, MD
Chief, Liver Diseases Branch National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and
Kidney Diseases National Institutes of Health; Chief Staff Physician Hepatology Service National Institutes of Health Clinical Center Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Suthat Liangpunsakul, MD, MPH
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Indiana University School of Medicine and the R.L.
Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center Indianapolis, Indiana, USA

Wai K. Leung, MD, FRCP
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics The Chinese University of Hong Kong Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong
Marc S. Levin, MD, AGAF
Professor Department of Medicine Washington University School of Medicine; Staff Physician St Louis Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
Barnes-Jewish Hospital St Louis, Missouri, USA

Henry C. Lin, MD
Chief, Gastroenterology Section New Mexico Veterans Affairs Health Care
System Professor of Internal Medicine University of New Mexico Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA
Chun-Min Lo
Department of Pathology Genome Research Institute University of Cincinnati Medical Center Cincinnati, Ohio, USA

Joel S. Levine, MD
Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology University of Colorado Health Sciences Center Denver, Colorado, USA

Stephen Locarnini, MD, PhD
Professor, Research and Molecular Development Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference
Laboratory North Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

xiv

Contributors

Bo L. Lönnerdal, PhD
Professor Department of Nutrition University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA
James D. Lord, MD, PhD
University of Washington Medical Center Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Seattle, Washington, USA
Shelly C. Lu, MD
Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA
Finlay A. Macrae, MB, BS, MD, FRACP,
FRCP Professor Department of Medicine University of Melbourne; Head, Colorectal Medicine and Genetics The Royal Melbourne Hospital Parkville, Victoria, Australia
James L. Madara, MD
Chief Executive officer, University of Chicago Medical Center
Dean, Pritzker School of Medicine and Biological Sciences
Sara and Harold Lincoln Thompson Distinguished Service Professor
University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois, USA
Karen L. Madsen, PhD
Professor Department of Medicine University of Alberta Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Gabriel M. Makhlouf, MD, PhD,
FRCP Emeritus Professor of Medicine Medical College of Virginia Virginia Commonwealth University Medical
Center Richmond, Virginia, USA
Martín G. Martín MD, MPP
Professor of Pediatrics Mattel Children's Hospital; Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology and
Nutrition David Geffen School of Medicine University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA

Gary M. Mawe, PhD
Professor Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology University of Vermont Burlington, Vermont, USA
Marlyn J. Mayo, MD
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas Dallas, Texas, USA
Craig J. McClain, MD
Professor Department of Medicine University of Louisville; Chief, Department of Hepatology University of Louisville/Jewish Hospital and
Louisville Veterans Affairs Medical Center Louisville, Kentucky, USA

Donald G. Mitchell, MD
Professor of Radiology Department of Radiology Division of Magnetic Resonance Imaging Thomas Jefferson University Hospital Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Martin Montes, MD
Assistant Professor Department of Pathology Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von
Humboldt Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia Lima, Peru
Elizabeth Montgomery, MD
Professor of Pathology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; Pathologist, Johns Hopkins Hospital Baltimore, Maryland, USA

Meredythe A. McNally, MD
Fellow in Gastroenterology Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Alec J. Megibow MD, MPH
Professor of Radiology New York University Medical Center New York, USA
Fabrizio Michelassi, MD
Lewis Atterbury Stimson Professor Chairman, Department of Surgery Weill Medical College of Cornell University; Surgeon-in-Chief New York-Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell
Medical Center New York, USA
George K. Michalopoulos, MD, PhD
Maude Menten Professor and Chairman Department of Pathology University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
Laurence J. Miller, MD
Professor of Medicine and Biochemistry/ Molecular Biology
Karl & Marjory Hasselman Professor of Research College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic Associate Dean of Research, Mayo Clinic Director for Research, Mayo Clinic Arizona Scottsdale, Arizona, USA

Marshall H. Montrose, PhD
Professor Chair, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Physiology University of Cincinnati School of Medicine Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Peter L. Moses, MD
Professor of Medicine University of Vermont College of Medicine; Associate Vice President of the Faculty Practice Fletcher Allen Health Care Burlington, Vermont, USA
Michael W. Mulholland, MD, PhD
Professor and Chair Department of Surgery University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Daniel K. Mullady, MD
Advanced Endoscopy Fellow Division of Gastroenterology Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Sean J. Mulvihill, MD
Professor and Chairman Department of Surgery University of Utah School of Medicine; Senior Director, Clinical Affairs Huntsman Cancer Institute Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

Satoshi Minoshima, MD, PhD
Professor of Radiology and Bioengineering Vice Chair for Research, Department of Radiology Head, Primate PET Imaging Suite, WaNPRC University of Washington Seattle, Washington, USA

Karnam S. Murthy, PhD
Professor of Physiology and Medicine Medical College of Virginia Virginia Commonwealth University Medical
Center Richmond, Virginia, USA

xv

Contributors

Enders K.W. Ng, MD
Professor Department of Surgery The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Department of Surgery Prince of Wales Hospital Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong
Trung V. Nguyen
Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology and Centre for Neuroscience
University of Melbourne Victoria, Australia
Timothy T. Nostrant, MD, FACP,
FACG, AGAF, FASGE Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

Sareh Parangi, MD, FACS
Assistant Professor Department of General and Endocrine
Surgery Harvard Medical School Massachusetts General Hospital Attending Surgeon, Department of
Surgery Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Henry P. Parkman, MD
Temple University School of Medicine Gastroenterology Section Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Richard M. Peek Jr
Director, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition
Vanderbilt University Medical Center Nashville, Tennessee, USA

Philip T. Nowicki, MD
Professor Department of Pediatrics Ohio State University Columbus, Ohio, USA
Kulmira Nurgali
Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology and Centre for Neuroscience
Department of Physiology University of Melbourne Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Christoph Oesterreicher, MD
Department of Medicine University of California, San Diego La Jolla, California, USA
Stephen J. Pandol, MD
Professor Staff Physician, Department of Veterans Affairs Department of Medicine University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA
John E. Pandolfino, MD
Associate Professor Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University Chicago, Illinois, USA
Julián Panés, MD
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine University of Barcelona; Consultant, Department of Gastroenterology Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Spain

Steven R. Peikin, MD
Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Liver
Diseases Cooper University Hospital Robert Wood Johnson Medical School University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey Camden, New Jersey, USA
Elizabeth M. Petty, MD
Professor Departments of Internal Medicine and Human
Genetics University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Josep M. Piqué, MD
Associate Professor Department of Medicine University of Barcelona; Chief, Department of Gastroenterology Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Spain
Theresa T. Pizarro, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine Digestive Health Research Center University of Virginia Health System Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
Daniel K. Podolsky, MD
Mallinckrodt Professor of Medicine Harvard Medical School;
Division Chief, Gastroenterology; Director, Center of the Study of Inflammatory
Bowel Disease Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Jeffrey L. Ponsky, MD
Chairman, Department of Surgery University Hospitals of Cleveland Cleveland, Ohio, USA
Maria J. Pozo, PharmD, PhD
Professor, Department of Physiology University of Extremadura Caceres, Spain
John C. Rabine, MD
LtCol, US Air Force Chief, Division of Gastroenterology David Grant Medical Center Travis Air Force Base Fairfield, California, USA
David S. Raiford, MD
Professor of Medicine Director, Liver Service Vanderbilt University Medical Center Nashville, Tennessee, USA
Philip W. Ralls, MD
Professor and Vice Chair Department of Radiology Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA
David W. Rattner, MD
Professor of Surgery Harvard Medical School Chief, Division of General and Gastrointestinal
Surgery Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Jean-Pierre Raufman, MD
Moses and Helen Golden Professor of Medicine
Head, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology
University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Helen E. Raybould, PhD
Professor Department of Anatomy, Physiology,
and Cell Biology School of Veterinary Medicine University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA
Howard A. Reber, MD
Chief, Gastrointestinal Surgery Professor of Surgery Division of General Surgery David Geffen School of Medicine University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA

xvi

Contributors

Douglas K. Rex, MD
Chancellor's Professor of Medicine Indiana University School of Medicine; Director of Endoscopy Indiana University Hospital Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
Joel E. Richter, MD, MACP
Richard L. Evans Chair and Professor Department of Medicine Temple University School of Medicine Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Michelle L. Robbin, MD
Professor Chief of Ultrasound Department of Radiology University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, Alabama, USA
Lewis R. Roberts, MB, ChB, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic; Consultant in Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Marc E. Rothenberg, MD, PhD
Director and Endowed Chair Division of Allergy and Immunology Professor of Pediatrics Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center University of Cincinnati College of Medicine Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Jayanta Roy-Chowdhury, MB, BS,
MRCP Professor Departments of Medicine and Molecular
Genetics Marion Bessin Liver Research Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University Bronx, New York, USA
Namita Roy-Chowdhury, PhD
Professor, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Genetics
Marion Bessin Liver Research Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University Bronx, New York, USA
Stephen E. Rubesin, MD
Professor Department of Radiology University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Radiologist Department of Radiology Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA

Deborah C. Rubin, MD
Professor Department of Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology Department of Developmental Biology Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Robert B. Rucker, PhD
Distinguished Professor Emeritus Department of Nutrition University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA
Anil K. Rustgi, MD
T. Grier Miller Professor of Medicine and Genetics Chief of Gastroenterology Department of Medicine University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Gino T.P. Saccone
Associate Professor Flinders University Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Arun J. Sanyal, MB, BS, MD
Charles Caravati Professor of Medicine Chairman, Division of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Nutrition Department of Internal Medicine Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond, Virginia, USA
Michael G. Sarr, MD
J.C. Masson Professor of Surgery Department of Surgery, Mayo Medical School; Consultant, Division of Gastroenterology
and General Surgery Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Robert Schwabe, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine Columbia University College of Physicians
and Surgeons New York, USA
Carlos Seas, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander
von Humboldt Hospital Nacional Cayetano Heredia Lima, Peru
Emmanuel Seremba, MD
Fellow The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas; Attending Physician

Makerere University Medical School Mulago Hospital Kampala, Uganda
Nicholas J. Shaheen, MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Medicine and Epideriology Director, Center for Esophageal Diseases and
Swallowing University of North Carolina School of Medicine Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
Fergus Shanahan, MD
Professor and Chair Department of Medicine and Director, Alimentary
Pharmabiotic Centre University College Cork National University of Ireland; Professor Department of Medicine Cork University Hospital Cork, Ireland
Philip M. Sherman, MD, FRCPC
Research Institute Hospital for Sick Children University of Toronto Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Yasutake Shimizu
Department of Basic Veterinary Science School of Veterinary Sciences Gifu University Gifu, Japan
Eric Sibley, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA
Diane M. Simeone, MD
Lazar J. Greenfield Professor of Surgery Chief, Gastrointestinal Surgery University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Phillip D. Smith, MD
Mary J. Bradford Professor in Gastroenterology Professor of Medicine and Microbiology University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, Alabama, USA
Christopher J. Smolock, MD
Department of Surgery University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Thomas C. Smyrk, MD
Associate Professor of Pathology Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Rochester, Minnesota, USA

xvii

Contributors

Ronald J. Sokol, MD
Professor and Vice Chair Chief, Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Nutrition Department of Pediatrics Director, Colorodo Clinical and Translational
Sciences Institute University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine; The Children's Hospital Aurora, Colorado, USA
Andrew H. Soll, MD
Professor, David Geffen School of Medicine University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA
Rhonda F. Souza, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas; Veterans Affairs North Texas Health Care System,
Dallas Dallas, Texas, USA
Stuart Jon Spechler, MD
Professor of Medicine Berta M. and Cecil O. Patterson Chair in
Gastroenterology Chief, Division of Gastroenterology Veterans Affairs North Texas Health Care System,
Dallas The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas Dallas, Texas, USA

Jung W. Suh, MD, MPH
Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California Los Angeles, California, USA
Weijing Sun, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine Director of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology
Program Department of Medicine Division of Hematology/Oncology University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
William Sun, PhD
Department of Pathology Genome Research Institute University of Cincinnati Medical Center Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Joseph J.Y. Sung, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine Chairman of the Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics The Chinese University of Hong Kong Prince of Wales Hospital Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong
C. Paul Swain, MD
Professor Imperial College, London London, UK

Ben Z. Stanger, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor Division of Gastroenterology Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Samuel L. Stanley Jr, MD
Professor Department of Medicine Washington University School of Medicine; Vice Chancellor for Research Washington University St Louis, Missouri, USA
William F. Stenson, MD
Nicholas V. Costrini Professor of Gastroenterology and Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Eric E. Stone, MD
Assistant Professor Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department of Internal Medicine University of New Mexico Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA

Lawrence Szarka, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine College of Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Jayant A. Talwalkar, MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Medicine Advanced Liver Diseases Study Group Miles and Shirley Fitterman Digestive Diseases
Center Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Phillip I. Tarr, MD
Melvin E. Carnahan Professor of Pediatrics Professor of Molecular Microbiology Director, Division of Gastroenterology and
Nutrition Department of Pediatrics and St Louis Children's
Hospital Washington University School of Medicine St Louis, Missouri, USA
Beth Taylor, MS, RD, CNSD, FCCM
Nutrition Support Specialist Barnes-Jewish Hospital St Louis, Missouri, USA

Dwain L. Thiele, MD
Professor and Vice Chair Department of Internal Medicine The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas Dallas, Texas, USA
Paul J. Thuluvath, MB, BS, MD,
FRCP Associate Professor of Medicine Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Andrea Todisco, MD
Associate Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Mark Topazian, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine Miles and Shirley Fiterman Center for
Digestive Diseases Mayo College of Medicine Rochester, Minnesota, USA
William J. Tremaine, MD
Professor of Medicine Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Patrick Tso, PhD
Professor Department of Pathology Genome Research Institute University of Cincinnati Medical Center Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Jerrold R. Turner, MD, PhD
Professor Associate Chairman for Academic Affairs Department of Pathology The University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois, USA
Javier Vaquero, MD
Postdoctoral Research Fellow Neuroscience Research Unit Hôpital Saint-Luc University of Montreal Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Arnold Wald, MD
Professor of Medicine Section of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health Madison, Wisconsin, USA

xviii

Mary Kay Washington, MD, PhD
Professor Department of Pathology Vanderbilt University Medical Center Nashville, Tennessee, USA
Paul B. Watkins, MD
Verne S. Caviness Distinguished Professor of Medicine
Director, Translational and Clinical Sciences Institute
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
Kymberly D.S. Watt, MD, FRCPC
Hepatology/Liver Transplantation Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Jerome D. Waye, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology Director of Endoscopy Mount Sinai Medical Center New York, USA
Steven A. Weinman, MD, PhD
Professor, Internal Medicine Neuroscience and Cell Biology The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, Texas, USA
Theodore H. Welling, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery Division of Transplantation University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
A. Clinton White Jr, MD
Paul R. Stalnaker Distinguished Professor and Director, Infectious Disease Division
Department of Internal Medicine The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, Texas, USA
Russell H. Wiesner, MD
Professor of Medicine Mayo Clinic Transplant Center Mayo Medical School;

Contributors

Director of Viral Hepatitis Liver Transplant Program Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
C. Mel Wilcox, MD
Professor Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, Alabama, USA
John W. Wiley, MD
Professor Department of Internal Medicine University of Michigan Health System; Director, Michigan Clinical Research Unit University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Christopher B. Williams, MA, BM,
BCh, FRCP Endoscopy Unit St Mark's Hospital for Colorectal and Intestinal
Disorders Harrow, London, UK
John A. Williams, MD, PhD
Professor of Molecular and Integrative Physiology University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Ernest M. Wright, FRS
Professor of Physiology David Geffen School of Medicine University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA
Francis Y.K. Yao, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine and Surgery Associate Medical Director, Liver Transplantation University of California, San Francisco San Francisco, California, USA
Hal F. Yee Jr, MD, PhD
William and Mary Ann Rice Memorial Distinguished Professor
Department of Medicine University of California, San Francisco; Chief of Gastroenterology and Hepatology

San Francisco General Hospital San Francisco, California, USA
Graeme P. Young, MD, FRACP
Professor of Gastroenterology Department of Medicine Flinders University of South Australia; Director, Department of Gastroenterology Flinders Medical Centre Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Tonia M. Young-Fadok, MD, MS,
FACS, FASCRS Professor of Surgery Chair, Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery Mayo Clinic, Arizona Scottsdale, Arizona, USA
Tony E. Yusuf, MD
Director, GI Endoscopy and Pancreatobiliary Center of Excellence
State University of New York Downstate Medical Center and Kings County Hospital Center;
Assistant Professor of Medicine State University of New York Downstate College
of Medicine Brooklyn, New York, USA
Harvey A. Ziessman, MD
Professor of Radiology Director of Nuclear Medicine Imaging Division of Nuclear Medicine Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences The Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Ellen M. Zimmermann, MD
Associate Professor Department of Internal Medicine Division of Gastroenterology University of Michigan Health System Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Gregory Zuccaro Jr, MD
Vice Chairman for Quality and Innovation Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology Cleveland Clinic Cleveland, Ohio, USA

xix

Preface

It is over 20 years since the Textbook of Gastroenterology was launched. From the very first edition the aim has been to present the scientific basis of gastroenterology in a way that gives insight into common clinical problems, to provide at its core an encyclopedic discussion of virtually all the disease states encountered in practice, and to describe all the major diagnostic and therapeutic technologies of gastroenterology, both the long standing and the very recent, available to clinicians today. As in the past, we have approached this fifth edition of the Textbook with the aim of updating every chapter and seeking new authors for at least 30 percent in order to provide a fresh approach to the material.
We have undertaken some major new initiatives in association with the Textbook over the years. For example, from the beginning, we recognized that the practice of gastroenterology is a highly visual one and so, on the basis of the old adage that a picture is worth a thousand words, we have published an Atlas of Gastroenterology to accompany the Textbook. As the Textbook itself is of sufficient size and detail to be difficult for students and house staff to carry with them, we published an abridged paperback version, the Handbook of Gastroenterology. In the fourth edition of the Textbook, we added an extensive hepatology section, recognizing that many practicing gastroenterologists are also hepatologists. In this fifth edition, we have undertaken another substantive change. The reader will note that the section in previous editions that described approaches that a clinician might take to common symptoms and signs encountered in gastroenterology or hepatology has been deleted. The rationale behind this decision was as follows: (1) the Textbook was becoming very large and needed to be shortened in a way that would not alter the basic strategy that defined its design; (2) much of what was available in these "Approaches to . . ." chapters is included in the chapters that describe the clinical conditions; and (3) the "Approaches to . . ." section, organized and edited appropriately, could serve as a textbook on its own merits, directed at an audience of students, house staff, and practitioners who are not primarily gastroenterologists. Accordingly, the "Approaches to . . ." section of previous editions has been incorporated into a separate volume, Principles of Clinical Gastroenterology.

Much has changed in the science and practice of gastroenterology and hepatology since the publication of the first edition of the Textbook. Over the years we have endeavored to keep pace with the many advances that define our clinical discipline in order to maintain the Textbook's modernity, freshness, and up-to-date accuracy. In this spirit, we are delighted to welcome Tony Kalloo to the editorial team. His hands-on experience in the most modern procedural techniques of gastroenterology, in addition to his broad understanding of the discipline, have added immensely to this edition.
We are delighted to have a new publisher, WileyBlackwell, for this edition. Their keen insight into the publishing industry and the way in which textbooks are utilized today has been the basis for some of the changes made to the Textbook. We are also grateful for their knowledge of the international world of medicine, which will help us to distribute the contents of the Textbook to a global audience. The editors would like especially to thank Elisabeth Dodds at Wiley-Blackwell, whose commitment to excellence has contributed materially to the quality of the book. In addition, without the assistance of Alison Brown this fifth edition of the Textbook would not have been published.
Our efforts were especially facilitated by the expert assistance of Lori Ennis and Barbara Boughen, who collaborated as a team, complementing editorial talents with interpersonal skills to maintain the high quality of the text and deliver the manuscripts in a timely fashion. The editors are indebted to their administrative and secretarial assistants, Patricia Lai, Terri Astin, Jennifer Mayes, Sue Sparrow, Patty Pool, Gracie Bernal-Muñoz, and Maria L. Vidrio. In addition, the faculty and fellows of the Gastroenterology Divisions at the University of Michigan, Washington University in St Louis, and the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston provided valuable assistance in reviewing the chapters in the fourth edition of the Textbook in preparation for this, the fifth edition.
Tadataka Yamada, MD

xxi

1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

A COMPONENTS
1 Integrative responses of the
gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal
Stephen J. Pandol, Helen E. Raybould, Hal F. Yee Jr

Control systems, 3 Regulation of food intake by the gastrointestinal tract, 5 The role of water, 6 Cephalic and oral phases of a meal, 7 Gastric phase of a meal, 8 Duodenal signals regulating gastric, hepatic, and pancreatic
functions, 8

Nutrient digestion and absorption systems in the small intestine, 11
Colonic phase of a meal, 12 Regulation of nutrient storage and release: roles of the liver and
endocrine pancreas, 12 Regulation of the metabolic state, 13

This chapter provides an overview of the mechanisms involved in the regulation of food intake and the various responses in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, the liver, and the pancreas to the ingestion of a meal. The coordination of these processes is essential for the regulation of food intake; the digestion and absorption of nutrients in the food; the distribution, storage, and release of nutrients to meet demand; and the elimination of wastes. Each of the processes described in this introductory chapter is explored in greater depth and with extensive references to the literature elsewhere in the textbook.
The GI tract consists of the alimentary canal from the mouth to the anus and the associated glandular organs (i.e., salivary glands, liver, and pancreas) that empty their contents into the canal. In a general sense, the GI tract adds water, ions, and enzymes to a meal to convert it into an aqueous solution of molecules that can be transported within the body. Importantly, most of the added substances are absorbed for reuse. The assimilation of a meal involves major physiological processes that occur in the GI tract: motility, secretion, digestion, absorption, and elimination. Food is taken into the mouth as large particles containing macromolecules that are not absorbable. The breaking down of food into absorbable material occurs by grinding and mixing the food (motility) with various secretions containing enzymes, ions, and water that enter the GI tract. The enzymes convert the macromolecules into absorbable molecules in a
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

process termed digestion. The products of digestion, as well as the secretions from the upper parts of the GI tract, are then transported across the epithelium to enter the blood or lymph by a process termed absorption. Secretions and lumenal contents are moved from the mouth to the anus and eliminated by GI motility. The coordination of GI function is regulated in a synchronized way to maximize digestion and absorption by means of multiple control mechanisms.
The liver and pancreas are anatomically coupled to the GI tract through the biliary and pancreatic ductal systems, respectively. Further, the liver receives blood circulation directly from the GI tract and the pancreas through the portal circulation. The liver has numerous vital functions, including bile formation and secretion; uptake, storage, and release of nutrients; generation of plasma proteins; detoxification; and immune surveillance. The exocrine pancreas provides the major digestive enzymes, whereas the endocrine pancreas plays a central role in the uptake, storage, and release of nutrients in the liver, as well as in other tissues such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.
Control systems
Because the macronutrient content of a meal can vary considerably, the GI tract is endowed with mechanisms that can detect the presence of food and mount appropriate physiological responses. In addition, the GI tract communicates with associated organs (e.g., pancreas) such that when events occur in the more proximal GI tract, signals are sent to the more distal parts, and vice versa. Three principal control mechanisms regulate GI function: endocrine, paracrine, and neural (Fig. 1.1).

3

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Sensor cell

ENDOCRINE
Microvilli Hormone
CIRCULATION

Sensory neuron

NEUROCRINE
Interneurons Neurotransmitter

Secretomotor neuron
Target cells

Target cell

PARACRINE

Target

Target

cell cell

Paracrine mediator

Figure 1.1 Three principal types of control mechanism regulate the function of the gastrointestinal tract: paracrine, endocrine, and neurocrine (neural). Examples of paracrine mechanisms are numerous. In this figure, the target cell is shown as being adjacent to the sensor cell. However, paracrine mechanisms may be mediated over tens or hundreds of micrometers and may involve many different cell types, including epithelial cells, endocrine cells, nerve terminals, and smooth muscle. From Undergraduate Teaching Program of the American Gastroenterological Association, 1996.

Endocrine regulation Endocrine regulation describes the process whereby the sensing cells in the GI tract, the enteroendocrine cells, respond to a stimulus and secrete regulatory peptides or hormones that travel by way of the bloodstream to target cells. Effector cells respond to the hormones and express specific receptors. Hormones released from the GI tract have effects on cells located in other regions of the GI tract and also on the glandular structures associated with the GI tract, such as the pancreas and the liver.
The secretory products of the enteroendocrine cells are released in response to chemical (nutrients, acid, osmolarity) and mechanical (distention, stretch) stimuli to the wall of the GI tract, although the exact mechanisms by which this occurs are not well understood. Most enteroendocrine cells in the gut wall are of the "open" type; these cells have an apical membrane that is in contact with the lumen of the GI tract (generally regarded as where the sensing occurs) and a basolateral membrane over which secretion occurs.
Examples of hormones secreted by the GI tract abound. Gastrin, one of the better characterized GI hormones, plays a central role in the regulation of gastric acid secretion. Gastrin is released from endocrine cells located in the antral mucosa in response to activation of the parasympathetic outflow to the GI tract. Other hormones include glucoinsulinotropic peptide, which is released by glucose in the intestine and augments insulin secretion from the pancreatic -cell; cholecystokinin (CCK), which plays a role in the intestinal feedback regulation of proximal GI function, food intake, and the secretion of pancreatic and biliary constituents into the intestine; secretin, which plays a role in neutralizing gastric acid emptied into the intestine; and motilin, which regulates gastrointestinal motility.

Paracrine regulation Paracrine regulation describes the process whereby a chemical messenger or regulatory peptide is released from enteroendocrine cells and diffuses through the interstitial space to reach target cells. Paracrine agents exert their actions on several different cell types in the wall of the GI tract, including smooth muscle cells, absorptive enterocytes, secretory cells in glands, and other enteroendocrine cells. Histamine is an important paracrine mediator in the gut wall. In the stomach, histamine is stored and released by enterochromaffinlike cells located in the gastric glands, and acts by diffusing through the interstitial space of the lamina propria to neighboring parietal cells to stimulate the production of acid. Somatostatin also is an important paracrine mediator. Released from the antral mucosa in response to acid, somatostatin inhibits the release of gastrin from neighboring gastrincontaining endocrine cells, which results in the inhibition of meal-stimulated gastric acid secretion.
Neural regulation The functions of the GI tract are controlled by activity in the extrinsic and intrinsic nervous systems. The extrinsic nervous system, defined as those nerves that innervate the gut with cell bodies located outside of the gut wall, is part of the autonomic nervous system. The GI tract is innervated by both the parasympathetic and sympathetic subdivisions of the autonomic nervous system. The parasympathetic innervation to the gut is through the vagus and the pelvic nerves. The vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) innervates the esophagus, stomach, gallbladder, pancreas, small intestine, cecum, and proximal colon. The pelvic nerves innervate the distal colon and anorectal region. The sympathetic innervation is supplied by cell bodies in the spinal cord and by fibers that

4

Integrative responses of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal CHAPTER 1

terminate in the prevertebral ganglia (i.e., celiac, superior and inferior mesenteric ganglia). The postganglionic neurons innervate all parts of the GI tract.
The intrinsic nervous system, also referred to as the enteric nervous system, has cell bodies that are contained within the wall of the gut in the submucosal plexus and myenteric plexus.
The afferent (sensory) innervation of the GI tract is derived from both parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation. The cell bodies of the vagal afferents are in the nodose ganglion with a central projection terminating in the brainstem and a distal projection to the gut wall. The cell bodies of the afferent neurons that run with the sympathetic pathway are in the dorsal root ganglia. The peripheral terminals of the spinal and vagal afferents are located in all layers of the gut wall, where they detect chemical and mechanical stimuli. The afferent nerves send information to the central nervous system (CNS), which drives reflexes to change secretory and motor function in the GI tract. The afferent innervation is also responsible for transmitting painful stimuli to the CNS.

enteric nervous system are characterized by their function and also by the neurotransmitters they contain. The enteric nervous system contains the components of a reflex pathway (afferent neurons, interneurons, efferent neurons) and thus is capable of functioning in the absence of input from the CNS. However, enteric nervous system function is often modulated by the CNS.
Many GI hormones have been identified in the neurons of the enteric nervous system, where they may act as neurotransmitters, and in regions of the brain, where they may be involved in the regulation of autonomic outflow. These mediators and regulatory peptides are thus referred to as brain­gut peptides and the extrinsic and intrinsic components innervating the gut are sometimes referred to as the brain­gut axis.
Regulation of food intake by the gastrointestinal tract

Enteric nervous system The enteric nervous system comprises two major plexuses consisting of cell bodies (ganglia) and interconnecting strands that contain nerve fibers. The myenteric plexus lies between the longitudinal and circular muscle layers and the submucosal plexus lies in the submucosa. Neurons in the

Multiple complex signals from metabolically active tissues and the CNS contribute to the long-term regulation of body weight (Fig. 1.2). In addition, signals derived from the presence of food in the GI tract regulate food intake, particularly in the short term. Perfusion of the intestine with single macronutrients, or mixtures thereof, results in the inhibition

Hedonic inputs

Hypothalamus

Visfatin Adiponectin

Figure 1.2 Many signaling systems regulate food intake. This graphic presents an overview of inputs from the central nervous system and from peripheral tissues such as adipose tissue (leptin) and metabolic tissue (endocrine pancreas with signals insulin and pancreatic polypeptide [PP]). CCK, cholecystokinin; DVC, dorsal vagal complex; GIP, gastric inhibitory polypeptide; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide-1; OXM, oxyntomodulin. Adapted from Badman MK, Flier JS. The gut and energy balance: visceral allies in the obesity wars. Science 2005;307:1909.

Resistin

Adipose tissue

Leptin

Insulin

PYY3-36 OXM

Pancreas

Incretin action

GLP-1 GIP
PP Amylin

DVC Ghrelin
CCK

Meal timing Meal size Energy expenditure Reproductive
competence

Nutrient receptors Stretch receptors

Vagal afferents

Chemosensors

5

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

of food intake and intestinal feedback regulation of GI function. These observations have led to the notion of nutrient sensors in the GI tract. Vagal afferents innervating the proximal GI tract are activated by the presence of lumenal nutrients, leading to the activation of CNS pathways involved in the regulation of food intake, including the nuclei of solitary tract (the region in the brainstem where vagal afferents terminate) and the arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus.
Humoral factors are also involved in the regulation of food intake. Many GI hormones are termed satiety signals. These signals are characterized by their release from enteroendocrine cells when nutrients are in the GI tract, and by observations that exogenous injection of these hormones, including CCK, glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1, peptide YY (PYY), and ghrelin, in experimental animals and humans produces a decrease in food intake.
Possibly the best characterized of these satiety signals is CCK. CCK is released from enteroendocrine cells by protein hydrolysates and free fatty acids in the intestinal lumen. Exogenous administration of CCK to humans and experimental animals has determined that CCK inhibits meal size by activating CCK1 receptors. These receptors are most likely localized to the peripheral terminals of vagal afferent fibers innervating the mucosal wall of the duodenum. However, although it is clear that CCK can inhibit the size of subsequent meals, its role in the long-term regulation of food intake is uncertain. CCK1-receptor null mice that receive long-term administration of CCK1 receptor antagonists maintain normal body weight when fed ad libitum, possibly as a result of the effects of longer-term satiety signals.
GLP-1 is a product of the proglucagon gene that is secreted from the distal small intestine in response to glucose and fatty acids and is proposed to be involved in the regulation of appetite and energy intake. Plasma levels of GLP-1 in humans increase after a meal. Exogenous administration of GLP-1 or agonists of the GLP-1 receptor in humans and experimental animals leads to decreased food intake. The site of action is thought to be directly on the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, an area of the brain involved in the integration of short- and long-term (metabolic) satiety signals.
Despite the controversy surrounding the role of PYY, the weight of evidence now suggests that it does play a physiological role in the regulation of food intake and body weight. Plasma levels of PYY increase after a meal, and the hormone is converted rapidly from PYY1­36 to PYY3­36 by the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase IV. PYY3­36 acts as specific agonist for the PYY Y2 receptor and is the most potent form of the peptide to inhibit food intake. PYY likely acts by way of the vagal afferent pathway but also by exerting a direct effect on the hypothalamus.
Ghrelin is secreted by endocrine cells in the stomach and is an unusual GI regulatory peptide, because, unlike those already discussed, it increases food intake rapidly and transiently after exogenous administration. Circulating levels of

ghrelin decrease with feeding and increase during the fasting period, thus suggesting that it may act as a physiological regulator of appetite. Interestingly, circulating levels of ghrelin are low after gastric bypass surgery, an effect that has been associated with the effectiveness of this procedure in reducing body weight.
The role of water
Water is necessary for the digestion and absorption of nutrients and for the elimination of wastes. Water provides a fluid environment for the movement of lumenal contents, a solution for digestive enzyme action, and a medium to deliver solute to absorptive surfaces.
The daily input of water into the GI tract is about 9.0 L per day, which comprises 2 L oral intake, 1.5 L salivary saliva, 2.5 L gastric juice, 0.5 L bile, 1.5 L pancreatic juice, and 1.0 L small intestinal secretion. The daily intestinal content of water entering the colon is 1.5­2.0 L, whereas fecal output consists of only 0.1­0.2 L water. Thus, the distal small intestine and colon reabsorb almost all the water delivered to them.
Electrolytes play a central role in the mechanisms of secretion and absorption of water. For example, electrolytes are secreted or absorbed across the epithelium of the GI tract by ion transport systems. The actively transported electrolytes then cause water to move so that isosmolality is maintained. Another result of the transport of a particular ion across the epithelium is that other ions with the opposite charge flow passively and paracellularly along with water through the paracellular spaces between epithelial cells.
In each organ, specific combinations of ion transport systems mediate the secretion or absorption of ions and water, thus providing the overall effect of that organ on water flow in the GI tract. Although these systems are described in detail in chapters dedicated to specific organs, the illustrations in Fig. 1.3 show prototypes of a secretory epithelium (Fig. 1.3a) and an absorptive epithelium (Fig. 1.3b). In the secretory epithelium, activation of a Cl- channel on the lumenal surface along with activation of a K+ channel on the basolateral surface of the cell drives Cl- across the epithelium into the lumen. This effect is promoted by the high intracellular K+ concentration produced by the basolateral Na+,K+-ATPase and the increased intracellular Cl- concentration resulting from the effect of the Na+,K+-ATPase on facilitating the movement of Cl- into the cell using the Na+/K+/Cl- cotransport system. The end result is that Cl- is transported into the lumen. The electrical and osmotic effect of this transport is the subsequent movement of Na+ and water through the paracellular space into the lumen. The net result is water and NaCl secretion.
An example of absorptive transport is provided in Fig. 1.3b. The Na+/glucose cotransport on the lumenal surface results in absorption of the ion Na+ and the nutrient glucose. This

6

Integrative responses of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal CHAPTER 1

Na+ H2O
Cl- CHANNEL
Cl-
(a)

K+ Cl-
Na+

K+ CHANNEL
Na+, K+, Cl­ cotransport

K+ Na+, K+-ATPase

Na+, Glucose cotransport

Glucose Na+

Cl- H2O
Na+ K+ Na+, K+-ATPase

(b) Figure 1.3 Transports of intestinal secretory (a) and absorptive (b) cells.

transport is also facilitated by the Na+,K+-ATPase. The resulting electrical and osmotic effects of the transport of both Na+ and glucose cause the additional absorption of Cl- and water across the epithelium. Of note, much of the water-absorptive process in the small intestine is coupled to nutrient transport. That is, sugars, amino acids, and fatty acids are absorbed using Na+-coupled transport systems, accounting for more rapid absorption of liquids containing combinations of nutrients and NaCl.
As suggested previously, absorption can be regulated by lumenal factors, such as nutrients. Lumenal contents can also regulate secretion. An example is salivary secretion stimulated by food in the mouth or even the thought of food before it enters the mouth. In addition, the meal and nutrients in the meal can activate gastric, biliary, and pancreatic water secretion. The mechanisms that regulate each are specific to the organ and involve both neural and humoral pathways as briefly described in the present chapter and in more detail in other chapters in this textbook.

Cephalic and oral phases of a meal
The main feature of this part of the meal is the activation of the GI tract in readiness for the meal. The cephalic phase consists of responses to auditory, cognitive, visual, and olfactory stimuli induced by the meal. The oral phase includes many of the same stimuli, as well as those initiated in the mouth, which are both chemical and mechanical. The effector responses are mediated through various higher brain centers (many involved in cognition) and ultimately converge on the brainstem to increase parasympathetic outflow to the gut. This outflow activates secretory and motor responses including salivary, gastric, and pancreatic secretion; gallbladder contraction and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi; and relaxation of smooth muscle activity in the proximal stomach. These responses supply the gut with water, ions, digestive enzymes, and bile necessary to initiate digestion.
During the oral phase, contact of the food with the buccal mucosa presents additional chemical and mechanical stimuli. The responses initiated by these stimuli are, in general, the same as those stimulated during the cephalic phase because they share a common efferent pathway of activation through the vagus nerve. Functions of salivary secretions are listed in Table 1.1. Chewing, an important component of the oral phase of the meal, subdivides the food and mixes it with salivary secretions. Digestion starts in the mouth with the action of salivary amylase and lingual lipase. Mucus in the saliva lubricates the food for both chewing and swallowing.
Neural pathways mediate the components of the oral and cephalic phases. For example, salivary secretion is mediated by parasympathetic effector neurons. In the stomach, vagal efferent activity results in the stimulation of chief cells, enterochromaffin-like cells, parietal cells, and G cells. Thus, there is stimulation of function by way of the enteric neurons, which then activate release of paracrine (histamine) and humoral (gastrin) mediators that will further stimulate parietal and chief cell secretion. These mechanisms ensure the rapid initiation of protein digestion as food enters the stomach.
Table 1.1 Functions of chewing and salivary secretion
Disruption of food resulting in smaller particles Formation of bolus for swallowing Initiation of starch and lipid digestion Facilitation of taste Cleansing of mouth and provision of antibacterial action Clearance and neutralization of refluxed gastric material in the
esophagus Regulation of gastric and duodenal phases Regulation of food intake and eating behavior Assistance in speech

7

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

VAGAL EFFERENT OUTFLOW
Enteric nervous system +

VAGAL EFFERENT OUTFLOW
+

+ + +

Ach Chief cell

Ach Ach

Parietal

ECL

cell cell

Pepsinogen

HCl

Lumen

Histamine
Lamina propria

G cell GRP Gastrin
Blood

Figure 1.4 Stimulation of gastric acid secretion by increased parasympathetic outflow is effectively amplified by intrinsic neuronal circuitry in the gastric wall. Vagal efferents synapse with intrinsic cholinergic neurons and with neurons containing gastrinreleasing peptide (GRP). Activation of these intrinisic neurons stimulates a number of cell types in the gastric mucosa. Neurocrine (GRP and acetylcholine [Ach]), paracrine (histamine), and endocrine (gastrin) pathways all contribute to this response. ECL, enterochromaffin-like cell; G cell, gastrin cell; HCl, hydrochloric acid. From Undergraduate Teaching Program of the American Gastroenterological Association, 1996.

Gastric phase of a meal
The presence of food in the stomach initiates several responses within the stomach itself and in other parts of the GI tract. The main functions of the stomach, among many, are to act as a temporary reservoir for the meal and to initiate protein digestion through the secretion of acid and the enzyme precursor pepsinogen. As food enters the stomach from the esophagus it presents two principal stimuli: a mechanical stimulation of the gastric wall caused by distention and stretch of the smooth muscle wall and a chemical stimulation caused by oligopeptides and amino acids in the gastric lumen. The regulation of gastric acid secretion during the gastric phase is dependent on the integrated action of endocrine, paracrine, and neural pathways (Fig. 1.4). Both intrinsic and extrinsic neural reflex pathways are important for the regulation of gastric function. Afferent neurons that pass from the GI tract to the CNS by way of the vagus nerve (and to a lesser extent to the spinal cord) respond to mechanical and chemical stimuli and activate parasympathetic outflow that is both excitatory and inhibitory.
The endocrine pathways include the release of gastrin, which stimulates gastric acid secretion. Important paracrine pathways include the release of histamine from enterochromaffin-like cells, which stimulates gastric acid secretion; and the release of somatostatin from cells in the antral mucosa, which inhibits gastric acid secretion. Activation of these pathways elicits both secretory and motor responses. Secretory responses include acid secretion, pepsinogen secretion, and the production of mucus, intrinsic factor, gastrin, lipase, and bicarbonate (Table 1.2). These secretions initiate protein digestion and protect the gastric mucosa. Motor responses, which are described as changes in the activity of smooth muscle, include inhibition of proximal stomach motility (i.e., receptive relaxation) and stimulation of distal stomach motility causing antral peristalsis. The function of these changes in smooth muscle function is to store the meal, mix

Table 1.2 Major functions of the gastric phase
Gastric responses Storage of the meal Secretion of pepsinogen and lipase to initiate digestion Secretion of H+ to kill microorganisms and convert pepsinogen to active
form Secretion of intrinsic factor to bind vitamin B-12 (cobalamin) for
absorption Secretion of mucus and bicarbonate for gastric mucosal barrier and
lubrication Secretion of water for aqueous suspension of nutrients and to make
hyposmotic Mixing secretions with food and reduction of particle size (grinding) of
the meal Regulation of emptying of contents into the duodenum
Distal gastrointestinal tract responses Stimulation of pancreatic secretion Contraction of the gallbladder Increased colonic motor activity Relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi
it with secretions, and regulate the flow of contents out of the stomach.
The gastric phase also includes the activation of the more distal GI tract, including pancreatic secretion, gallbladder contraction, and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi. These effects are mediated by the same afferent and efferent pathways that regulate gastric responses and prepare the intestine for the emptying of food from the stomach into the intestine.
Duodenal signals regulating gastric, hepatic, and pancreatic functions
The duodenum and proximal small intestine initiate several regulatory systems that mediate the controlled delivery of

8

Integrative responses of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal CHAPTER 1

Table 1.3 Duodenal signal-mediated responses
Inhibition of gastric acid secretion Inhibition of gastric emptying Stimulation of pancreatic enzyme secretion Stimulation of pancreatic and biliary ductal ion and water secretion Stimulation of gallbladder contraction Relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi Alteration of intestinal motility from the fasted to the fed pattern
chyme from the stomach and the secretion of pancreatic juice and bile into the duodenum to match the digestive and absorptive capacity of the intestine (Table 1.3). The combination of organs regulated during this phase has been termed the duodenal cluster unit: stomach, duodenum, liver, biliary tract, gallbladder, and pancreas. Lumenal and wall stimuli activate neural and endocrine pathways to mediate the responses of these organs. The different organ systems in the duodenal cluster unit have a common embryological origin and are regulated by similar sensory mechanisms and effector pathways. The gastric phase of the response to a meal provides some of the stimuli for the duodenal phase. For example, the products of gastric lipid and protein digestion are potent stimulants of regulation in the duodenum. The important duodenal stimuli are distention, acid, osmotic load, and different nutrients. The sensory pathways consist of spinal and vagal afferents and intrinsic sensory neurons that initiate reflex pathways. Hormonal pathways, especially those medi-

ated by CCK and secretin, are of central importance (Fig. 1.5). Of note, the effector systems regulated include the inhibition of gastric emptying and secretion, the stimulation of pancreatic secretion, gallbladder contraction, relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi, pancreatic and biliary water and bicarbonate secretion, intestinal secretion, and the conversion of small bowel motility from the fasted to fed pattern.
Gastric emptying depends on the chemical and physical composition of the gastric contents (i.e., chyme) entering the duodenum. Sensory neurons, both vagal and spinal, respond to nutrients, H+, distention, and the hyperosmolality of chyme. The effector responses that result in the inhibition or slowing of gastric emptying are not completely understood but involve activation of vagal efferent outflow, which produces a decrease in antral contractions, contraction of the pylorus, and a decrease in proximal gastric tone. In addition to these extrinsic neural pathways, there may also be local pathways, such as an intrinsic neural reflex, mediating the pyloric contraction induced by acid in the duodenum.
The availability of CCK antagonists has contributed to the appreciation that CCK is physiologically important in regulating the function of the duodenal cluster unit. The administration of CCK1 receptor antagonists reverses the inhibition of gastric emptying, gallbladder contraction, relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi, and stimulation of pancreatic enzyme secretion in response to either a meal or the infusion of nutrients into the duodenum. CCK is released from endocrine cells in the proximal intestine in response to lumenal lipid and protein. The action of CCK to inhibit gastric acid secretion and gastric emptying, and to increase pancreatic secretion, is dependent on neural pathways (Fig. 1.6). CCK stimulates

Figure 1.5 Diagrammatic representation of the duodenal cluster unit illustrates the control mechanisms and pathways involved in intestinal feedback regulation during the duodenal phase. The nutrient content and osmolality of the meal are sensed (represented as a meter) and activate predominantly neural pathways involving cholecystokinin (CCK) to open or close various stopcocks to increase pancreatic secretion or delay gastric emptying, for example. The acidity of the meal is sensed and activates the release of secretin and neural pathways to increase bicarbonate secretion from the pancreas, biliary tract, and probably also from the duodenal wall. The contents of the duodenum are mixed with the secretions by the segmenting contractions of the smooth muscle wall, represented as a stirring bar and magnetic stirrer. From Undergraduate Teaching Program of the American Gastroenterological Association, 1996.

Duodenal wall
H H2O C O3­

GC AH SY TM RE I C

Pancreatic juice

E

N Z Y M

H C O3­

E

S

Biliary secretion

B I L E

H C O3­

Duodenal lumen
STIRRING BAR MAGNET

Secretin

34

5 6
pH meter

77

CCK and nerves

34

5 6
Osmolality and nutrient meter

9

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

VAGAL AFFERENT
INPUT

· CCK interacts with CCK-A receptors on afferent neurons

CCK

Sphincter of Oddi relaxation

Gallbladder contraction

CCK

VAGAL EFFERENT OUTFLOW

Decreased acid secretion

Decreased gastric emptying
Increased pancreatic enzyme secretion

Figure 1.6 Cholecystokinin (CCK) acts predominantly by way of a vagal afferent pathway to integrate intestinal feedback regulation of the duodenal phase of the meal. From Undergraduate Teaching Program of the American Gastroenterological Association, 1996.

specific CCK1 receptors on vagal afferent nerve terminals in the intestinal mucosa, which results in the activation of vagovagal reflexes to modify gastric, biliary, and pancreatic function. Thus, CCK, long thought of as a classic hormone, actually functions locally as a paracrine effector to stimulate afferent neurons, leading to activation of reflex neural responses.
The physiological release of CCK in response to a meal is modulated by at least two peptides. One is monitor peptide, which is secreted by pancreatic acinar cells. In addition, there is at least one lumenal CCK-releasing factor. The proposed mechanism of action for both of these releasing factors is that they are constitutively secreted into the intestinal lumen. In the absence of protein or protein products in the intestinal lumen, both factors are efficiently broken down by digestive enzymes and thus are not available to stimulate CCK release. On ingestion of a meal, however, dietary proteins compete with the releasing factors as substrates for the digestive enzymes. The net effect is that the releasing factors escape digestion and become available to stimulate CCK secretion from endocrine cells in the mucosa.
The most important function of the pancreas in the integrated response to a meal is the production, storage, and secretion of digestive enzymes along with fluid. The major control of pancreatic secretion is exerted by efferent fibers from the parasympathetic nervous system and by the hormones CCK and secretin. As indicated in the previous sections, parasympathetic activation of pancreatic secretion occurs during the cephalic, oral, gastric, and duodenal phases of the meal. Secretion during the duodenal phase accounts for about 70% of the total response to a meal. In this phase, secretion is activated by the presence of chyme in the duodenum by way of extrinsic neural pathways, enteropancreatic neural pathways (i.e., through intrinsic neurons that terminate in both the duodenum and pancreas), and endocrine pathways (i.e., through CCK and secretin). Of note, research indicates that the effect of CCK on pancreatic secretion is

predominantly mediated through neural reflexes similar to those described for the regulation of gastric function.
As the meal enters the intestine, it is acidic and hyperosmotic; however, by the time it leaves the duodenum, it has a neutral pH and is isosmotic. These necessary changes for optimal digestive enzyme activity are achieved by the secretion of large volumes of water and bicarbonate ions by the pancreatic and biliary systems and the intestinal mucosa, as well as by the regulation of gastric motility and secretion as previously described. The alkaline secretions are regulated mainly by the release of secretin from the duodenal mucosa. Acting as an endocrine agent, secretin increases bicarbonate and water secretion from the pancreatic and biliary ductal systems.
Contraction of the gallbladder and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi result in the addition of biliary secretion to the meal. During the cephalic, oral, and gastric phases, parasympathetic efferent nerves mediate these responses. During the duodenal phase, CCK acting either alone or through a vagal reflex pathway has a pronounced effect on the delivery of bile to the duodenum. Bile is composed of both inorganic and organic constituents. As previously indicated, the inorganic constituents (e.g., water, bicarbonate ions, and other electrolytes) serve to convert gastric chyme into a neutral isosmotic solution. The major organic constituents of bile are conjugated bile acids, phospholipids, cholesterol, and bilirubin; the latter two are excretory products. Both bile acids and phospholipids are essential in maintaining cholesterol in a soluble state and thereby preventing the formation of gallstones. Conjugated bile acids traverse the entire small intestine and are taken up by a receptormediated transport system in the terminal ileum. The conjugated bile acids return to the liver by way of the portal circulation and then are secreted back into the biliary system and stored in the gallbladder. This cycling of bile acids is termed the enterohepatic circulation. Bile acids have multiple

10

Integrative responses of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal CHAPTER 1

important functions in the process of digestion and absorption of lipids and fat-soluble vitamins. They accomplish these functions in part by possessing polar (hydrophilic) and nonpolar (hydrophobic) regions that allow them to interface between aqueous and lipid environments. Thus, bile acids are involved in the formation of emulsions and micelles and in the binding of lipolytic digestive products. All these effects enhance the digestion and the absorption of fat in the meal.
The highly regulated duodenal phase is responsible for the addition of water, ions, enzymes, bile acids, and other secretions to the meal in proportions that result in an optimal environment for the digestion of nutrients. The process of digestion in the intestinal lumen is facilitated further by the induction of patterns of motility in the duodenum that promote the mixing of intestinal contents with digestive enzymes.
During the intervals between meals, motility of the GI tract is characterized by periods of intense contractions and periods of quiescence. In humans, these periods cycle at about 1.5 h. The sequential contractions migrate aborally (i.e., toward the anus) and have been termed the migrating motor complex (MMC). This complex of migrating contractions starts in the stomach and moves through the intestine and into the colon, sweeping undigested material and contents through the GI tract in the interdigestive period. Initiation of the MMC is dependent on the integrity of the vagal innervation, which serves to release the hormone motilin, which in turn activates the MMC. Food in the intestine abolishes the MMC and changes intestinal motility from this fasted pattern to a fed pattern of motility.
Nutrient digestion and absorption systems in the small intestine
The small intestine is divided into three functional regions: duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The jejunum is the major organ for intralumenal and surface digestion and absorption of nutrients. In addition, a significant amount of water and ions are secreted and absorbed in the jejunum to facilitate digestion and absorption. The ileum provides another site for absorption and has two unique absorptive roles. One is the absorption of conjugated bile acids for reuse after they have traversed the length of the small intestine participating in fat digestion and absorption. The other is the absorption of cobalamin (vitamin B-12) bound to intrinsic factor secreted by the stomach. The ileum also releases hormones that have important functions in the gut. For example, PYY inhibits gastric function and satiety regulation. The ileocecal valve prevents the large reservoir of colonic bacteria from entering the small intestine.
Three characteristics of the small intestine make it especially well adapted for its critical role in nutrient assimilation. First, the small intestine has an enormous surface area as a result of folds in the mucosa, villi on the mucosa, and microvilli

on the epithelial cells. Second, the blood flow to the intestine markedly increases with a meal to facilitate the transport of nutrients; it can account for up to 25% of cardiac output during a meal. Third, the enteric nervous system is highly developed in the small intestine, enabling this region of the GI tract to function independently of the extrinsic innervation.
The main responses initiated in the small intestinal phase are alterations in intestinal motility patterns, intestinal secretion, and blood flow, as well as regulation of tight junction permeability. The small intestine exhibits two motor patterns: peristalsis and segmentation. Both of these motility patterns are generated by the enteric nervous system and are independent of the extrinsic nervous system. Peristalsis is characterized by a wave of relaxation followed by a ring of contraction that develops at a point and moves aborally over variable distances. Peristalsis is the primary mechanism by which contents are moved along the intestine in the interdigestive period. Segmentation is characteristic of the fed state and is the process by which rings of contraction develop at uniform intervals, dividing the lumen into segments. Segmentation is the primary mechanism by which the contents of the intestine are mixed with secretions and moved across the mucosa to enhance absorption. Another major effect of segmentation is to slow the transit of the meal in the small intestine to further enhance absorption.
The major changes in the chemical and physical characteristics of food, as well as the absorption of nutrients, trace elements, vitamins, water, and ions, occur in the intestinal phase. Hydrolysis of proteins and carbohydrates and the solubilization and hydrolysis of fats are catalyzed by enzymes in the intestinal lumen (from salivary, gastric, and pancreatic secretions) and on the brush border of the surface of the intestinal mucosa. Examples of lumenal and surface digestive systems are listed in Table 1.4. Absorption is the process by which molecules produced by lumenal surface digestion are transported into epithelial cells and then carried into the blood or lymph. The duodenum and jejunum have the highest absorptive capacities; most absorption occurs in the upper small intestine, although some occurs in the ileum. Molecules
Table 1.4 Digestive enzymes of the lumen and mucosal surface
Intralumenal Salivary amylase Gastric pepsin and lipase Pancreatic amylase, lipase, phospholipase, cholesterol esterase, trypsin,
chymotrypsin, elastase, carboxypeptidase A, carboxypeptidase B, DNase, RNase
Mucosal surface Lactase, sucrase, isomaltase Amino-oligopeptidase, aminopeptidase A, dipeptidase, dipeptidyl
aminopeptidase, carboxypeptidase P, g-glutamyltransferase, folate conjugase

11

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Table 1.5 Mucosal absorptive transporters
Na+-glucose/galactose cotransporter (SGLT1), fructose transporter (GLUT5)
Neutral amino acid transporter (NBB system); PHE system for phenylalanine and methionine; IMINO system for imino amino acids, proline and hydroxyproline; basic amino acid transporter, acidic amino acid transporter
Na+-dependent transporters for folate, thiamine, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, biotin
Na+-dependent conjugated bile acid transporter in the ileum Cobalamin­intrinsic factor receptor in the ileum
are absorbed by two principal mechanisms: transcellular (i.e., passing through enterocytes) and paracellular (i.e., passing between enterocytes). Monosaccharides, amino acids, electrolytes, minerals, and water-soluble vitamins enter the portal circulation and pass through the liver into the systemic circulation. Lipids and fat-soluble vitamins and cholesterol esters (together with lipophilic drugs) enter the lymph, which drains into the systemic circulation. Examples of mucosal absorptive systems are listed in Table 1.5.
Colonic phase of a meal
The colonic phase is important for the further reabsorption of water and ions and for the storage and elimination of waste products. The cecum and ascending colon receive about 2 L of ileal effluent daily. Absorptive transport mechanisms reduce the volume to about 200 mL per day. The transverse, descending, and sigmoid portions of the colon store fecal material and transport the material to the rectum. The rectum signals the defecation reflex. In addition, some fermentation of monosaccharides yields free fatty acids that can be taken up by colonic epithelial cells.
The stimuli induced in the colon are both mechanical (e.g., rectal distention) and chemical (e.g., free fatty acids). Extrinsic and intrinsic neural pathways mediate the motility responses of the colon and the defecation response. Hormonal pathways affecting other parts of the GI tract may also be excited in the colon. For example, PYY may be released from the colonic mucosa if the fat content of the meal is high and not all is absorbed by passage through the small intestine. PYY, in turn, slows gastric emptying and transit of the meal through the small intestine, resulting in increased fat digestion and absorption. Further, PYY decreases food intake through its regulatory effect on satiety.
The effectors in the colonic phase are both motor and secretory. The colon exhibits both storage motor patterns (i.e., changes in tone) and propulsive motor patterns (i.e., phasic contractions). Rectal distention initiates the defecation reflex. This response consists of both involuntary and

voluntary components. Propulsive motility in the descending colon and rectum is increased to move the feces to the anus, where relaxation of internal and external anal sphincters facilitates elimination.
Regulation of nutrient storage and release: roles of the liver and endocrine pancreas
An essential function of the liver and endocrine pancreas is to coordinate the distribution of vital metabolic substrates to the tissues of the body. It must perform this task during both the fed (i.e., absorptive) state, when nutrients ingested during a meal enter the circulatory system from the gut, and the fasted (i.e., postabsorptive) state, when the gut contains no nutrients (Table 1.6). During the fed state, the body's energy requirements are met by a portion of the ingested nutrients, and any remaining nutrients must be stored for later use. Conversely, during the fasted state, the energy needs of the tissues must be satisfied by metabolic substrates generated from the body's stores, chiefly the liver, the adipose tissue, and the skeletal muscle. The integrated responses of the liver and endocrine pancreas to a meal direct the crucial metabolic
Table 1.6 Major characteristics of the fed and fasted states
Fed state Nutrients absorbed from the gut Energy needs met by using ingested nutrients Insulin released by the pancreas Net hepatic glucose uptake Hepatic glycogen synthesis and storage Hepatic protein and triglyceride synthesis Muscle glycogen synthesis and storage Muscle protein synthesis Adipose triglyceride storage Glucose is predominant fuel source
Fasted state No nutrients in the gut Energy needs met by using stored fuel Glucagon released by the pancreas Net hepatic glucose release Hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis Hepatic protein and fat catabolism Muscle glycogenolysis Muscle protein catabolism Adipocyte fat catabolism Enhanced fatty acid utilization by most tissues
Long-term fast Hepatic ketogenesis Enhanced ketone utilization by the brain and other tissues Proportional increase in renal gluconeogenesis

12

Integrative responses of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to a meal CHAPTER 1

transition from the fed to the fasted state and back. These responses are controlled by a complex network of endocrine, paracrine, and neural signals, as well as by the concentration of metabolic substrates in the portal blood that feeds the liver and pancreas. Insulin and glucagon, hormones produced in the islet cells of the pancreas, are the principal regulators of the metabolic state, such that the transition from the fed to the fasted state can be explained by a reduction in the ratio of insulin to glucagon in the blood.
Fed state Extrinsic nutrients enter the bloodstream from the gut while a meal is digested and absorbed. During this period, termed the fed state, ingested glucose is the body's principal energy source. A portion of this glucose, absorbed directly from the portal system, enters the liver where some of it is used to meet the liver's energy needs, and the remainder is converted to glycogen, which will replete the hepatic stores, and to fatty acids and glycerol for synthesis of and storage as triacylglycerols in the adipose tissue. Thus, a key feature of the fed state is net glucose uptake by the liver. Glucose that reaches the skeletal muscle is catabolized for energy and converted to glycogen to replete muscle energy stores. Adipocytes catabolize glucose, and also use it to form -glycerol phosphate and fatty acids, which are triacylglycerol precursors. Ingested amino acids are taken up by all of the body's tissues and organs, including the liver, for use in protein synthesis. However, excess amino acids are not stored as protein but are converted by the liver to -keto acids, which are catabolized or converted to fatty acids for storage as fat. Thus, the net synthesis of protein during the fed state simply replenishes the protein degraded during the fasted state, except in growing children and vigorously exercising adults. The lipid contents of a meal are transported to the circulation by way of the lymphatics in the form of triacylglycerols. Lipoprotein lipases in the endothelium hydrolyze the ingested triacylglycerols into fatty acids and glycerol, which are a source of energy for tissues, and the adipocytes store the excess as fat.
Fasted state During the fasted state, the absence of nutrient absorption from the gut forces the liver to maintain the concentration of glucose in the blood. This is imperative because, under ordinary circumstances, glucose is the exclusive energy source for the brain and the erythrocytes. The blood glucose concentration is sustained by hepatic glucose production and by a reduction in glucose use by most tissues and organs. An early event in the fasted state is the hydrolysis of glycogen (i.e., glycogenolysis) in the liver into glucose, which is released into the circulation. However, the hepatic stores of glycogen are limited, so that during prolonged fasts the liver must synthesize glucose from a variety of precursors (i.e., gluconeogenesis), including lactate, pyruvate, amino acids, and glycerol. These glucose precursors result from several extrahepatic

metabolic processes that are stimulated during a prolonged fast. Glycogen is stored in skeletal muscle, as well as the liver. During a prolonged fast or when a muscle is working, skeletal muscle glycogen is hydrolyzed to form lactate and pyruvate. Lipid hydrolysis (i.e., lipolysis) in adipocytes is stimulated in the fasted state, resulting in the formation of glycerol, as well as fatty acids. As the fasted state proceeds, protein mainly located in skeletal muscle is catabolized to amino acids. These precursors are circulated to the liver where they are converted into glucose to help preserve the concentration of glucose in the blood. Consequently, during the fasted state, the liver is a site of net glucose release.
Gluconeogenesis is capable of supplying less than half of the energy necessary for survival. Therefore, the fasted state is also characterized by a substantial reduction in glucose utilization by most tissues and organs of the body. Glucose generated by the liver is thus spared for use by the CNS. Glucose use is reduced by an increase in fat utilization by other tissues. As previously discussed, the enhanced lipolysis associated with the fasted state produces fatty acids in addition to the glucose precursor, glycerol. These fatty acids are released to the systemic circulation where they are used as an energy source by nearly all tissues except, most notably, the CNS.
During long-term fasts (i.e., longer than 24­48 h), further metabolic changes occur that facilitate survival. The kidneys, which also are capable of performing gluconeogenesis, take on an increasingly prominent role in glucose production. In addition, the liver converts acetyl-CoA, a product of fatty acid catabolism, into ketones. These ketones are used as an energy source by many tissues, including the brain. A distinct advantage of shifting the fuel source from glucose to ketones is that muscle is spared as a source of amino acids for gluconeogenesis.
Regulation of the metabolic state
During the fed state, serum glucose in particular, but also amino acids and other sugars in the blood, absorbed from a meal stimulate the secretion of insulin from the -cells of the pancreatic islets (Table 1.7). In addition to the metabolic substrates absorbed during a meal, gastrointestinal hormones released from duodenal cells facilitate insulin release. These hormones, called incretins, include GLP-1 and glucoinsulinotropic peptide. In addition, vagal neural pathways and -adrenergic stimuli regulate insulin release. In contrast, somatostatin and -adrenergic stimuli inhibit insulin release. Insulin affects mainly the metabolism of the liver, adipose tissue, and muscle, which are the primary sites of fuel storage and release. The hepatic response to insulin is to promote net glucose uptake, glycogen synthesis and storage, and protein and triglyceride synthesis. In adipocytes, insulin stimulates the uptake of glucose, triglyceride synthesis from glucose,

13

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Table 1.7 Regulation and function of key hormonal and paracrine regulators of nutrient storage and release

Peptide

Source

Stimuli and facilitators

Inhibitors

Functions

Insulin
Glucagon Somatostatin
Glucagon-like peptide-1

Pancreatic b-cells

Glucose Other sugars (e.g., mannose) Amino acids (e.g., leucine, arginine) GI hormones (e.g., glucagon-like
peptides, cholecystokinin, secretin) Vagal input b-Adrenergic signals

a-Adrenergic signals Somatostatin (paracrine)

Pancreatic a-cells Pancreatic d-cells

 Glucose Amino acids (e.g., arginine, alanine)

Glucose Insulin Somatostatin Fatty acids

Glucose Amino acids (e.g., arginine) GI hormones (e.g., glucagon-like
peptides, cholecystokinin, secretin)

Duodenal L-cells

Glucose Lipids

Liver  Glycogen synthesis and storage  Glycogenolysis  Protein and triglyceride synthesis  Very low-density lipoprotein production  Gluconeogenesis  Ketogenesis
Muscle  Protein synthesis  Glycogen synthesis and storage
Adipose tissue  Triglyceride storage  Lipolysis
Hepatic  Glycogenolysis  Gluconeogenesis  Ketogenesis
Pancreatic  Glucagon release  Insulin release  Secretion by the exocrine pancreas
Gastrointestinal  Gastric emptying  Gastric acid and gastrin production  Splanchnic blood flow
Pancreatic  Insulin release
Gastrointestinal  Gastric emptying

and net triglyceride storage. The effect of insulin on muscle is to stimulate net glucose and amino acid uptake and use, glycogen synthesis and storage, and protein synthesis.
During the fasted state when there are no nutrients being absorbed from the gut, glucagon secretion is highest. This observation results from the fact that glucagon release is mainly stimulated by hypoglycemia, although certain amino acids, epinephrine (adrenaline), and sympathetic neural activity also stimulate its secretion. Conversely, glucose, insulin, somatostatin, and certain fatty acids inhibit secretion of this peptide. Glucagon, which acts primarily on the liver, counters the effects of insulin by stimulating glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, and ketogenesis.
Aside from regulating the secretion of insulin and glucagon, catecholamines and the autonomic nervous system stimulate glycogenolysis by the liver and muscle, gluconeogenesis by

the liver, and lipolysis by adipocytes. Hypoglycemia leads to reflex epinephrine secretion and sympathetic neural activity. Although other hormones, such as cortisol and growth hormone, modulate hepatic metabolism, they do not play an important role in the liver's response to a meal.
In addition to the roles that blood glucose and amino acid concentrations play in the hormonal regulation of the metabolic state, the concentration of glucose in the blood of the sinusoids directly modulates hepatic metabolism. As a result of the activity of certain glucose concentrationdependent enzymes in the liver, elevation of the sinusoidal blood glucose concentration stimulates glycogen synthesis and inhibits glycogenolysis. Together, hormones, the autonomic nervous system, and the concentration of metabolic substrates in blood precisely modulate the hepatic response to a meal.

14

A COMPONENTS
2 The enteric nervous system and its
extrinsic connections
John B. Furness, Trung V. Nguyen, Kulmira Nurgali, Yasutake Shimizu

Structural organization of the enteric nervous system, 15 Microscopic structure of the enteric nervous system, 18 Histochemical profiles and transmitter multiplicity of enteric
neurons, 19 Physiological characteristics of enteric neurons, 21 Functionally defined enteric neurons, 23

Enteric control of motility, 28 Enteric control of secretion and vasodilation, 30 Enteric nervous system responses to noxious stimuli, 32 Sympathetic effects on motility and secretion, 32 Summary, 34

The proper functioning of the digestive tract is absolutely dependent on the enteric nervous system. If this system of neurons is missing or depleted, then humans or other mammals die or suffer deficiencies in digestive function, depending on the extent of the loss of enteric neurons. An extreme manifestation of enteric neuron loss is Hirschsprung disease, which involves congenital absence of enteric neurons (aganglionosis) in all, or part, of the large intestine. Patients with Hirschsprung disease die if the aganglionic segment is not removed; conversely, removal of the aganglionic segment and the presence of intact enteric nervous system throughout the remaining bowel restores good health [1]. Partial degeneration of the enteric nervous system during life leads to severe dysmotility. Such degeneration occurs, for example, when the enteric nervous system is targeted by the infective organism of Chagas disease, Trypanosoma cruzi [2].
The enteric nervous system circuits have essential roles in the control of motility, blood flow, water and electrolyte transport, and acid secretion in the digestive tract, and the enteric nervous system is most commonly the medium through which extrinsic neurons control gastrointestinal function [3]. The enteric nervous system is capable of functioning independently of central control, although the central nervous system normally modifies its activity.
Structural organization of the enteric nervous system
Nerve cell bodies, their processes, and enteric glial cells
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

embedded in the wall of the gut form the enteric nervous system (Fig. 2.1). The number of enteric neurons in a human is estimated to be 200­600 million, which is about the same number of nerve cells as in the spinal cord [3]. The nerve cell bodies are grouped in small aggregates, the enteric ganglia, which are connected by bundles of nerve cell processes to form two major ganglionated plexuses in the tubular digestive tract: the myenteric plexus, also called the Auerbach plexus, and the submucosal plexus, often referred to as the Meissner plexus.
Locations of the enteric ganglia The myenteric plexus of ganglia and connecting nerve strands lies between the longitudinal and circular layers of the muscularis externa and forms a continuous network around the circumference of the tubular digestive tract from the upper esophagus to the internal anal sphincter. In the parts of the large intestine where the longitudinal muscle is gathered into taeniae, the myenteric plexus is prominent underneath the taeniae and is sparser over the rest of the colonic surface.
Ganglia are numerous only in the submucosal plexus of the small and large intestines; extensive networks of linked ganglia are absent from the submucosa of the esophagus and stomach, although isolated ganglia may be encountered in these regions.
Ganglia are occasionally found in the mucosa, specifically in the connective tissue close to the muscularis mucosae. Small ganglia are also found along the extrinsic nerves (i.e., vagus, pelvic, and mesenteric nerves) as they enter the gut. Ganglia associated with the extrinsic nerves located on the surface of the gut, particularly in the stomach and rectum, are referred to as subserosal ganglia. Enteric ganglia are also present in the gallbladder, biliary ducts, and pancreas.

15

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Myenteric plexus (a)
Longitudinal muscle

Circular muscle
Deep muscular plexus Submucosal plexus

Mucosa (b)
Paravascular nerve
Subserous nerve

Muscularis mucosae
Perivascular nerves

Submucosal artery

Mesentery Myenteric plexus

Submucosal plexus

Deep muscular plexus
Mucosal plexus

Figure 2.1 The enteric plexuses as seen (a) in whole mounts and (b) in transverse section of the small intestine. There are two ganglionated plexuses, the myenteric and the submucosal, in addition to plexuses of nerve fibers in the muscle and the mucosa and around the arterioles. Adapted from Furness and Costa [33], with permission.

Nonganglionated plexuses The enteric neurons provide axons that form a series of nonganglionated plexuses that supply effector tissues of the tubular digestive tract: the longitudinal muscle plexus, the circular muscle plexus (and its subdivisions), the plexus of the muscularis mucosae, the mucosal plexus, and the perivascular plexuses. The exception is the striated component of the external musculature of the esophagus, which is found in the upper third of the human esophagus and in a greater proportion of the esophagus in most other species. The striated muscle cells are innervated at motor endplates, not by a nerve plexus.
The pattern of innervation of the longitudinal muscle differs according to its bulk. In humans, and in other species in

which the longitudinal muscle is a thick layer throughout the intestine, the nerve fiber bundles run parallel to the muscle and comprise the longitudinal muscle plexus. In some species, such as the rabbit, guinea pig, and mouse, the thickness of the longitudinal muscle of the small intestine is less than about 10 muscle cells. In these species, the nerve fiber bundles do not form a plexus within the longitudinal muscle, but rather a tertiary plexus, a component of the myenteric plexus, that lies against the inner surface of the longitudinal muscle (Fig. 2.2) [4,5]. The processes of individual tertiary plexus neurons ramify extensively on the inner surface of the longitudinal muscle [6].
The circular muscle plexus is formed by parallel bundles of nerve fibers throughout the thickness of this muscle layer. In

16

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

1 2

2 1 3 3

100 M
Figure 2.2 The three components of the myenteric plexus in small animals are shown in a drawing of a whole mount of guinea pig small intestine. Common to all species are the primary component of the plexus (1), consisting of the ganglia and internodal strands (interganglionic connectives), and the secondary component (2), consisting of nerve strands lying parallel to the circular muscle. The tertiary plexus (3) is found only where the longitudinal muscle is thin; in such regions, little or no longitudinal muscle plexus is found within the longitudinal layer. Adapted from Furness and Costa [16], with permission.
some regions of the gastrointestinal tract, a dense layer of nerve fiber bundles provides additional innervation of the inner part of the circular muscle. The presence of this dense layer and its position in relation to the circular muscle differs among regions [3]. In the mammalian small intestine, the circular muscle consists of a thick outer layer and a thin inner layer of muscle cells [7,8]. The dense plexus of nerve fibers located between these two muscle layers in the small intestine is called the deep muscular plexus [9]. The colon of most species lacks an inner layer of specialized circular muscle; a dense layer of nerve fibers, the submuscular plexus, similar to the deep muscular plexus, lies close against the inner surface of the circular muscle, adjacent to connective tissue of the submucosa [9­11]. The circular muscle plexus continues into the smooth muscle sphincters of the digestive tract without any apparent change in form. The myenteric plexus also continues into the sphincter regions.
The muscularis mucosae throughout the digestive tube consists of outer longitudinal and inner circular layers of smooth muscle innervated by nerve fibers running parallel to the muscle bundles. Muscle bundles extend into the cores of the small intestinal villi, and similar strands of muscle are found between the gastric glands [12]. In the small intestine of small animals, such as mice and rats, the muscularis mucosae is thin and barely discernible in histological sections.
The mucosal plexus is a network of fine nerve fiber bundles that lies beneath the mucosal epithelium. Sparse in the esophagus, the mucosal plexus is prominent in the stomach, small intestine, colon, and gallbladder. The mucosal plexus

in the small intestine is sometimes described as having subglandular, periglandular, and villous components. These components are continuous with one another, despite being innervated by slightly different nerve fiber populations.
Perivascular plexuses are found around the arterioles within the gut wall. The plexuses have mixed origins, from enteric neurons, extrinsic sympathetic neurons, and spinal afferent neurons. Innervation of veins within the gut wall is sparse or nonexistent, and lymphatic vessels in the gut wall appear to lack innervation. The lymphatic tissue within the gut wall, notably the Peyer patches, is innervated from intrinsic and extrinsic sources [13].
Myenteric plexus The myenteric plexus consists of small aggregations of neurons, the myenteric ganglia, nerve fiber bundles that connect the ganglia, and nerve bundles that connect the plexus with other structures (Fig. 2.3). The ganglia are flattened in the plane of the plexus, and usually have a thickness of one to four nerve cells, depending on the state of contraction and the size of the intestine [14]. In any region of the gastrointestinal tract, ganglion size varies widely. In the guinea pig ileum, ganglia range in size from a single cell to about 200 nerve cell bodies.
The pattern of ganglia, determined by shape and orientation, differs among regions and species but is often readily identifiable as belonging to a particular part of the intestine [15,16]. Small bands of nerve fibers known as internodal strands or interganglionic connectives connect the ganglia (see Figs 2.2 and 2.3). The meshwork formed by the ganglia and the internodal strands is called the primary component of the myenteric plexus. Nerve strands that connect with the primary plexus and run circumferentially constitute the secondary component of the plexus (see Figs 2.2 and 2.3) [4,17]. Branches from these secondary strands innervate the circular muscle [18]. Nerve fiber bundles (called penetrating fiber bundles or vertical connections) also run through the circular muscle to connect the myenteric plexus with the submucosal and mucosal plexuses [19].
The major targets for nerve cells of the myenteric plexus are the muscularis externa (most of its innervation is from this source), the submucosal ganglia, and other myenteric nerve cells. Intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs) with cell bodies in the myenteric plexus, and a small number of secretomotor neurons in the myenteric ganglia, also innervate the mucosa. The intestinofugal neurons comprise a minor population of myenteric neurons that project to sympathetic prevertebral ganglia.
Submucosal plexus A continuous network of numerous small ganglia is found in the submucosa throughout the small and large intestine. In many species, plexuses of ganglia are located in inner and outer layers, but some regions in certain species of small

17

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function
neurons, notably submucosal IPANs, project from the submucosa to the myenteric plexus. Other submucosal neurons innervate the muscularis mucosae. The inner circular muscle in some species, including human, is innervated in part by submucosal neurons [11,23,24]. In the stomach, which almost entirely lacks submucosal ganglia, the intrinsic innervation of the mucosa and muscularis mucosae comes from the myenteric plexus.
Ganglia of the gallbladder, biliary ducts, and pancreas The biliary system and the pancreas develop from diverticula of the small intestine, and the ganglia in their walls are part of the enteric nervous system. Plexuses of ganglia, similar to the enteric plexuses of the small intestine but differing between species in their relations to tissue layers, are found in the gallbladder, cystic duct, and common bile duct [3]. Numerous nerve fibers occur in the muscle, around blood vessels, and in the mucosa of the biliary tract. Ganglia, connected to each other by small nerve trunks, are scattered through the pancreas, forming a three-dimensional plexus in this solid organ. Nerve fibers are found around the acini and the blood vessels and in the islets. The intrinsic neurons of the gallbladder control motility and the flux of water and electrolytes. In the pancreas, intrinsic neurons appear to be involved in the control of both endocrine and exocrine components, although the most complete data exist for exocrine control [25]. Nerve fibers connect the plexuses of the biliary system and the pancreas with the ganglionated plexuses of the upper small intestine [26­28]. These connections are presumed to contribute to coordination between these organs and the tubular gastrointestinal tract.

Figure 2.3 Drawing of a whole mount of the myenteric plexus of the human small intestine prepared by Auerbach and published in Henle's Textbook of Histology in 1871. Myenteric ganglia, internodal strands, and small nerve trunks of the secondary component of the myenteric plexus (arrows) can be seen.
animals have only a single layer of submucosal ganglia [3,20]. The inner and outer plexuses contain different populations of neurons, defined by their morphological and histochemical characteristics [21]. The electrophysiological properties of the nerve cell populations in the two plexuses also differ [22]. It is assumed that the inner plexus (closer to the mucosa) is mainly concerned with the control of fluid movement, and the outer plexus contributes to control of motility of the external muscle. Submucosal ganglia are smaller and less regularly arranged than myenteric ganglia.
The submucosal plexus harbors the cell bodies of neurons with dual secretomotor/vasodilator function, as well as the cell bodies of neurons that are solely secretomotor [3]. Some

Microscopic structure of the enteric nervous system
Shapes of neurons The nerve cells of the enteric ganglia can be classified into subgroups according to their shapes [3,19]. The first effective classification was by Dogiel [29], who proposed that the shapes of nerve cells are related to their functions. He defined three cell shapes: types I, II, and III. The first two are readily recognized in different species and with various staining techniques; the third type is less well defined, but bears some resemblance to a group later referred to as filamentous neurons. Type I neurons are generally flattened in the plane of the ganglia; they have oval cell bodies, prominent flattened (lamellar) dendrites, and a single long axon often characterized by spiny protuberances close to the cell body. Muscle motor neurons and many interneurons are type I neurons. Type II neurons have a spheroidal shape and give rise to several axons, usually three to ten, although some type II neurons are pseudounipolar [19,30]. A few type II neurons

18

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

have tapering dendrites in addition to several long axonlike processes and are referred to as dendritic type II cells [31]. Intrinsic primary afferent neurons have Dogiel type II morphology.
A variety of other shapes have been described, notably in the pig and guinea pig intestines, which have been studied intensively, and in human [19]. Stach [31] extended Dogiel's classification to include types IV, V, and VI and mini-neurons, based primarily on work in the pig [19]. Type IV neurons are secretomotor neurons in the guinea pig and probably in the pig. In the guinea pig small intestine, filamentous and small simple neurons (the latter being similar to the mini-neurons in the pig) have been described [30].
Numbers of neurons The numbers of nerve cells in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses have been estimated by counting the nerve cell bodies per unit area of gut surface [16,32]. The counts indicate that the number of nerve cells in the enteric nervous system is about the same as the number of nerve cells in the spinal cord [33]. The accuracy of counts of neurons depends on the methods used and many published counts are probably underestimates [34]. Myenteric nerve cells are numerous throughout the digestive tube, varying in density from about 1000 to about 15 000 cell bodies/cm2. The esophagus and proximal stomach have lower densities, compared with high densities in the distal stomach and large intestine, and intermediate densities in the small intestine. In total, the enteric nervous system of an individual mammal contains 2 × 106­109 nerve cells, depending on the size of the mature animal [16,32,34]. The total number of nerve cells in the myenteric plexus of the sheep small intestine has been estimated to be 31.5 million, in the guinea pig 2.75 million, and in the mouse 403 000 [32]. Estimates of total numbers in the submucosa of the small intestine are 50 million in sheep, 950 000 in guinea pig, and 330 000 in mouse. The estimated total number of enteric neurons in the human gastrointestinal tract is 200­600 million [3].
Ultrastructure The enteric nervous system consists of compact arrangements of nerve cell bodies, nerve fiber terminals, bundles of nerve fibers, and neuroglia. Unlike other autonomic ganglia, the enteric ganglia do not contain blood vessels or connective tissue cells, although septa of connective tissue sometimes separate parts of the ganglia in large species, including human. Nutrients are supplied to the ganglia through the surrounding interstitial fluid. Similarly, hormones and drugs that act on the enteric ganglia diffuse from the interstitial fluid. It may be significant for the actions of hormones that the cell bodies of many enteric neurons present large surface areas, devoid of neuroglia, to the extraganglionic space [3].
Nerve fibers in the enteric plexuses are of two types: fibers of relatively uniform diameter, about 0.2­0.5 m; and fibers

that consist of varicosities, usually about 1­2 m in diameter, connected by short intervening segments that measure about 0.2­0.5 m. The nonvaricose axonal segments are regarded as nonterminal regions that do not release transmitter, whereas the varicosities contain numerous transmitter vesicles and are considered to be points of transmitter release. The varicose segments of enteric axons, including those within ganglionated plexuses and those associated with muscle or mucosal epithelium, are often hundreds of micrometers or several millimeters long. This means that a single axon can contact many nerve cell bodies or other effector cells. The close contacts with nerve cells and their dendrites are of two types: those that have synaptic specializations, consisting of presynaptic accumulations of vesicles and postsynaptic densities; and those in which varicosities containing numerous synaptic vesicles come close to the target neuron, with no intervening glial cell and an absence of postsynaptic density. The latter nonspecialized association is the most common. Most enteric neurons receive both specialized and nonspecialized contacts [35­37].
Nerve fibers that innervate muscle and epithelium are arranged in bundles in which the individual fibers are partly surrounded by enteric neuroglia [38]. Although there are no obvious postjunctional specializations in which the varicosities come close to muscle cells, such varicosities may make close contacts with muscle cells that are associated with prejunctional specializations, particularly junctional clumping of vesicles [39].
Histochemical profiles and transmitter multiplicity of enteric neurons
The enteric nervous system contains more than 30 potential neurotransmitters that affect the activity of neurons, muscle, and epithelial cells [3,40]. Moreover, individual neurons contain several possible neurotransmitters in addition to other neuron-specific proteins (Table 2.1). The combinations of chemical attributes, which are related to the functions of the neurons and their places in nerve circuits, provide a chemical code that identifies neurons. In general, more than one substance contributes to the transmission process, which is therefore described as plurichemical [41].
Colocalized substances do not have equal status as transmitters. One or more substances have the major role(s) in transmission; these are the primary transmitters. For example, sympathetic vasoconstrictor neurons in many species contain norepinephrine (noradrenaline) and neuropeptide Y (NPY). The primary transmitter is norepinephrine; NPY has a subsidiary or modifying role. The relative contributions of different transmitters can vary between neurons with common functions, depending on the location and the activity of the neurons; the inhibitory muscle motor neurons of the gut are a good example (see section on motor neurons). Some

19

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Table 2.1 Major types of neurons in the enteric nervous system and some of their defining characteristics. The numbers in parentheses identify the anatomical depictions of the neurons in Fig. 2.6

Functional definition

Primary transmitters

Comments

Excitatory circular muscle motor neurons (6)
Inhibitory circular muscle motor neurons (7)

ACh, cotransmitter TK ACh receptors: muscarinic TK receptors: NK1, NK2
NO plus several cotransmitters with varying prominence: ATP, VIP, PACAP

Excitatory longitudinal muscle motor neurons (4)
Inhibitory longitudinal muscle motor neurons (5)
Excitatory neurons to the muscularis mucosae
Inhibitory neurons to the muscularis mucosae
Myenteric ascending interneurons (1)
Myenteric descending interneurons (local reflex) (8)
Myenteric descending interneurons (secretomotor and motility reflexes) (9)
Myenteric descending interneurons (MMC) (10)
Myenteric intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs) (2)
Submucosal IPANs (11)

ACh, cotransmitter TK
NO plus several cotransmitters with varying prominence: ATP, VIP, PACAP ACh, cotransmitter TK
NO plus several cotransmitters: ATP, VIP, PACAP ACh, nicotinic receptors postsynaptic ACh, ATP may be a cotransmitter
ACh, 5-HT (at 5-HT3 receptors)
ACh
TK, CGRP, and ACh (see text)
TK, CGRP, and ACh (see text)

Intestinofugal neurons (3)

ACh, cotransmitter VIP

Motor neurons to gut endocrine cells
Noncholinergic secretomotor/ vasodilator neurons (12) Cholinergic secretomotor/vasodilator neurons (13) Cholinergic secretomotor (nonvasodilator) neurons (14) Submucosal uniaxonal neurons projecting to the myenteric plexus (15)

Various. Neurons innervating G cells use GRP VIP. Other peptides of the VIP family may contribute ACh
ACh
ACh (deduced). Contain VIP (NOS?)

Excitatory neurons supply all smooth muscle regions, including sphincters. Most innervate muscle close to cell bodies; some run a short distance orally to supply muscle Inhibitory neurons supply all smooth muscle regions, including sphincters. Most innervate muscle close to cell bodies; some run anally to supply muscle Supply muscle adjacent to cell bodies
Supply muscle adjacent to cell bodies
Similar properties to other excitatory muscle motor neurons (see above) Similar properties to other inhibitory muscle motor neurons (see above) In the small intestine, only one type. Involved in local peristaltic reflex These neurons also contain NOS
This type of descending interneuron has been documented in several species. In guinea pig, it is in a pathway of descending excitation Neurons contain somatostatin. These neurons may be involved in conducting the MMC along the intestine These neurons detect intralumenal chemistry and distortion of their processes These neurons respond to intralumenal chemistry and mucosal distortion These neurons directly or indirectly detect conditions in the gut wall and are in the afferent pathways of enteroenteric reflexes The innervation of the different endocrine cell types has not been well described Neurons project both to the mucosa and to arterioles. Most of these neurons are in submucosal ganglia Dual projection, to the mucosa and to arterioles. Innervate bases of glands. Most of these neurons are in submucosal ganglia Innervate mucosal epithelium only. Most of these neurons are in submucosal ganglia Possibly displaced myenteric interneurons

ACh, acetylcholine; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; GRP, gastrin-releasing peptide; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; MMC, migrating myoelectric complex; NK, neurokinin (receptor); NO, nitric oxide; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; PACAP, pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide; TK, tachykinin; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide.

neurons contain more than one primary transmitter and several subsidiary transmitters or neuromodulators; some classes of enteric neurons have five or more transmitters or neuromodulators.

A broad range of experiments suggests a constancy of primary transmitters between species; many of the observed species differences in neuronal chemistry are probably differences in subsidiary transmitters or neuromodulators.

20

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

Although beyond the scope of this chapter, information about all the substances that may participate in enteric neurotransmission in different species is provided in published reviews [3,40,42,43].
The immunohistochemical localization of specific combinations of compounds in neurons provides a valuable investigative tool that allows the projections of individual neurons to be determined and their functions to be deduced, even if the roles of the detected chemicals are not known. For example, the inhibitory and excitatory muscle motor neurons in the gastrointestinal tract can be localized by immunoreactivity to vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and substance P, respectively.
Physiological characteristics of enteric neurons
Electrophysiological properties of enteric neurons The electrophysiological classification of enteric neurons is confounded because the properties of the neurons differ between regions of the digestive tract and, even in a specific region, properties can vary depending on the circumstances of the experiment [3,44,45]. Classification is most useful when the electrophysiological type can be correlated with the physiological function of the neuron and with its shape and histochemical profile.
In the small intestine of the guinea pig, most neurons can be separated into two groups, AH and S, according to their electrophysiological properties (Fig. 2.4). These terms were introduced in 1974 by Hirst and colleagues [46] and the classification remains useful, although the reasons for calling them AH and S are no longer well justified.
The S neurons exhibit brief action potentials that are followed by short-duration afterhyperpolarizing potentials (AHPs) lasting 20­100 ms. The action potentials are blocked by tetrodotoxin. S neurons exhibit fast excitatory postsynaptic

potentials (EPSPs), and compound fast EPSPs of sufficient amplitude to generate action potentials can be evoked in all S neurons. These EPSPs are referred to as compound because they are the summed effects of transmission from several axons. Slow EPSPs are also recorded from S neurons. S neurons have a variety of shapes, which include the Dogiel type I and filamentous morphologies, and have a single axon.
Intensive study of the currents and ion channels of AH neurons in the guinea pig have has helped to explain how the excitability and firing patterns of these neurons are controlled [47]. Action potentials of the AH neurons in the guinea pig small intestine have greater amplitudes and longer durations than those of the S neurons, and they have an inflection (hump) on the falling phase. They are normally followed by two separate phases of hyperpolarization (see Fig. 2.4). An early AHP lasts 20­100 ms and is followed by a second hyperpolarization, the late AHP, which lasts 4­25 s. The late AHP is the result of the opening of IKCa channels, which are Ca2+-sensitive K+ channels [48 ­51]. A hyperpolarizationactivated cation current contributes to the repolarization of the late AHP [47,52]. The action potentials in AH neurons are carried by a combination of Na+ and Ca2+ [46,53]. The Ca2+ that enters during the action potential triggers the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores; it is this Ca2+ that opens the K+ channels necessary to generate the slow AHP [54]. Many transmitters and hormones that excite enteric neurons block the AHP [44,47]. All AH neurons in the guinea pig small intestine have Dogiel type II morphology. AH neurons in the guinea pig ileum usually do not exhibit fast EPSPs, and when recorded the EPSPs have small amplitudes [45,46,55]. In contrast, slow EPSPs do occur in AH neurons and can trigger action potentials.
The S and AH nomenclature does not apply, or is less useful, for some other gut regions. For example, in the guinea pig rectum, some neurons that exhibit a prolonged AHP have a single axon and receive fast EPSPs [56]. In the gastric corpus, all myenteric neurons have S characteristics and do not

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 2.4 Action potentials elicited in an S neuron (a) and in AH neurons (b­d) by intracellular current pulses. The action potential in the S neuron is followed by a brief period of hyperpolarization, whereas the action potential in an AH neuron is followed by two phases of hyperpolarization (early and late afterhyperpolarizing potentials), one brief (b) and the other prolonged (c, d). Note the differences in the time scales. From Hirst et al. [46], with permission.

(d)

50 ms

40 ms

20 mV 100 ms
20 mV 1s
21

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

exhibit a prolonged hyperpolarization after the action potential [57,58].
Synaptic transmission in the enteric nervous system Enteric neurons receive fast and slow EPSPs and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs). In addition, transmitter release from terminal axons may be reduced by presynaptic inhibition.
Fast EPSPs are graded in amplitude in relation to the strength of electrical stimulation, and when they are evoked reflexly, individual EPSPs of different amplitudes are observed (see below). Thus, enteric neurons receive multiple fast synaptic inputs. The fast EPSPs, which can be elicited by single pulses, last about 15­30 ms. They are associated with an increased membrane conductance, which is attributed primarily to Na+. Several transmitters contribute to fast EPSPs in S neurons (Fig. 2.5). The use of nicotinic receptor blockers, and other experimental data, show that acetylcholine (ACh) is the most prominent transmitter of fast EPSPs [42]. Some fast EPSPs are in fact completely blocked by nicotinic receptor antagonists, whereas others are reduced in amplitude, some by as little as 20% (see Fig. 2.5) [59­61]. In about 60%­80% of neurons with a nicotinic antagonist-resistant fast EPSP, the residual EPSP is reduced in amplitude or abolished by PPADS, an antagonist of P2X receptors [60,61]. This indicates that purinergic (i.e., ATP-mediated) transmission underlies some fast EPSPs. In about 10% of neurons, a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist blocks or reduces fast EPSPs that remain in the presence of hexamethonium [61,62]. At some synapses, ATP and 5-HT are probably cotransmitters with ACh. Antagonists of receptors for these three transmitters, in combination, do not fully block fast EPSPs in some S neurons, which implies the existence of one or more other transmitters of fast EPSPs.
In the guinea pig small intestine, slow EPSPs usually last 15­120 s and occur in at least 75% of S neurons and in probably all AH neurons [63,64]. The slow EPSPs are evoked by short trains of stimuli, usually applied at 5­20 Hz for 1­2 s.

Slow EPSPs evoked by electrical stimulation are likely to be the result of the superimposed actions of several different transmitters, each producing superficially similar synaptic potentials [63,65]. Simultaneous recording from an AH neuron and from an S or another AH neuron in the same ganglion has shown that AH neurons provide slow excitatory synaptic inputs to both S and AH neurons [66]. Other experiments indicate that AH neurons activated by sensory stimuli cause slow EPSPs in AH and S neurons [64,67]. No direct evidence suggests that S neurons are a source of slow EPSPs, although adequate research to exclude this possibility has not been performed.
When connecting strands are stimulated close to the recorded AH neuron, the main source of input is probably other AH neurons. Although several substances found within enteric nerve terminals mimic slow EPSPs, including 5-HT, substance P, VIP, and somatostatin, most AH neurons have tachykinin immunoreactivity but they never contain 5-HT, somatostatin, or VIP [40]. Slow EPSPs in IPANs are mimicked by the NK3 tachykinin receptor agonist senktide [68] and are partially blocked by the NK3 receptor antagonist SR142801, by the NK1 antagonist SR140333, or by a combination of NK1 and NK3 receptor antagonists [69,70]. Stimulation of descending pathways that impinge on IPANs elicits slow EPSPs that can be antagonized by a 5-HT7 receptor antagonist, although this compound does not reduce the tachykinin-mediated transmission elicited by stimulation of local inputs [65]. Thus, transmission from local connections is through tachykinins, whereas long descending inputs use 5-HT.
Slow EPSPs have been recorded in S neurons in the myenteric and submucosal ganglia. Slow EPSPs in inhibitory motor neurons are blocked by NK1 receptor antagonists [71]. However, slow transmission to descending interneurons is not affected by NK1 or NK3 receptor block.
A long-lasting form of slow excitatory transmission, termed sustained slow postsynaptic excitation, has been described in myenteric AH neurons [72]. Activation of presynaptic axons supplying AH neurons for extended periods (1­30 min) at

(a) ACh (25%)

(b) ACh/ATP (67%)

(c) ACh/5-HT (11%)

Control

10 mV 10 ms

Hexamethonium 100 M

Control Hexamethonium 100 M
PPADS 10 M

Control Hexamethonium 100 M
Ondansetron 1M

Figure 2.5 Pharmacological dissection of fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in S neurons of the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig ileum. (a) A fully cholinergic EPSP is blocked by the nicotinic receptor blocker hexamethonium. (b) A fast EPSP is partly reduced by hexamethonium. The remaining component is largely blocked by the purinergic P2X receptor antagonist PPADS. (c) A fast EPSP in which the response remaining after the administration of hexamethonium is blocked by the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)3 receptor blocker ondansetron. ACh, acetylcholine. From Galligan et al. [42], with permission.
22

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

low frequency (1 Hz) gives rise to a sustained increase in the excitability of the neurons that develops over several minutes and is associated with depolarization, increased input resistance, and suppression of the late AHP. This state of excitation declines more slowly. Successive stimulus trains (duration > 4 min) elicit successively greater increases in excitability. Increased excitability can last up to 3.5 h after a stimulus period of 30 min.
Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in myenteric neurons have been measured only in a small proportion of neurons in the guinea pig small intestine [73,74]. It is possible that electrical stimulation of internodal strands with one or more pulses affects both excitatory and inhibitory fibers. The excitatory responses may obscure any IPSPs that are evoked simultaneously. Studies in which enteric reflex pathways are activated by physiological stimuli have also failed to evoke IPSPs in myenteric neurons. This suggests that any physiological role for this type of synaptic potential may be confined to a small group of myenteric neurons.
Electrophysiological studies of submucosal neurons have been performed in preparations from the small intestine, cecum, and distal colon of the guinea pig [75­79]. About 90% of all submucosal neurons exhibit fast EPSPs, and a large proportion of these also exhibit slow EPSPs, similar to those observed in myenteric neurons. The fast EPSPs are blocked by hexamethonium and are presumably mediated by ACh acting through nicotinic receptors. Pharmacological data indicate that slow transmission to secretomotor neurons in the submucosa is mediated through purinergic P2Y receptors [80,81].
Although slow IPSPs are rare in myenteric neurons, they are common in submucosal neurons. Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials occur in about 50% of submucosal neurons in the guinea pig small intestine and in as many as 90% of the neurons in the cecum [75­78]. Most submucosal neurons with slow IPSPs also exhibit slow EPSPs, and all have fast EPSPs. In the small intestine, neurons with slow IPSPs contain VIP and are noncholinergic secretomotor/vasodilator neurons [82]. The IPSP is caused by a substantial increase in the K+ permeability of the membrane, which leads to a hyperpolarization of up to 30 mV. Two separate contributions to IPSPs have been identified: adrenergic transmission from the terminals of sympathetic secretomotor inhibitory neurons (see Sympathetic effects on motility and secretion) and nonadrenergic transmission from intrinsic neurons.
Lesion studies reveal that most submucosal neurons receive fast cholinergic input from neurons in the myenteric plexus and from other neurons in the submucosal plexus [83]. The slow EPSPs in many submucosal neurons appear to come from myenteric neurons, but some may come from submucosal neurons [81­83].
Presynaptic inhibition may also have a role in the enteric nervous system. Sympathetic nerve stimulation reduces the amplitudes of fast EPSPs in both myenteric and submucosal

neurons, probably by decreasing the amount of ACh released from the synapses [84,85], although postsynaptic inhibitory effects may also play a role. It appears that the presynaptic inhibitory effect of the sympathetic neurons is the primary mechanism by which they diminish the contractile activity of the gut [3]. This inhibition is mediated through -adrenergic receptors. ACh released from enteric nerve terminals can act presynaptically to regulate the subsequent release of ACh and possibly to modify the release of the transmitters mediating slow EPSPs [86]. Several other putative transmitters contained within enteric nerve terminals (e.g., dynorphin, enkephalin, -aminobutyric acid, 5-HT) have been observed in pharmacological experiments to reduce transmitter release in the gastrointestinal tract. No physiological roles have yet been established for these latter substances in presynaptic inhibition in the enteric nervous system.
Functionally defined enteric neurons
The identification of neurons by function has been derived by combining data from studies of the physiological properties of enteric reflexes, the morphological identification of those neurons that are present (and could thus fulfill the physiological functions), and the correlation of neurochemical (primarily immunohistochemical) and pharmacological properties of enteric neurons (see Table 2.1). The model species has been the guinea pig (Fig. 2.6). These data have contributed to a complete definition of the types of neurons in the small intestine, and a thorough, but not yet complete, definition of the neuron types in other regions [3]. Sufficient data are available from other species, notably human, pig, rat, and mouse, to suggest that the data from guinea pig can be extrapolated. One interspecies difference is the placement of cell bodies of some neurons; specifically, the cell bodies of motor neurons of the external muscle are present in both the myenteric and submucosal plexuses in human and pig, whereas they are almost completely confined to the myenteric plexus in guinea pig, rat, and mouse.
Motor neurons Muscle motor neurons of the stomach and intestines Excitatory neurons innervate the longitudinal and circular smooth muscle and the muscularis mucosae throughout the digestive tract. The primary transmitter of these neurons is ACh, which acts on the muscle through muscarinic receptors [3]. Tachykinins contribute to the excitatory transmission but have a lesser role than ACh. The tachykinins in the enteric neurons are substance P, neurokinin A, neuropeptide K, and neuropeptide-. The tachykinin component of excitatory transmission appears to be more prominent at high rates of neuron firing. Immunohistochemical studies and quantitative electron microscopy reveal that ACh and

23

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

(a) Oral
1

3 4
2

5 6

8 7

9 10

11

15 12

13

14

Arteriole

Anal LM MP
CM SMP MM

Gland

Muc

(b) Oral
3 11

34

5

8

2 6

7

11 14 14

8­10 14 6,7
13

Anal LM MP
CM
osp SMP
isp MM
Muc

Figure 2.6 The types of neurons in the small intestine of the guinea pig (a), all of which have been defined by their functions, cell body morphologies, chemistries, key transmitters, and projections to targets, and in the small intestine of the pig (b). The numbers adjacent to the neurons correspond to the numbers referred to in Table 2.1. Note that the muscularis mucosae (MM) is very thin in the guinea pig small intestine and the neurons that innervate this muscle have not been identified in this species. In other species they are in the submucosal ganglia. In many cases the equivalent neurons have been identified in the pig and guinea pig, and they have been given the same numbers. LM, longitudinal muscle; MP, myenteric plexus; CM, circular muscle; SMP, submucosal plexus; Muc, mucosa; isp, inner submucosal plexus; osp, outer submucosal plexus. (a) Adapted from Furness et al. [47] with permission; (b) modified from Timmermans et al. [21], with permission.

tachykinins are contained in the same excitatory muscle motor neurons [87,88]. In the guinea pig small intestine, these neurons, and the inhibitory motor neurons, are S neurons by electrophysiological classification.
Intrinsic motor neurons that relax the muscle are involved in descending reflexes that both facilitate the passage of contents along the bowel and relax regions, such as the stomach, that expand to accommodate and retain their contents. These

neurons, called enteric inhibitory neurons, release a combination of transmitters that contribute to relaxation in varying degrees, depending on the region and the species [41,89­91]. The neurotransmitters are nitric oxide (NO), ATP (or a related compound), pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), and VIP. VIP and the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS) are found together in the inhibitory motor neurons. NOS inhibitors and scavengers of NO reduce

24

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

inhibitory transmission in many species, including human, indicating that NO is an inhibitory transmitter [92,93]. However, electrophysiological and pharmacological evidence indicates that at least one other primary transmitter must be involved in the transmission from these neurons [41].
ATP relaxes the muscle, and when the inhibitory neurons are active, increased levels of ATP and its metabolites are detected in perfusates [94]. Suramin, an antagonist of the action of ATP on P2 purinoceptors in intestinal muscle, can depress transmission from the inhibitory neurons of the guinea pig taenia coli [95]. VIP contributes to inhibitory transmission in some gastrointestinal muscles, but its involvement is highly variable between regions and in different species [96]. Peptide histidine isoleucine (PHI), or its human equivalent, peptide histidine methioninamide (PHM), is derived from the same gene as VIP and has similar effects. Another member of the VIP family, PACAP, also relaxes intestinal muscle and is found in enteric neurons. Immunoneutralization and pharmacological antagonism of PACAP receptors each indicate that PACAP contributes to enteric inhibitory transmission in some regions of the gut [91,97].
Thus, NO, VIP or PHI, PACAP, and ATP (or a related compound) probably all contribute to inhibitory transmission to muscle. In most instances, NO is the primary transmitter, and the relative contributions of VIP, PACAP, and ATP vary.
Muscle motor neurons of the striated muscle of the esophagus The striated muscle of the esophagus is innervated by axons that form motor endplates, but unlike motor endplates elsewhere, individual endplates in the esophagus receive dual innervation, one axon being from a vagal motor neuron with its cell body in the medulla oblongata and the other axon originating from a cell body in the myenteric plexus [98]. In the rat, the vagal endings are immunoreactive for calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and the endings of myenteric origin exhibit NOS immunoreactivity. Double staining for these markers indicates that both fibers make synaptic connections with the muscle, and that the two fiber types are often closely apposed, facilitating presynaptic interaction [99]. The vagal motor neurons are essential to esophageal function, and if their axons are severed, esophageal paralysis results [100]. The enteric innervation of motor endplates is presynaptic to the vagal motor innervation and causes inhibitory modulation of the vagal input [101].
Secretomotor and secretomotor/vasodilator neurons controlling fluid exchange Secretomotor neurons in the small and large intestines and gallbladder enhance water and electrolyte secretion. There are two types of neuron: secretomotor/vasodilator neurons that send axons to both the mucosal epithelium (causing water and electrolyte secretion) and the submucosal arterioles

(causing vasodilation), and secretomotor (only) neurons that supply the epithelium but not the arterioles. Secretomotor transmission to the mucosa has both cholinergic and noncholinergic components [102,103]. ACh released from the cholinergic neurons acts on muscarinic receptors on the mucosal epithelium. The primary transmitter of the noncholinergic secretomotor effect is VIP. Stimulation of single neurons and measurement of the resulting changes in the diameter of submucosal blood vessels provide direct evidence for the presence of both cholinergic and noncholinergic vasodilator neurons [104­106]. Immunohistochemical studies, combined with denervation, confirm that both intrinsic cholinergic and noncholinergic neurons innervate submucosal arterioles [107]. VIP is likely the primary transmitter for noncholinergic vasodilation [3].
Gastric vasodilator neurons Gastric acid secretion and blood flow are enhanced when the vagus nerve is stimulated; these effects are reduced by muscarinic antagonists. It is usually impossible to determine experimentally whether vasodilation is the result of a direct vascular action of cholinergic neurons, in addition to a functional hyperemia consequent to the increased secretion [108]. However, Thiefin and colleagues showed that centrally administered thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulated a vagal pathway in the rat that caused gastric vasodilation after acid secretion was blocked by omeprazole [109]. The increased blood flow in the absence of secretory change was antagonized by atropine. There is also evidence of noncholinergic transmission from gastric vasodilator neurons that use VIP [110].
Gastric secretomotor neurons that stimulate acid output Some secretomotor neurons govern gastric acid secretion. These neurons are cholinergic and act on the parietal cells through muscarinic receptors. For a description of the roles of these neurons and their relation to the hormonal control of gastric acid secretion, see Chapter 13.
Motor neurons that innervate enteric endocrine cells A variety of endocrine cells reside in the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract, and because the mucosa is densely innervated, most of these cells have nerve fibers in close proximity. The best-documented motor neurons that provide functional innervation of enteric endocrine cells are those controlling the release of gastrin. Vagal and intrinsic gastric pathways influence the release of gastrin. The final neurons in both pathways are enteric neurons in the stomach wall. Transmission from the final secretomotor neurons is mediated at least partly by gastrin-releasing peptide [3]. Release from other enteroendocrine cells is also likely to be under neural control. For example, the basal release of

25

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

motilin is reduced by atropine and by tetrodotoxin and stimulated by muscarinic agonists; these findings suggest that motilin cells receive an excitatory cholinergic input [111].
Innervation of lymphoid tissue (Peyer patches) Lymphoid aggregations of the gastrointestinal tract (i.e., Peyer patches) are surrounded by nerve fibers, some of which penetrate the capsules of the follicles [13,112]. Receptors for transmitters of enteric neurons occur on lymphocytes within the lymphoid follicles and on lymphocytes that are scattered in the connective tissue of the mucosa [113,114]. Moreover, close axonal approaches to scattered lymphocytes suggest that there may be functional innervation of isolated lymphocytes within the mucosa [112,115]. Close appositions between axons and mast cells also occur in the mucosa [116].
Enteric interneurons Interneurons have been identified in all gut regions, although their characteristics may vary between regions more than those of other neuron types. For example, the ileum and colon contain the same, or very similar, motor neurons and IPANs, but their complements of interneurons are quite different.
Within the myenteric plexus, the interneurons form chains of like neurons that run both orally and aborally [117,118]. The guinea pig small intestine has at least three classes of descending interneurons and one class of ascending interneurons. Detailed studies show synaptic interconnections between the chains formed by two of the types of descending interneurons [119]. The ascending interneurons appear to be involved in local motility reflexes, as are the descending cholinergic neurons that contain NOS [3]. Another type of descending interneuron, the ACh/somatostatin interneuron, may be linked to the passage of migrating myoelectric complexes (MMCs). These neurons have a distinctive appearance, with numerous branching, tapering, and filamentous dendrites [117]. They have very rare connections from IPANs [120,121]. Migrating myoelectric complexes are waves of excitatory activity that are conducted aborally along the gut. They are mediated through the intrinsic neural pathways of the small intestine [122]. Interruption of the continuity of the enteric nervous system blocks conduction of the MMCs [123], which begin in the duodenum and travel the full length of the small intestine, but not along the colon. It is thus pertinent that the ACh/somatostatin filamentous descending interneurons are found in both the ileum and the duodenum but not in the proximal or distal colon. The third type of descending interneuron, the ACh/5HT interneuron, is involved in descending excitatory reflexes and possibly in secretomotor reflexes [124]. Interneurons also make connections between the myenteric and submucosal plexuses.
Pharmacological analysis indicates that transmission in the ascending pathway is cholinergic, through nicotinic receptors.

Descending reflexes are also blocked by nicotinic antagonists in most species [3], but descending reflexes close to the stimulus, at least in guinea pigs, are resistant to blockade by the nicotinic antagonist hexamethonium [89,125,126]. Pharmacological data reveal that other transmitters of descending pathways are ATP, acting at P2X receptors, and tachykinins, acting at NK1 and NK3 receptors [71,127,128]. Nitric oxide, which is probably released from descending interneurons containing NOS, does not appear to be a primary transmitter of enteric interneurons. It may act as a retrograde transmitter, being released from the cell bodies of the interneurons and acting retrogradely on the endings of the terminals of IPANs to reduce transmitter release [129].
Intrinsic primary afferent neurons About 100 years ago, several investigators showed that enteric motility reflexes could be elicited in segments of intestine that had no neural connections with the central nervous system [130­132]. It was therefore assumed that primary afferent neurons were contained in the gut wall. However, it was discovered at about the same time that reflexes, notably cutaneous vasodilator reflexes, could be initiated by way of axon collaterals even when the axons bearing the collaterals were disconnected from their cell bodies. It is thus necessary to leave sufficient time between lesioning the nerves (so that endings and their collaterals die) and testing the integrity of reflexes. These experiments applied to the small and large intestines of guinea pig, cat, and dog indicate that the motility reflexes are intrinsic [3]. Nevertheless, it is possible to elicit reflexes through activation of axon reflexes [133].
The intrinsic reflex pathways involved in the control of gut movement, blood flow, and secretion are activated through neurons that respond to several stimuli, such as distention, lumenal chemistry, and mechanical stimulation of the mucosa. The IPANs in the guinea pig small intestine have been positively identified as AH neurons with Dogiel type II morphology (Fig. 2.7). Evidence, primarily comparisons of neuron projections and chemistry, suggests that Dogiel type II neurons in other species are also IPANs. However, other neuron types may also have roles as IPANs [134,135].
The AH electrophysiological properties and Dogiel type II morphology of IPANs were confirmed by experiments in which activity-dependent changes were used to reveal the neurons [136,137], and by intracellular recording [67,138] in the small intestine of the guinea pig. These indirect findings agree with deductions made from studies of the morphology and projections of type II neurons [139,140]. Neurons with similar morphology, histochemistry, and projections have been found in the small and large intestines of guinea pig, mouse, rat, human, pig, and sheep. Various experiments indicate that the cell bodies of the mucosal mechanoreceptor primary afferent neurons are in the submucosal ganglia and the cell bodies of chemoreceptor afferent

26

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.7 A myenteric intrinsic primary afferent neuron (IPAN) (multipolar Dogiel type II) and its conduction pathways are depicted. Action potentials initiated by physiologically appropriate stimuli and by noxious stimuli can traverse the cell bodies (transcellular conduction) or can be conducted to output synapses by way of an axon reflex (axon reflex conduction). Conduction across the cell body is modified by the synaptic inputs that it receives. Myenteric IPANs make synaptic connections with other neurons in the myenteric and submucosal ganglia. EPSPs, excitatory postsynaptic potentials; LM, longitudinal muscle; MP, myenteric plexus; CM, circular muscle; SM, submucosa; Muc, mucosa. Adapted from Furness [3], with permission.

Transmission via slow EPSPs

Synaptic modulation
Transcellular conduction

Neurite deformation
Axon reflex conduction

LM MP
CM SM

Muc

Stimuli from lumen

neurons are in the myenteric ganglia, as are the cell bodies of stretch-responsive primary afferent neurons.
Intrinsic primary afferent neurons are one of several types of afferent neuron associated with the gut (Fig. 2.8). Others types are vagal afferent neurons, spinal afferent neurons, and intestinofugal neurons. The intestinofugal neurons are probably second-order neurons in afferent pathways leading from the gut to the prevertebral ganglia [141]. The extrinsic primary afferent neurons are subdivided into two groups: those with cell bodies in the vagal (nodose) ganglia, and those with cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia. In general, the vagal afferent pathways carry information about the physiological state of the digestive organs. Impulses conveying pain or discomfort are conducted through the dorsal root ganglion (i.e., spinal afferent) pathways.
Extrinsic motor connections Sympathetic neurons Norepinephrine is the primary transmitter of the sympathetic postganglionic neurons that supply the gastrointestinal tract. Their cell bodies are in prevertebral and paravertebral ganglia, and their axons run to the gut with the mesenteric nerves. The major roles of these neurons are to regulate blood flow to the gastrointestinal tract, regulate intestinal fluid and electrolyte secretion to keep it in balance with whole-body requirements, and inhibit gastrointestinal motility (see Sympathetic effects on motility and secretion).
Vagal and pelvic motor pathways The vagus nerves contain the axons of neurons whose cell bodies lie within the brainstem. A variety of effects, primarily on the upper gastrointestinal tract, are mediated through

these neurons, including control of esophageal peristalsis, relaxation of the proximal stomach, enhancement of gastric peristalsis, stimulation of gastric acid secretion, promotion of gastrin secretion, stimulation of pancreatic secretion, and contraction of the gallbladder [3]. Except within the striated muscle of the esophagus, the vagal neuron does not act directly; it forms synaptic connections with enteric neurons. Vagal efferent neurons also project to the small intestine and proximal colon. It is interesting that Brunner glands in the small intestine appear to be innervated directly by vagal pathways, but not by local intrinsic neurons [142].
According to the convention used for other cranial autonomic pathways, the vagal neurons of these motor pathways have been called parasympathetic preganglionic or vagal preganglionic neurons. Reference to vagal input neurons as preganglionic wrongly implies that enteric neurons are relay neurons in parasympathetic pathways. Vagal input neurons are neurons in complex circuits in which enteric reflexes of several types are integrated with signals from the central nervous system and from other parts of the gastrointestinal tract.
Transmission from vagal input neurons to enteric neurons is mediated principally by ACh acting on nicotinic receptors; the effects of stimulating vagal motor pathways are blocked or substantially attenuated by drugs that block nicotinic receptors.
The major gastrointestinal effects of the pelvic nerves are on movement, secretion, and blood flow in the distal colon and rectum. The pathways are analogous to those of the vagus; pelvic efferent neurons with cell bodies in the sacral spinal cord form synapses on enteric neurons at which ACh is an excitatory transmitter acting through nicotinic receptors. The pelvic nerves initiate defecatory reflexes.

27

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Brainstem

Spinal cord

Dorsal root ganglion

Vagal primary afferent neurons

Nodose ganglion

Intrinsic primary afferent neurons

Mucosal mechanosensitive neurons

Chemical- and stretchsensitive neurons

Sympathetic ganglion
Intestinofugal neurons

Spinal primary afferent neurons
LM MP
CM
SM Muc

Figure 2.8 The afferent neurons of the digestive tract. Two classes of intrinsic primary afferent neuron (IPAN) have been identified: myenteric IPANs that respond to distortion of their processes in the external muscle layers and, by way of processes in the mucosa, to changes in lumenal chemistry; and submucosal IPANs that detect mechanical distortion of the mucosa and lumenal chemistry. Extrinsic primary afferent neurons have cell bodies in dorsal root ganglia (spinal primary afferent neurons) and vagal (nodose and jugular) ganglia. Spinal primary afferent neurons supply collateral branches in prevertebral (sympathetic) ganglia and in the gut wall. Intestinofugal neurons are parts of the afferent limbs of enteroenteric reflex pathways. Nerve endings in the mucosa are activated by hormones, most prominently 5-hydroxytryptamine, released from enteroendocrine cells (arrows). LM, longitudinal muscle; CM, circular muscle; MP, myenteric plexus; SM, submucosa; Muc, mucosa. Adapted from Furness [3], with permission.

Enteric control of motility
Intrinsic reflexes of the enteric nervous system are essential to the generation of the patterns of motility observed in the small and large intestines. The major patterns of muscle movements in the small intestine are mixing movements, propulsive reflexes that travel short distances, the MMC, peristaltic rushes, and retropulsion associated with vomiting. The same neurons participate in each of these actions, but how the nervous system is programmed to produce such diverse outcomes is not known. In contrast to the intestines, peristalsis in the stomach is a consequence of spontaneous electrical events (i.e., slow waves) in the muscle that begin in the corpus and travel to the pyloric sphincter [3]. The intensity of contraction is determined by the actions of the vagus nerves, which form connections with enteric motor neurons in the gastric wall. The proximal stomach relaxes to accommodate the arrival of food. This relaxation is also mediated through the vagus. Thus, the primary integrative centers for control of gastric motility are in the brainstem, whereas those for control of the small and large intestines are in the enteric

nervous system. Reflexes can be generated in the gastric enteric circuits, but their importance, relative to control through the vagus, is not clear. In most mammalian species, the contractile tissue of the external wall of the esophagus is striated muscle; in other species, including human, the proximal half or more is striated muscle and the remainder is smooth muscle. The striated muscle of the esophagus is controlled by an integrative circuitry in the brainstem. Thus, although the myenteric ganglia are prominent in the striated muscle part of the esophagus, they are modifiers, not essential control centers, for esophageal peristalsis.
The smooth muscle sphincters restrict and regulate the passage of the lumenal contents between regions. In general, reflexes that are initiated proximal to the sphincters relax the sphincter muscle and facilitate the passage of the contents, whereas reflexes that are initiated distally restrict retrograde passage of contents into more proximal parts of the digestive tract.
Circuits in the small intestine The circuits involved in local peristaltic reflexes in the small intestine, and the projections of the component neurons,

28

Interneuron

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

Longitudinal muscle motor neuron

Circular muscle motor neuron

Oral

Anal

Interneuron

Network of primary afferent neurons

Figure 2.9 The pathways for propulsive reflexes in the intestine. The first parts of the descending inhibitory and the ascending excitatory reflex pathways are depicted in a short segment of intestine. The patterns in the circuitry for the ascending and descending pathways are similar. Intrinsic primary afferent (sensory) neurons (IPANs) are circumferentially oriented and form self-reinforcing networks. They provide outputs to ascending and descending interneurons and monosynaptic connections to motor neurons. The interneurons form descending and ascending chains and also provide

outputs to motor neurons. In the descending pathway, some neurons excite the longitudinal muscle, and some neurons inhibit the circular muscle. Ascending reflex pathways supply inputs to excitatory longitudinal muscle motor neurons and excitatory circular muscle motor neurons. A set of descending interneurons (bottom) involved in conducting the migrating myoelectric complex receives few inputs from IPANs but connects with motor neurons.

have been deduced from studies of guinea pig small intestine (Fig. 2.9; see also Fig. 2.6). Experiments in other mammals, including cat, dog, and rat, suggest that the pathways are similarly organized in other mammals [3]. In all species, excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons supply the muscle, the general patterns of small intestine motility are similar, and intrinsic reflexes are evoked by the bulk and chemical nature of the lumenal contents.
The movements of the intestine are a result of the contractions and relaxations of the external longitudinal and circular muscles and of the muscularis mucosae. Neural control is superimposed on an underlying rhythm of muscle activity (i.e., slow waves), which occurs at frequencies of about 3­12/min in human. The major role in forming the pattern of mixing and propulsive movements appears to be taken by the circular layer of the external muscle, areas of which contract (or relax) like an annulus to close or increase the lumen during both propulsive and mixing movements.
To study enteric muscle motor reflexes, investigators isolate segments of intestine to eliminate the influence of the central nervous system and circulating hormones. This simplifies recording from the muscle and enteric neurons. In these preparations, lumenal distention, or chemical or mechanical stimulation of the mucosa, elicits reflexes whose effects on the circular muscle can be recorded with intracellular microelectrodes [125,143­148]. The major responses of the muscle are depolarizing potentials (i.e., excitation) in the circular layer oral to the site of the stimulus and aboral hyperpolarizing potentials (i.e., inhibition). This polarization of electrical

responses is analogous to that of the mechanical events that occur when the intestine is distended. Longitudinal muscle motor neurons are also activated by reflex stimuli [149]. The longitudinal muscle contracts at the same time as the circular muscle, although there may be a delay between the commencement of contraction in the two layers. The longitudinal muscle appears to restrict the lengthening of the intestine when the circular muscle contracts [3].
If the myenteric plexus is cut, neither the reflex responses to mucosal stimulation nor those to lumenal distention pass along the gut, whereas interruption of the submucosal plexus has no effect [125,150,151]. Therefore, the reflex pathways excited by mucosal stimulation must pass locally from the sensory receptors in the mucosa to the myenteric plexus. Responses evoked by distention persist if the mucosa is removed [125,152,153], a finding consistent with the presence of mechanosensitive processes of IPANs in the external muscle. Mucosal distortion releases 5-HT from enterochromaffin cells in the epithelial lining [154], which in turn activates the endings of the IPANs to initiate or potentiate peristaltic reflexes [155].
In the guinea pig small intestine, IPANs with cell bodies in the myenteric plexus provide extensive varicose networks in the ganglia, primarily close to and surrounding the cell bodies [139,156]. A few neurons have aborally projecting collateral axons [157]. The varicosities of IPAN terminals provide synaptic inputs to most neurons in the myenteric plexus [158], and electrophysiological studies of the effects of activation of IPANs through their nerve endings in the mucosa

29

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

confirm that IPANs communicate with other neurons by means of slow EPSPs [64,67], whereas recording at a distance in a circumferential direction implies that some synapses from IPANs cause fast EPSPs [121]. Slow EPSPs are evoked consistently only at rates of electrical stimulation of presynaptic neurons of about 3 Hz or more. In accordance with this finding, the primary afferent neurons fire in response to physiological stimuli in bursts that commonly achieve rates of 10­40 Hz [64,67].
It is notable that physiological as well as ultrastructural studies indicate that IPANs synapse with other IPANs to form a self-reinforcing network. IPANs are numerous, about 500 per millimeter-length of the small intestine. Because the stimuli giving rise to intestinal reflexes (e.g., lumenal chemicals, distention, mucosal distortion) are not spatially confined to submillimeter distances, it can be deduced that reflexes are usually initiated by the more-or-less synchronous activation of a population of several hundred interconnected IPANs. The summation of the synaptic events caused by transmission from the IPANs results in the nearly simultaneous activation of numerous interneurons and motor neurons. The IPANs in the submucosal plexus project to the myenteric plexus and appear to be directly sensitive to mechanical and chemical stimulation of the mucosa. At least some portion of the reflexes evoked by stimulation of the mucosa is mediated by submucosal IPANs.
Enteric reflexes often extend for several centimeters along the intestine from a single point of stimulus, unlike the processes of most IPANs and of motor neurons. This implies that most enteric reflex pathways include interneurons, which, as previously explained, form interconnecting chains that run along the intestine and which may individually run for more than 1 cm [159]. The pathway may be longer in species other than guinea pig. Immunohistochemical data indicate that, in guinea pig small intestine, there is one population of orally directed interneurons, which are cholinergic, and several populations of aborally directed interneurons, many of which are immunoreactive for choline acetyltransferase (see Table 2.1 and Fig. 2.6). Fast EPSPs, which are output events of interneurons, occur in neurons at distances of 0.5­2.5 cm from the stimuli. Physiological and structural studies indicate that interneurons make connections with both motor neurons and other interneurons, confirming the pattern of connectivity shown in Fig. 2.9. The circuits in Fig. 2.9 depict individual neurons, although cohorts of neurons are actually activated, as previously described.
The projections of motor neurons to the circular muscle have been determined by several techniques: · mapping the responses to transmural nerve stimulation in normal pieces of the intestine and in pieces in which the nerve paths were lesioned and allowed to degenerate [160,161] · microscopic analysis of the effects of nerve lesions [16]

· observation of retrograde transport of microcrystals of dye placed on the inner surface of the muscle [88] · filling the neurons by using intracellular microelectrodes [162]. Most excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons supplying the circular muscle extend only 1­2 mm along guinea pig intestine, but they run up to half the distance around its circumference, about 6­8 mm in guinea pig small intestine. Thus, the response to reflex activation is spread around the intestine. This finding is consistent with the common observation that the intestine undergoes annular, not eccentric, contractions or relaxations. The reflex probably involves a summed response to transmission from many motor neurons; each smooth muscle cell is influenced by about 25 inhibitory motor neurons, and a similar convergence of excitatory influence can be expected [160]. Furthermore, the electrical communication between smooth muscle cells ensures summation of the effects of the population of motor neurons. Some excitatory motor neurons project orally as far as 10 mm, and some inhibitory motor neurons project aborally as far as 30 mm.
In addition to the simple reflex whose neural circuits have now been deduced (Fig. 2.9), the intestine exhibits mixing movements and cyclic changes of activity: MMCs, retropulsion, and peristaltic rushes [3]. The MMCs pass along the intestine from the stomach to the terminal ileum. In humans, these cycles last about 90 min and occur between digestive periods. The MMC is generated by the enteric nervous system. During digestion, the contents of the intestine trigger irregular mixing contractions. The neural pathways depicted in Fig. 2.9 presumably provide the building blocks for both the irregular contractile activity and the MMCs, with the irregular contractile activity perhaps representing the superimposition and interaction of simple reflexes. It has been deduced that the descending neuron chains for the MMC are separate from those of local reflexes (see Enteric interneurons).
Enteric control of secretion and vasodilation
About 5­10 L of water, derived from food and drink, salivary secretions, gastric secretion, secretions of the pancreas and biliary system, and from the intestine itself, enters the lumen of the human intestine each day. To maintain the equilibrium of fluids in the body, electrolytes absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract must be matched by losses through perspiration, respiration, urination, and defecation. Secretion and absorption are balanced so that the osmolarity of the fluid in the small intestine is closely matched to that in the interstitial fluid, although there are local variations from isosmolarity (e.g., in the lamina propria of the villi). The critical role played by regulation within the intestine itself is exemplified by the life-threatening effects of bacterial toxins,

30

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

such as cholera toxin, which act on enteric neurons to cause copious secretion of fluid across the intestinal epithelium, and the deleterious effect of deficiency of intestinal fluid secretion, as occurs in cystic fibrosis.
Water moves from the lumen in company with nutrient molecules [163,164]. The major process for the absorption of nutrients, such as glucose, is cotransport with Na+, in this case through the Na+/glucose cotransporter SGLT1. The entry of these solute molecules draws water across the epithelium, which is one reason to add glucose to oral rehydrating fluids. Direct measurements indicate that the cotransport comprises 1 glucose and 210­260 water molecules [164]. It has been estimated that SGLT1 absorbs 8­9 L of water each day from the small intestine [164]. Another way to consider the relationship between dissolved nutrient molecules and the amount of associated fluid is that 100 g of carbohydrate, if broken down to monosaccharides, would require about 1.8 L of water to be absorbed and be isotonic with blood and tissue fluids. Amino acid transport is also ion-coupled and similarly involves water movement in concert with absorption. The large fluxes of water from the lumen to the fluid compartments of the body are partly balanced by intestinal secretion that is mediated by enteric secretomotor reflexes.
As implied in the previous paragraph, the most efficient way to shift water molecules across the epithelium is to move solute molecules, and this is indeed how most water molecules move. A small proportion may pass through specialized water channels, the aquaporins, and a small proportion uses a paracellular route to cross the epithelium [164]. The secretomotor neurons stimulate the epithelial cells to pump Cl- into the lumen, which takes with it counter ions, mostly Na+, and water. A major component of Cl- secretion is through the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channel. It is also likely that the secretion of K+ ions, which is stimulated by muscarinic agonists [165], is increased by the activity of cholinergic secretomotor neurons. K+ secretion is also accompanied by water secretion.
Secretion in the small intestine is primarily from the crypts and the bases of the villi, and in the colon is from the deep parts of the glands; conversely, absorptive processes are dominant in the more superficial parts of the mucosa [166,167]. These functions are not mutually exclusive, and in fact both functions can occur at all levels of the mucosa [168].
Enteric secretomotor and vasomotor reflexes related to fluid exchange Distention, mechanical stimulation of the mucosa, intralumenal nutrients, and the application of chemicals to the mucosa, including noxious substances, evoke secretomotor and vasodilator reflexes [169­174]. Histochemical studies in the guinea pig small intestine indicate that two types of the motor neurons for secretion are also motor neurons

for vasodilation; that is, these secretomotor neurons cause a physiologically appropriate vasodilation, concomitant with secretion, through collaterals to submucosal arterioles [3]. A third type of secretomotor neuron does not project to the vasculature. As previously indicated, the control of secretion in the small intestine contributes to the regulation of wholebody water and electrolyte status. If more fluid is absorbed with nutrients or across the gastric mucosa than is lost elsewhere, some of the excess can be passed back under the control of secretomotor reflexes. Thus, the source of secreted fluid in the small intestine is a mixture of serum electrolytes and locally absorbed electrolytes. We postulate that local computation of the need for vasodilation and transmucosal absorption to supply electrolytes for secretion determines the relative activation of vasodilator and nonvasodilator secretomotor neurons (Fig. 2.10).
Glucose or its uptake stimulates the enteric secretomotor reflex [169]. Enteric reflexes also cause HCO3- secretion in response to duodenal acidification, although other acidsensitive mechanisms, including a neurally independent stimulation of prostaglandin production, also cause secretion of HCO3- [175]. It is likely that the same ion channels are permeable to Cl- and HCO3-, the relative amounts of Cl- and HCO3- transported being dependent on the lumenal pH [176]. Secretomotor reflexes can also be initiated pathologically by toxins, such as cholera toxin or enterotoxins, in the lumen (see Enteric nervous system responses to noxious stimuli).
The enteric secretomotor/vasodilator circuits consist of IPANs with their endings in the mucosa and an integrating circuitry that feeds back to motor neurons with cell bodies in the submucosal ganglia [3]. In some cases, the reflex pathways involve the myenteric ganglia (e.g., cholera toxininduced secretion) [177], whereas reflexes initiated by mechanical stimulation of the mucosa can be mediated entirely through the submucosal plexus [103,171,178]. Pathways from the myenteric plexus also cause vasodilation [179,180]. There are two types of secretomotor neurons, cholinergic and noncholinergic. The noncholinergic neurons appear to mediate most of the local reflex response, using VIP, or a related peptide, as their primary transmitter. In the guinea pig small intestine, there are two types of cholinergic neurons: those that also contain NPY (and other peptides) and those that contain calretinin. The ACh/calretinin neurons preferentially innervate the glands at the base of the mucosa and have collaterals to submucosal arterioles, whereas the ACh/NPY neurons do not appear to innervate the arterioles. The presence of three classes of secretomotor neurons, two of which also have vasodilator collaterals, probably contributes to the balance of secretion and vasodilation appropriate to the digestive state (see above and Fig. 2.10).
In addition to reflexes that have secretomotor neurons as their outputs, IPANs may have direct secretomotor effects.

31

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Sympathetic inhibitory input

Sympathetic vasoconstriction

Enteric inputs
14

VIP/PACAP ACh
12
13

Electrolytes from circulation

Secreted electrolytes

ACh VIP/PACAP

Absorbed electrolytes
Figure 2.10 Schematic representation of the integration of enteric neuronal control of secretomotor and vasomotor activity in the small intestine. The circuitry provides for the adjustment of fluid and electrolyte secretion into the intestinal lumen, according to the sources of the fluid and the need of the whole body to maintain fluid homeostasis. The secretory flux is supplied by fluid that is absorbed across the epithelium in company with nutrients and ions and by fluid from the circulation. The existence of both secretomotor only (neuron 14) and secretomotor/vasodilator neurons (neurons 12 and 13) facilitates the adjustment of the relative supply from these two sources. The enteric secretomotor reflexes are under tonic inhibitory control from the sympathetic neurons that innervate secretomotor neurons, and the availability of fluid from the circulation is limited by the activity of the sympathetic vasoconstrictor neurons. Decreases in blood pressure or blood volume (e.g., hemorrhage) inhibit both secretion and blood flow to the mucosa. The neuron numbers correspond to the numbering of neurons in Table 2.1 and their depiction in Fig. 2.6. ACh, acetylcholine; VIP/PACAP, vasoactive intestinal peptide/pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide.

Intrinsic primary afferent neurons are immunoreactive for tachykinins, and their varicose processes are immunoreactive for the vesicular ACh transporter [181]. Thus, their mucosal endings are likely to release ACh and tachykinins, both of which cause secretion. It has been directly shown that action potentials in one process of an IPAN traverse the cell body to invade other processes [182], and the pattern of branching of the neurons indicates that action potentials could be conducted, as an axon reflex, between terminals that branch within the mucosa [3]. Interestingly, the secretory responses to distention and to mucosal stroking in the guinea pig colon are reduced by tetrodotoxin (which blocks nerve conduction) and by atropine (which blocks the ACh receptors on the epithelium), but not by mecamylamine, an antagonist of cholinergic fast neuroneuronal transmission [171,173]. The concentration of mecamylamine that was used was shown to block nicotinic receptors in the colon [173]. Moreover, the responses to stroking were not reduced by extrinsic denervation, a finding that indicates they are dependent on the activation of intrinsic neurons [183]. Thus, there is good evidence that ACh released by axon reflex, or by mononeuronal reflexes crossing the IPAN soma, contributes to secretory responses.
Enteric nervous system responses to noxious stimuli
In the small intestine and colon, protective secretory and motility responses are initiated by irritants that are included in enemas, by noxious products of bacteria, and by parasitic infestations. The intestine exhibits exaggerated secretomotor reflexes, causing diarrhea, when levels of bacteria and bacterial toxins in the gut lumen are excessive [184,185]. Bacteria and parasites in the gut lumen also trigger powerful propulsive reflexes that help to expel these organisms [186­188]. Vomiting, which involves retropulsive reflexes in the small intestine, is also used to eliminate undesirable contents from the gut. Thus, enteric reflexes are initiated by noxious conditions in the gut, as well as being initiated by benign stimuli in normal physiological conditions.
Sympathetic effects on motility and secretion
The movement of the contents in an oral to aboral direction is restricted when sympathetic nerve activity increases. Under resting conditions, the sympathetic pathways exert little influence on motility. They come into action when protective reflexes are activated. Sympathetic pathways involved with fluid secretion are continuously active to regulate the intensity of the enteric reflexes to balance intestinal secretion with whole-body fluid status.

32

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

Sympathetic neurons slow transit by constricting the sphincters and by inhibiting the contractile activity of the nonsphincter regions [189]. Inhibition of muscle movement in the nonsphincter parts of the gastrointestinal tract is primarily through actions of the noradrenergic axons on enteric neurons, including the presynaptic inhibition of excitatory transmitter release. Sympathetic nerve fibers also have direct inhibitory actions on the nonsphincter muscle. In the sphincter regions, the sympathetic neurons contract the muscle. Other sympathetic neurons innervate and inhibit submucosal secretomotor neurons. Another group of noradrenergic sympathetic neurons supply the gastrointestinal vasculature, constricting the arterioles and arteries and the major mesenteric veins. Their primary roles are to adjust the proportion of the cardiac output going to digestive organs, according to relative physiological need.
Reflex pathways through which motility is inhibited are of two types. In some cases the reflexes pass by way of the central nervous system and then back to the intestine; re-

flexes also are conducted from one part of the gastrointestinal tract to another through sympathetic prevertebral ganglia [3,190,191].
The peripheral sympathetic enteroenteric reflex pathways and their associations with other sympathetic pathways are illustrated in Fig. 2.11. Because there is insufficient space in this chapter to survey all the evidence for the circuits shown, only the major points are discussed. Intestinofugal neurons that synapse in the prevertebral ganglia were demonstrated by intracellular recordings from the ganglia in preparations consisting only of a segment of intestine connected to a ganglion that had been completely removed from the body [192]. Activation of intestinal tension receptors evoked fast EPSPs in many nerve cells [192­194]. The EPSPs were blocked by the application of nicotinic antagonists to the ganglia, suggesting that they are cholinergic. This conclusion has been supported by the observation that all intestinofugal neurons are immunoreactive for choline acetyltransferase [195]. There is also a component of slow excitatory transmission

Descending spinal pathways

Figure 2.11 Connections of sympathetic pathways that affect intestinal motility, fluid exchange, and blood flow. Three main types of sympathetic neurons supply the nonsphincter parts of the intestine: 1, vasoconstrictor neurons; 2, secretion-inhibiting neurons; 3, motility-inhibiting neurons. These neurons all receive synaptic inputs from the spinal cord. In addition, the secretion-inhibiting and motility-inhibiting neurons receive inputs from intestinofugal neurons. Intestinofugal neurons do not connect with vasoconstrictor neurons. See text for further details.

Paravertebral ganglion

Preganglionic axons

Synaptic inputs to intestine 1 1
2 3

Intestinofugal outputs from intestine
Prevertebral ganglion
Intestinofugal neuron

Intestine: Stimulated segment 33

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

from the intestinofugal neurons, which is a result of the release of a cotransmitter, probably VIP [191]. Most intestinofugal neurons are second-order neurons that nevertheless may also be directly activated by stretch [141].
Sympathetic motility-inhibiting neurons probably have little or no activity in the resting state in both humans and animals [16]. The enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes appear to have a protective role for the gastrointestinal tract [3]. For example, in the case of enterogastric reflexes initiated by acidity or hypertonicity in the lumen of the upper small intestine, the slowing of gastric emptying protects the duodenal mucosa from acid and osmotic stress. Enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes affecting other parts of the intestine can be initiated by the distention of any region. Most studies have examined reflexes affecting the stomach and intestine, but similar reflex pathways affect the biliary system [196]. The reflexes that pass through the central nervous system are commonly evoked by noxious stimuli or by pain of visceral origin. For example, biliary colic, abdominal injury, and irritation within the abdominal cavity caused by chemicals or infection activate sympathetic reflexes that inhibit gut motility.
The net movement of water and electrolytes between the gut lumen and body fluid compartments is regulated to maintain overall fluid homeostasis. This is accomplished by sympathetic pathways that can override the enteric secretomotor reflexes (see Figs 2.10 and 2.11). Axons arising from the sympathetic secretomotor-inhibiting neurons in the prevertebral ganglia innervate secretomotor neurons, in which they elicit inhibitory synaptic potentials. Persuasive evidence indicates that normal intrinsic secretomotor reflex activity is inhibited by tonic activity of the sympathetic secretomotor inhibitory pathways. Cutting the sympathetic pathways releases the brake on the enteric secretomotor reflex and results in what Bernard, in 1859, called paralytic secretion [197]. The level of activity of the sympathetic secretomotor inhibitory neurons responds to changes in whole-body water content and electrolyte status; thus, sympathetic activity is increased and water and electrolyte secretion reduced in response to hemorrhagic hypotension, unloading of the baroreceptors, or reduction in right atrial pressure [198­ 201]. HCO3- secretion is also inhibited by sympathetic nerves [202].
Summary
The enteric nervous system is by far the largest grouping of neurons outside the central nervous system, in the human containing 200­ 600 million neurons. It contains primary afferent (sensory) neurons, interneurons, and several classes of motor neuron that together form complete reflex circuits that influence many aspects of digestive tract function, prominent among these being motility, secretion, and blood flow. Enteric reflexes are essential to generate the patterns of

motility of the small and large intestines, whereas motility in the esophagus and stomach is under dominant vagal control. Intramural secretomotor and vasodilator reflexes control the return to the lumen of fluid that is absorbed with nutrients. Sympathetic pathways inhibit motility in nonsphincter regions and contract the sphincters. These are protective reflexes. Sympathetic pathways regulate the secretomotor reflexes to maintain secretion appropriate to whole-body fluid balance.
References
1. Swenson O. Hirschsprung's disease: a review. Pediatrics 2002;109: 914.
2. Camilleri M. Dysmotility of the small intestine and colon. In: Yamada T (ed). Textbook of Gastroenterology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003:1486.
3. Furness JB. The Enteric Nervous System. Oxford: Blackwell, 2006. 4. Stöhr P. Mikroskopische Studien zur Innervation des Magen-
Darmkanales. Z Zellforsch 1930;12:66. 5. Llewellyn-Smith IJ, Costa M, Furness JB, Bornstein JC. Structure of
the tertiary component of the myenteric plexus in the guinea-pig small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1993;272:509. 6. Furness JB, Clerc N, Lomax AE, et al. Shapes and projections of tertiary plexus neurons of the guinea-pig small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 2000;300:383. 7. Li PL. Neue Beobachtungen über die Struktur des Zirkulärmuskels im Dünndarm bei Wirbeltieren. Z Anat Entwicklungsgesch 1937; 107:212. 8. Gabella G. Special muscle cells and their innervation in the mammalian small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1974;153:63. 9. Cajal SR. Histologie du Système Nerveux de l'Homme et des Vertébrés. Paris: Maloine, 1911. 10. Thuneberg L. Interstitial cells of Cajal. In: Schultz GS, Wood JD, Rauner BB (eds). Handbook of Physiology: The Gastrointestinal System. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society, 1989:349. 11. Furness JB, Lloyd KC, Sternini C, Walsh JH. Projections of substance P, vasoactive intestinal peptide and tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactive nerve fibres in the canine intestine, with special reference to the innervation of the circular muscle. Arch Histol Cytol 1990;53:129. 12. Synnerstad I, Ekblad E, Sundler F, Holm L. Gastric mucosal smooth muscles may explain oscillations in glandular pressure: role of vasoactive intestinal peptide. Gastroenterology 1998;114:284. 13. Defaweux V, Dorban G, Antoine N, et al. Neuroimmune connections in jejunal and ileal Peyer's patches at various bovine ages: potential sites for prion neuroinvasion. Cell Tissue Res 2007; 329:35. 14. Gabella G, Trigg P. Size of neurons and glial cells in the enteric ganglia of mice, guinea-pigs, rabbits and sheep. J Neurocytol 1984; 13:49. 15. Irwin DA. The anatomy of Auerbach's plexus. Am J Anat 1931;49: 141. 16. Furness JB, Costa M. The Enteric Nervous System. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1987. 17. Auerbach L. Fernere vorlaufige Mitteilung über den Nervenapparat des Darmes. Arch Pathol Anat Physiol 1864;30:457. 18. Wilson AJ, Llewellyn Smith IJ, Furness JB, Costa M. The source of the nerve fibres innervating the circular muscle and forming the deep muscular plexus in the guinea-pig small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1987;247:497. 19. Brehmer A. Structure of enteric neurons. Adv Anat 2006;186:1. 20. Scheuermann DW, Stach W, Timmermans JP, et al. Neuron specific enolase and S-100 protein immunohistochemistry for defining the

34

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

structure and topographical relationship of the different enteric nerve plexuses in the small intestine of the pig. Cell Tissue Res 1989;256:65. 21. Timmermans J-P, Hens J, Adriaensen D. Outer submucous plexus: an intrinsic nerve network involved in both secretory and motility processes in the intestine of large mammals and humans. Anat Rec 2001;262:71. 22. Thomsen L, Pearson GT, Larsen EH, Skadhauge E. Electrophysiological properties of neurones in the internal and external submucous plexuses of newborn pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1997;498:773. 23. Ekblad E, Ekman R, Håkanson R, Sundler F. Projections of peptidecontaining neurons in rat colon. Neuroscience 1988;27:655. 24. Porter AJ, Wattchow DA, Brookes SJ, Costa M. Projections of nitric oxide synthase and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-reactive submucosal neurons in the human colon. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;14:1180. 25. Owyang C, Williams JA. Pancreatic secretion. In: Yamada T (ed). Textbook of Gastroenterology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003:340. 26. Padbury RT, Furness JB, Baker RA, et al. Projections of nerve cells from the duodenum to the sphincter of Oddi and gallbladder of the Australian possum. Gastroenterology 1993;104:130. 27. Mawe GM, Gershon MD. Structure, afferent innervation, and transmitter content of ganglia of the guinea pig gallbladder: relationship to the enteric nervous system. J Comp Neurol 1989;283:374. 28. Kirchgessner AL, Gershon MD. Innervation of the pancreas by neurons in the gut. J Neurosci 1990;10:1626. 29. Dogiel AS. Über den Bau der Ganglien in den Geflechten des Darmes und der Gallenblase des Menschen und der Säugetiere. Arch Anat Physiol Leipzig Anat Abt Jg 1899:130. 30. Furness JB, Bornstein JC, Trussell DC. Shapes of nerve cells in the myenteric plexus of the guinea-pig small intestine revealed by the intracellular injection of dye. Cell Tissue Res 1988;254:561. 31. Stach W. A revised morphological classification of neurons in the enteric nervous system. In: Singer MV, Goebell H (eds). Nerves and the Gastrointestinal Tract. Lancaster, UK: MTP Press, 1989:29. 32. Gabella G. The number of neurons in the small intestine of mice, guinea-pigs and sheep. Neuroscience 1987;22:737. 33. Furness JB, Costa M. Types of nerves in the enteric nervous system. Neuroscience 1980;5:1. 34. Karaosmanoglu T, Aygun B, Wade PR, Gershon MD. Regional differences in the number of neurons in the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig small intestine and colon: an evaluation of markers used to count neurons. Anat Rec 1996;244:470. 35. Gabella G. Fine structure of the myenteric plexus in the guinea-pig ileum. J Anat 1972;111:69. 36. Llewellyn-Smith IJ, Furness JB, Costa M. Ultrastructural analysis of substance P immunoreactive nerve fibers in myenteric ganglia of guinea-pig small intestine. J Neurosci 1989;9:167. 37. Pompolo S, Furness JB. Ultrastructure and synaptology of neurons immunoreactive for gamma-aminobutyric acid in the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig small intestine. J Neurocytol 1990;19:539. 38. Gabella G. Structure of muscles and nerves in the gastrointestinal tract. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:335. 39. Klemm MF. Neuromuscular junctions made by nerve fibres supplying the longitudinal muscle of the guinea-pig ileum. J Auton Nerv Syst 1995;55:155. 40. Costa M, Brookes SJ, Steele PA, et al. Neurochemical classification of myenteric neurons in the guinea-pig ileum. Neuroscience 1996; 75:949. 41. Furness JB, Young HM, Pompolo S, et al. Plurichemical transmission and chemical coding of neurons in the digestive tract. Gastroenterology 1995;108:554. 42. Galligan JJ, Lepard KJ, Schneider DA, Zhou X. Multiple mechanisms of fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the enteric nervous system. J Auton Nerv Syst 2000;81:97.

43. Brookes SJ, Costa M. Cellular organisation of the mammalian enteric nervous system. In: Brookes SJ, Costa M (eds). Innervation of the Gastrointestinal Tract. London & New York: Taylor and Francis, 2002:393.
44. Wood JD. Application of classification schemes to the enteric nervous system. J Auton Nerv Syst 1994;48:17.
45. Bornstein JC, Furness JB, Kunze WAA. Electrophysiological characterization of myenteric neurons: how do classification schemes relate? J Auton Nerv Syst 1994;48:1.
46. Hirst GD, Holman ME, Spence I. Two types of neurones in the myenteric plexus of duodenum in the guinea-pig. J Physiol (Lond) 1974;236:303.
47. Furness JB, Jones C, Nurgali K, Clerc N. Intrinsic primary afferent neurons and nerve circuits within the intestine. Prog Neurobiol 2004;72:143.
48. Hirst GD, Johnson SM, van Helden DF. The slow calcium-dependent potassium current in a myenteric neurone of the guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 1985;361:315.
49. Galligan JJ, North RA, Tokimasa T. Muscarinic agonists and potassium currents in guinea-pig myenteric neurones. Br J Pharmacol 1989;96:193.
50. Vogalis F, Harvey JR, Furness JB. TEA- and apamin-resistant KCa channels in guinea-pig myenteric neurons: slow AHP channels. J Physiol (Lond) 2002;538:421.
51. Nguyen TV, Matsuyama H, Baell J, et al. Effects of compounds that influence IK (KCNN4) channels on afterhyperpolarizing potentials, and determination of IK channel sequence, in guinea pig enteric neurons. J Neurophysiol 2007;97:2024.
52. Galligan JJ, Tatsumi H, Shen KZ, et al. Cation current activated by hyperpolarization (IH) in guinea-pig enteric neurons. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G966.
53. Hirst GD, Johnson SM, van Helden DF. The calcium current in a myenteric neurone of the guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 1985;361:297.
54. Vogalis F, Furness JB, Kunze WA. Afterhyperpolarization current in myenteric neurons of the guinea pig duodenum. J Neurophysiol 2001;85:1941.
55. Brookes SJ. Classes of enteric nerve cells in the guinea-pig small intestine. Anat Rec 2001;262:58.
56. Tamura K. Morphology of electrophysiologically identified myenteric neurons in the guinea pig rectum. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G545.
57. Schemann M, Wood JD. Electrical behaviour of myenteric neurones in the gastric corpus of the guinea-pig. J Physiol (Lond) 1989;417:501.
58. Schemann M, Wood JD. Synaptic behaviour of myenteric neurones in the gastric corpus of the guinea-pig. J Physiol (Lond) 1989; 417:519.
59. Galligan JJ, Bertrand PP. ATP mediates fast synaptic potentials in enteric neurons. J Neurosci 1994;14:7563.
60. Lepard KJ, Galligan JJ. Analysis of fast synaptic pathways in myenteric plexus of guinea pig ileum. Am J Physiol 1999;276: G529.
61. Nurgali K, Furness JB, Stebbing MJ. Analysis of purinergic and cholinergic fast synaptic transmission to identified myenteric neurons. Neuroscience 2003;116:335.
62. Zhou X, Galligan JJ. Synaptic activation and properties of 5hydroxytryptamine3 receptors in myenteric neurons of guinea pig intestine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;290:803.
63. Morita K, North RA. Significance of slow synaptic potentials for transmission of excitation in guinea-pig myenteric plexus. Neuroscience 1985;14:661.
64. Kunze WA, Bertrand PP, Furness JB, Bornstein JC. Influence of the mucosa on the excitability of myenteric neurons. Neuroscience 1997;76:619.
65. Monro RL, Bornstein JC, Bertrand PP. Slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials in myenteric AH neurons of the guinea-pig ileum are reduced by the 5-hydroxytrytamine7 receptor antagonist SB 269970. Neuroscience 2005;134:975.

35

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

66. Kunze WA, Furness JB, Bornstein JC. Simultaneous intracellular recordings from enteric neurons reveal that myenteric AH neurons transmit via slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials. Neuroscience 1993;55:685.
67. Bertrand PP, Kunze WA, Bornstein JC, et al. Analysis of the responses of myenteric neurons in the small intestine to chemical stimulation of the mucosa. Am J Physiol 1997;273:G422.
68. Schneider DA, Galligan JJ. Presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the myenteric plexus of guinea pig intestine. Am J Physiol 2000;279:G528.
69. Alex G, Kunze WA, Furness JB, Clerc N. Comparison of the effects of neurokinin-3 receptor blockade on two forms of slow synaptic transmission in myenteric AH neurons. Neuroscience 2001;104: 263.
70. Johnson PJ, Bornstein JC. Neurokinin-1 and -3 receptor blockade inhibits slow excitatory synaptic transmission in myenteric neurons and reveals slow inhibitory input. Neuroscience 2004;126:137.
71. Thornton PD, Bornstein JC. Slow excitatory synaptic potentials evoked by distension in myenteric descending interneurones of guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 2002;539:589.
72. Clerc N, Furness JB, Kunze WA, et al. Long term effects of synaptic activation at low frequency on excitability of myenteric AH neurons. Neuroscience 1999;90:279.
73. Wood JD, Mayer CJ. Intracellular study of electrical activity of Auerbach's plexus in guinea-pig small intestine. Pflügers Arch Eur J Physiol 1978;374:265.
74. Johnson SM, Katayama Y, North RA. Slow synaptic potentials in neurones of the myenteric plexus. J Physiol (Lond) 1980;301:505.
75. Bornstein JC, Costa M, Furness JB. Synaptic inputs to immunohistochemically identified neurones in the submucous plexus of the guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1986;381:465.
76. Hirst GD, McKirdy HC. Synaptic potentials recorded from neurones of the submucous plexus of guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1975;249:369.
77. Surprenant A. Slow excitatory synaptic potentials recorded from neurones of guinea-pig submucous plexus. J Physiol (Lond) 1984; 351:343.
78. Mihara S, Katayama Y, Nishi S. Slow postsynaptic potentials on neurones of submucous plexus of guinea-pig caecum and their mimicry by noradrenaline and various peptides. Neuroscience 1985;16:1057.
79. Frieling T, Cooke HJ, Wood JD. Synaptic transmission in submucosal ganglia of guinea pig distal colon. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G842.
80. Hu H-Z, Gao N, Zhu MX, et al. Slow excitatory synaptic transmission mediated by P2Y1 receptors in the guinea-pig enteric nervous system. J Physiol (Lond) 2003;550:493.
81. Monro RL, Bertrand PP, Bornstein JC. ATP participates in three excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the submucous plexus of the guinea pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 2004;556:571.
82. Bornstein JC, Costa M, Furness JB. Intrinsic and extrinsic inhibitory synaptic inputs to submucous neurones of the guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1988;398:371.
83. Bornstein JC, Furness JB, Costa M. Sources of excitatory synaptic inputs to neurochemically identified submucous neurons of the guinea-pig small intestine. J Auton Nerv Syst 1987;18:83.
84. Hirst GD, McKirdy HC. Presynaptic inhibition at a mammalian peripheral synapse? Nature 1974;250:430.
85. Edwards FR, Hirst GD, Silinsky EM. Interaction between inhibitory and excitatory synaptic potentials at a peripheral neurone. J Physiol (Lond) 1976;259:647.
86. Morita K, North RA, Tokimasa T. Muscarinic presynaptic inhibition of synaptic transmission in myenteric plexus of guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 1982;333:141.
87. Llewellyn-Smith IJ, Furness JB, Gibbins IL, Costa M. Quantitative ultrastructural analysis of enkephalin-, substance P-, and VIPimmunoreactive nerve fibers in the circular muscle of the guineapig small intestine. J Comp Neurol 1988;272:139.

88. Brookes SJ, Steele PA, Costa M. Identification and immunohistochemistry of cholinergic and non-cholinergic circular muscle motor neurons in the guinea-pig small intestine. Neuroscience 1991;42: 863.
89. Costa M, Furness JB, Humphreys CMS. Apamin distinguishes two types of relaxation mediated by enteric nerves in the guinea-pig gastrointestinal tract. Naunyn Schmiedeberg's Arch Pharmacol 1986;332:79.
90. Crist JR, He XD, Goyal RK. Both ATP and the peptide VIP are inhibitory neurotransmitters in guinea-pig ileum circular muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1992;447:119.
91. Katsoulis S, Schmidt WE, Schwarzhoff R, et al. Inhibitory transmission in guinea pig stomach mediated by distinct receptors for pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1996;278:199.
92. Sanders KM, Ward SM. Nitric oxide as a mediator of nonadrenergic noncholinergic neurotransmission. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G379.
93. Rand MJ. Nitrergic transmission: nitric oxide as a mediator of non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic neuro-effector transmission. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1992;19:147.
94. McConalogue K, Todorov L, Furness JB, Westfall DP. Direct measurement of the release of ATP and its major metabolites from the nerve fibres of the guinea-pig taenia coli. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1996;23:807.
95. Hoyle CH, Knight GE, Burnstock G. Suramin antagonizes responses to P2-purinoceptor agonists and purinergic nerve stimulation in the guinea-pig urinary bladder and taenia coli. Br J Pharmacol 1990;99:617.
96. Makhlouf GM, Grider JR, Schubert ML. Identification of physiological function of gut peptides. In: Makhlouf GM (ed). Handbook of Physiology: The Gastrointestinal System. Washington, DC: American Physiological Society, 1989:123.
97. McConalogue K, Lyster DJ, Furness JB. Electrophysiological analysis of the actions of pituitary adenylyl cyclase activating peptide in the taenia of the guinea-pig caecum. Naunyn Schmiedeberg's Arch Pharmacol 1995;352:538.
98. Neuhuber WL, Raab M, Berthoud H-R, Wörl J. Innervation of the mammalian esophagus. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 2006;185:1.
99. Wörl J, Mayer B, Neuhuber WL. Spatial relationships of enteric nerve fibers to vagal motor terminals and the sarcolemma in motor endplates of the rat esophagus: a confocal laser scanning and electron-microscopic study. Cell Tissue Res 1997;287:113.
100. Ingelfinger FJ. Esophageal motility. Physiol Rev 1958;38:533. 101. Izumi N, Matsuyama H, Ko M, et al. Role of intrinsic nitrergic
neurones on vagally mediated striated muscle contractions in the hamster oesophagus. J Physiol (Lond) 2003;551:287. 102. Keast JR. Mucosal innervation and control of water and ion transport in the intestine. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 1987;109:1. 103. Cooke HJ, Reddix RA. Neural regulation of intestinal electrolyte transport. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:2083. 104. Neild TO, Shen KZ, Surprenant A. Vasodilatation of arterioles by acetylcholine released from single neurones in the guinea-pig submucosal plexus. J Physiol (Lond) 1990;420:247. 105. Vanner S, Surprenant A. Cholinergic and noncholinergic submucosal neurons dilate arterioles in guinea pig colon. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G136. 106. Kotecha N, Neild TO. Vasodilatation and smooth muscle membrane potential changes in arterioles from the guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1995;482:661. 107. Li ZS, Fox Threlkeld JE, Furness JB. Innervation of intestinal arteries by axons with immunoreactivity for the vesicular acetylcholine transporter VAChT. J Anat 1998;192:107. 108. Jodal M, Lundgren O. Neurohormonal control of gastrointestinal blood flow. In: Wood JD (ed). Handbook of Physiology: The Gastrointestinal System, Vol. 1. Washington, DC: American Physiological Society, 1989:1667.

36

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

109. Thiefin G, Taché Y, Leung FW, Guth PH. Central nervous system action of thyrotropin-releasing hormone to increase gastric mucosal blood flow in the rat. Gastroenterology 1989;97:405.
110. Ito S, Ohga A, Ohta T. Gastric relaxation and vasoactive intestinal peptide output in response to reflex vagal stimulation in the dog. J Physiol (Lond) 1988;404:683.
111. Poitras P, Trudel L, Miller P, Gu CM. Regulation of motilin release: studies with ex vivo perfused canine jejunum. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G4.
112. Ma B, von Wasielewski R, Lindenmaier W, Dittmar KE. Immmunohistochemical study of the blood and lymphatic vasculature and the innervation of mouse gut and gut-associated lymphoid tissue. Anat Histol Embryol 2007;36:62.
113. Heel KA, McCauley RD, Papadimitriou JM, Hall JC. Review: Peyer's patches. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1997;12:122.
114. Renzi D, Pellegrini B, Tonelli F, et al. Substance P (neurokinin-1) and neurokinin A (neurokinin-2) receptor gene and protein expression in the healthy and inflamed human intestine. Am J Pathol 2000;157:1511.
115. Ichikawa S, Eda N, Uchino S. Close association of peptidergic nerves with lymphocytes in canine and monkey ileal villi. Okajimas Folia Anat Jpn 1992;69:199.
116. Stead RH, Dixon MF, Bramwell NH, et al. Mast cells are closely apposed to nerves in the human gastrointestinal mucosa. Gastroenterology 1989;97:575.
117. Portbury AL, Pompolo S, Furness JB, et al. Cholinergic, somatostatin-immunoreactive interneurons in the guinea pig intestine: morphology, ultrastructure, connections and projections. J Anat 1995;187:303.
118. Young HM, Furness JB. An ultrastructural examination of the targets of serotonin-immunoreactive descending interneurons in the guinea-pig small intestine. J Comp Neurol 1995;356:101.
119. Mann PT, Southwell BR, Ding YQ, et al. Localisation of neurokinin 3 (NK3) receptor immunoreactivity in the rat gastrointestinal tract. Cell Tissue Res 1997;289:1.
120. Pompolo S, Furness JB. Quantitative analysis of inputs to somatostatin immunoreactive descending interneurons in the myenteric plexus of the guinea-pig small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1998; 294:219.
121. Stebbing MJ, Bornstein JC. Electrophysiological mapping of fast excitatory synaptic inputs to morphologically and chemically characterised myenteric neurons of guinea-pig small intestine. Neuroscience 1996;73:1017.
122. Sarna S, Stoddard C, Belbeck L, McWade D. Intrinsic nervous control of migrating myoelectric complexes. Am J Physiol 1981;241:G16.
123. Galligan JJ, Furness JB, Costa M. Migration of the myoelectric complex after interruption of the myenteric plexus: intestinal transection and regeneration of enteric nerves in the guinea pig. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1135.
124. Monro RL, Bertrand PP, Bornstein JC. ATP and 5-HT are the principal neurotransmitters in the descending excitatory reflex pathway of the guinea-pig ileum. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002; 14:255.
125. Smith TK, Furness JB. Reflex changes in circular muscle activity elicited by stroking the mucosa: an electrophysiological analysis in the isolated guinea-pig ileum. J Auton Nerv Syst 1988;25:205.
126. Johnson PJ, Bornstein JC, Yuan SY, Furness JB. Analysis of contributions of acetylcholine and tachykinins to neuro-neuronal transmission in motility reflexes in the guinea-pig ileum. Br J Pharmacol 1996;118:973.
127. Johnson PJ, Bornstein JC, Burcher E. Roles of neuronal NK1 and NK3 receptors in synaptic transmission during motility reflexes in the guinea-pig ileum. Br J Pharmacol 1998;124:1375.
128. Bian X, Bertrand PP, Bornstein JC. Descending inhibitory reflexes involve P2X receptor-mediated transmission from interneurons to motor neurons in guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 2000;528: 551.

129. Yuan SY, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Pharmacological evidence that nitric oxide may be a retrograde messenger in the enteric nervous system. Br J Pharmacol 1995;114:428.
130. Mall F. A study of the intestinal contraction. Johns Hopkins Hosp Rep 1896;1:37.
131. Bayliss WM, Starling EH. The movements and innervation of the small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1899;24:99.
132. Langley JN, Magnus R. Some observations of the movements of the intestine before and after degenerative section of the mesenteric nerves. J Physiol (Lond) 1905;33:34.
133. Grider JR, Jin JG. Distinct populations of sensory neurons mediate the peristaltic reflex elicited by muscle stretch and mucosal stimulation. J Neurosci 1994;14:2854.
134. Spencer NJ, Smith TK. Mechanosensory S-neurons rather than AHneurons appear to generate a rhythmic motor pattern in guinea-pig distal colon. J Physiol (Lond) 2004;558.2:577.
135. Spencer NJ, Dickson EJ, Hennig GW, Smith TK. Sensory elements within the circular muscle are essential for mechanotransduction of ongoing peristaltic reflex activity in guinea-pig distal colon. J Physiol (Lond) 2006;576:519.
136. Kirchgessner AL, Tamir H, Gershon MD. Identification and stimulation by serotonin of intrinsic sensory neurons of the submucosal plexus of the guinea pig gut: activity-induced expression of Fos immunoreactivity. J Neurosci 1992;12:235.
137. Kirchgessner AL, Liu MT, Gershon MD. In situ identification and visualization of neurons that mediate enteric and enteropancreatic reflexes. J Comp Neurol 1996;371:270.
138. Kunze WA, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Identification of sensory nerve cells in a peripheral organ, the intestine of a mammal. Neuroscience 1995;66:1.
139. Furness JB, Trussell DC, Pompolo S, et al. Calbindin neurons of the guinea-pig small intestine: quantitative analysis of their numbers and projections. Cell Tissue Res 1990;260:261.
140. Song ZM, Brookes SJ, Costa M. Identification of myenteric neurons which project to the mucosa of the guinea-pig small intestine. Neurosci Lett 1991;129:294.
141. Sharkey KA, Lomax AE, Bertrand PP, Furness JB. Electrophysiology, shape and chemistry of intestinofugal neurons projecting from guinea pig distal colon to inferior mesenteric ganglia. Gastroenterology 1998;115:909.
142. Moore BA, Kim D, Vanner S. Neural pathways regulating Brunner's gland secretion in guinea pig duodenum in vitro. Am J Physiol 2000;279:G910.
143. Hirst GD, McKirdy HC. A nervous mechanism for descending inhibition in guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1974;238:129.
144. Hirst GD, Holman ME, McKirdy HC. Two descending nerve pathways activated by distension of guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1975;244:113.
145. Smith TK, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Distension-evoked ascending and descending reflexes in the circular muscle of guinea-pig ileum: an intracellular study. J Auton Nerv Syst 1990;29:203.
146. Smith TK, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Interaction between reflexes evoked by distention and mucosal stimulation: electrophysiological studies of guinea-pig ileum. J Auton Nerv Syst 1991;34:69.
147. Yuan SY, Furness JB, Bornstein JC, Smith TK. Mucosal distortion by compression elicits polarized reflexes and enhances responses of the circular muscle to distension in the small intestine. J Auton Nerv Syst 1991;35:219.
148. Spencer NJ, Hennig GW, Smith TK. Stretch-activated neuronal pathways to longitudinal and circular muscle in guinea pig distal colon. Am J Physiol 2003;284:G231.
149. Smith TK, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Convergence of reflex pathways excited by distension and mechanical stimulation of the mucosa onto the same myenteric neurons of the guinea pig small intestine. J Neurosci 1992;12:1502.
150. Cannon WB. Peristalsis, segmentation and the myenteric reflex. Am J Physiol 1912;30:114.

37

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

151. Hukuhara T, Yamagami M, Nakayama S. On the intestinal intrinsic reflexes. Jpn J Physiol 1958;8:9.
152. Magnus R. Versuche am überlebenden Dünndarm von Säugethieren. I. Miltheilung. Pflüger's Archiv ges Physiol 1904;102:123.
153. Tsuji S, Anglade P, Ozaki T, et al. Peristaltic movement evoked in intestinal tube devoid of mucosa and submucosa. Jpn J Physiol 1992;42:363.
154. Bülbring E, Crema A. The release of 5-hydroxytryptamine in relation to pressure exerted on the intestinal mucosa. J Physiol (Lond) 1959;146:18.
155. Gershon MD. Nerves, reflexes, and the enteric nervous system. J Clin Gastroenterol 2005;38:S184.
156. Bornstein JC, Hendriks R, Furness JB, Trussell DC. Ramifications of the axons of AH-neurons injected with the intracellular marker biocytin in the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig small intestine. J Comp Neurol 1991;314:437.
157. Brookes SJH, Song ZM, Ramsay GA, Costa M. Long aboral projections of Dogiel type II, AH neurons within the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig small intestine. J Neurosci 1995;15:4013.
158. Pompolo S, Furness JB. Ultrastructure and synaptic relationships of calbindin-reactive, Dogiel type II neurons, in myenteric ganglia of guinea-pig small intestine. J Neurocytol 1988;17:771.
159. Song ZM, Brookes SJ, Costa M. Projections of specific morphological types of neurons within the myenteric plexus of the small intestine of the guinea-pig. Cell Tissue Res 1996;285:149.
160. Bornstein JC, Costa M, Furness JB, Lang RJ. Electrophysiological analysis of projections of enteric inhibitory motor neurones in the guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1986;370:61.
161. Smith TK, Furness JB, Costa M, Bornstein JC. An electrophysiological study of the projections of motor neurons that mediate noncholinergic excitation in the circular muscle of the guinea-pig small intestine. J Auton Nerv Syst 1988;22:115.
162. Nurgali K, Stebbing MJ, Furness JB. Correlation of electrophysiological and morphological characteristics of enteric neurons in the mouse colon. J Comp Neurol 2004;468:112.
163. Schultz SG, Fuisz RE, Curran PF. Amino acid and sugar transport in rabbit ileum. J Gen Physiol 1966;49:849.
164. Wright EM, Loo DD. Coupling between Na+, sugar, and water transport across the intestine. Ann NY Acad Sci 2000;915:54.
165. Joiner WJ, Basavappa S, Vidyasagar S, et al. Active K+ secretion occurs through multiple types of KCa channels and is regulated by IKCa channels in rat proximal colon. Am J Physiol 2003;285: G185.
166. Welsh MJ, Smith PL, Fromm M, Frizzell RA. Crypts are the site of intestinal fluid and electrolyte secretion. Science 1982;218: 1219.
167. Lundgren O, Jodal M. The enteric nervous system and cholera toxin-induced secretion. Comp Biochem Physiol 1997;118A:319.
168. Geibel JP. Secretion and absorption by colonic crypts. Annu Rev Physiol 2005;67:471.
169. Sjövall H, Jodal M, Lundgren O. Further evidence for a glucoseactivated secretory mechanism in the jejunum of the cat. Acta Physiol Scand 1984;120:437.
170. Diener M, Rummel W. Distension-induced secretion in the rat colon: mediation by prostaglandins and submucosal neurons. Eur J Pharmacol 1990;178:47.
171. Frieling T, Wood JD, Cooke HJ. Submucosal reflexes: distentionevoked ion transport in the guinea-pig distal colon. Am J Physiol 1992;263:G91.
172. Vanner S, Jiang MM, Surprenant A. Mucosal stimulation evokes vasodilation in submucosal arterioles by neuronal and nonneuronal mechanisms. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G202.
173. Sidhu M, Cooke HJ. Role for 5-HT and ACh in submucosal reflexes mediating colonic secretion. Am J Physiol 1995;269:G346.
174. Christofi FL, Wunderlich J, Yu JG, et al. Mechanically evoked reflex electrogenic chloride secretion in rat distal colon is triggered by endogenous nucleotides acting at P2Y1, P2Y2, and P2Y4 receptors. J Comp Neurol 2004;469:16.

175. Flemström G. Gastric and duodenal mucosal secretion of bicarbonate. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:1285.
176. Poulsen JH, Fischer H, Illek B, Machen TE. Bicarbonate conductance and pH regulatory capability of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:5340.
177. Jodal M, Holmgren S, Lundgren O, Sjöqvist A. Involvement of the myenteric plexus in the cholera toxin-induced net fluid secretion in the rat small intestine. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1286.
178. Weber E, Neunlist M, Schemann M, Frieling T. Neural components of distension-evoked secretory responses in the guinea-pig distal colon. J Physiol (Lond) 2001;536:741.
179. Vanner S. Myenteric neurons activate submucosal vasodilator neurons in guinea pig ileum. Am J Physiol 2000;279:G380.
180. Reed DE, Vanner SJ. Long vasodilator reflexes projecting through the myenteric plexus in guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol (Lond) 2003; 553:911.
181. Li ZS, Furness JB. Immunohistochemical localization of cholinergic markers in putative intrinsic primary afferent neurons of the guinea-pig small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1998;294:35.
182. Hendriks R, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. An electrophysiological study of the projections of putative sensory neurons within the myenteric plexus of the guinea-pig ileum. Neurosci Lett 1990; 110:286.
183. Cooke HJ, Sidhu M, Fox P, et al. Substance P as a mediator of colonic secretory reflexes. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G238.
184. Lundgren O, Peregrin AT, Persson K, et al. Role of the enteric nervous system in the fluid and electrolyte secretion of rotavirus diarrhea. Science 2000;287:491.
185. Lundgren O. Enteric nerves and diarrhoea. Pharmacol Toxicol 2002;90:109.
186. Mathias JR, Nogueira J, Martin JL, et al. Escherichia coli heat-stable toxin: its effect on motility of the small intestine. Am J Physiol 1982;242:G360.
187. Collins SM. The immunomodulation of enteric neuromuscular function: implications for motility and inflammatory disorders. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1683.
188. Vallance BA, Blennerhassett PA, Collins SM. Increased intestinal muscle contractility and worm expulsion in nematode-infected mice. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G321.
189. Furness JB, Costa M. The adrenergic innervation of the gastrointestinal tract. Ergeb Physiol 1974;69:1.
190. Kuntz A, Saccomanno G. Reflex inhibition of intestinal motility mediated through decentralized prevertebral ganglia. J Neurophysiol 1944;7:163.
191. Szurszewski JH, Miller SM. Physiology of prevertebral ganglia. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:795.
192. Crowcroft PJ, Holman ME, Szurszewski JH. Excitatory input from the distal colon to the inferior mesenteric ganglion in the guineapig. J Physiol (Lond) 1971;219:443.
193. Szurszewski JH, Weems WA. A study of peripheral input to and its control by postganglionic neurones of the inferior mesenteric ganglion. J Physiol (Lond) 1976;256:541.
194. Kreulen DL, Szurszewski JH. Reflex pathways in the abdominal prevertebral ganglia: evidence for a colo-colonic inhibitory reflex. J Physiol (Lond) 1979;295:21.
195. Mann PT, Furness JB, Pompolo S, Mäder M. Chemical coding of neurons that project from different regions of intestine to the coeliac ganglion of the guinea pig. J Auton Nerv Syst 1995;56:15.
196. Kuntz A, Van Buskirk C. Reflex inhibition of bile flow and intestinal motility mediated through decentralized celiac plexus. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1941;46:519.
197. Bernard C. Leçons sur les Liquides de l'Organisme. Paris: Baillière, 1859.
198. Mailman DS, Lakin M, Ingraham RC. Effects of hemorrhage on intestinal absorption and secretion. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1967; 125:728.

38

The enteric nervous system and its extrinsic connections CHAPTER 2

199. Mailman DS, Ingraham RC. Effects of hemorrhage and tilting on Na, Cl and H2O absorption from the intestine. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1971;137:78.
200. Sjövall H, Jodal M, Redfors S, Lundgren O. The effect of carotid occlusion on the rate of net fluid absorption in the small intestine of rats and cats. Acta Physiol Scand 1982;115:447.
201. Redfors S, Hallbäck DA, Sjövall H, et al. Effects of hemorrhage on

intramural blood flow distribution, villous tissue osmolality and fluid and electrolyte transport in the cat small intestine. Acta Physiol Scand 1984;121:211. 202. Jönson C, Tunbäck Hanson P, Fändriks L. Splanchnic nerve activation inhibits the increase in duodenal HCO3- secretion induced by luminal acidification in the rat. Gastroenterology 1989;96:45.

39

A COMPONENTS
3 Sensory neurons of the
gastrointestinal tract
John B. Furness

Extrinsic primary afferent neurons, 40 Intrinsic primary afferent neurons, 48

Intestinofugal neurons, 50 Overview, 51

Detection of the physiological state and environment of the gastrointestinal tract involves three systems of sensors: primary afferent neurons, enteroendocrine cells, and immune cells (Fig. 3.1). Each of these detecting systems is more extensive than those of other organs [1]. About 20% of the neurons in the enteric nervous system, which contains about 400 million neurons in humans, are sensory, and more than 50 000 axons that reach the gut through the vagus and splanchnic nerves are also sensory. The gastroenteropancreatic endocrine system contains thousands of enteroendocrine cells, many of which react to their local environment, and from which more than 20 identified hormones are released. The gut immune system senses foreign proteins and contains 70%­80% of the body's immune cells.
The neurons that detect the states of tissues are known as primary afferent neurons, primary because they are the first neurons in reflex pathways, and afferent because they convey information toward reflex control centers. Three broad classes of afferent neurons are associated with the gut: extrinsic primary afferent neurons, which have cell bodies in vagal and dorsal root (spinal) ganglia; intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs), which have cell bodies, processes, and synaptic connections in the gut wall; and intestinofugal neurons, which have cell bodies in the gut but innervate sympathetic ganglia outside the gut wall.
The monitoring and control of the digestive system by neurons is hierarchical. The gut contains an extensive collection of neurons, the enteric nervous system, within its walls (see Chapter 2). This intrinsic nervous system is capable of generating appropriate reflex responses to the contents of the intestinal lumen; for example, local reflexes generate mixing and propulsive movements of the muscle, local changes in
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

blood flow, and secretion of water and electrolytes. These intrinsic reflexes have important roles in the small and large intestines, but they are not prominent in the functions of the stomach, nor in control of the esophagus, pancreas, and gallbladder. At the next level, reflexes occur between parts of the digestive system, for example between the duodenum and stomach to regulate gastric emptying. At the next level, the digestive organs send signals to the central nervous system. These include afferent signals for reflexes that act on the digestive system, signals that mediate coordination with other body systems, and signals that relate to sensations including discomfort, nausea, pain, and satiety.
Extrinsic primary afferent neurons
Extrinsic primary afferent neurons have cell bodies in the nodose and jugular ganglia, from which axons follow vagal pathways to innervate the gut (vagal primary afferent neurons), or in dorsal root ganglia (spinal primary afferent neurons). The fibers of spinal primary afferent neurons in the thoracic and lumbar regions (thoracolumbar spinal afferents, Fig. 3.2) pass through the sympathetic ganglia to reach the gut by way of the splanchnic and mesenteric nerves. Some fibers originating from thoracic dorsal root ganglia join the vagus nerve, either through the stellate ganglion or directly through small connecting nerves in the thorax. Conversely, many axons of vagal afferent neurons supplying the small intestine are in the celiac branch of the vagus nerve and join with spinal afferent fibers in the mesenteric nerves as they run to the gut. The axons of spinal primary afferent neurons with cell bodies in the sacral ganglia follow the pelvic nerves to reach the colon and rectum (pelvic spinal afferents, Fig. 3.2).
The types of information carried to the central nervous system by extrinsic afferent neurons are summarized in Table 3.1. Very broadly, the afferent information can be divided into that which reaches conscious sensation, such as

40

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3
Brainstem

Figure 3.1 Three types of sensory signals originate from the gastrointestinal tract. Cells in the mucosal epithelium (enteroendocrine cells) detect chemicals in the lumen and mechanical stimuli applied to the mucosa. These release endocrine messages in the form of hormones, which enter the circulation and can act at remote sites. Gut hormones can also act locally, on nerve endings, on the epithelium, and on cells of the immune system. Immune messages are conveyed by circulating lymphocytes, which are activated if antigens are presented to them from the lumen or if the mucosal epithelium is breached, and by the local release of cytokines. Neural messages are conveyed by neurons whose sensitive endings are in the lamina propria, beneath the mucosal epithelium, in the muscle, and in enteric ganglia. Some afferent neurons have cell bodies in the gut wall (intrinsic primary afferent neurons and intestinofugal neurons), and others are in extrinsic ganglia (extrinsic primary afferent neurons).

Vagal primary afferent neuron

Immune and tissue defense signals: local and systemic

Intestinofugal neuron
Endocrine hormones: local and circulating

Lumenal stimulants: bulk, antigens, nutrients, irritants, enteric secretions, mechanical distortion

Spinal cord
Spinal primary afferent neuron
Intrinsic primary afferent neuron
Stretch

sensations of gastric or intestinal fullness, warmth, various types of pain (cramp, colicky pain, sharp pain), discomfort, nausea, hunger, and satiety, and that which is not perceived, such as the chemical nature of the contents of the intestines and the mechanical activity of the gut during normal digestion, which initiate responses such as gastric acid secretion, pancreatic secretion, gallbladder contraction, and gastric and intestinal motor activity.
The level of specificity and detail of the afferent information that reaches the central nervous system is not known. The central nervous system may be informed of the general state of the digestive organs by the summation of afferent signals. This is suggested by the substantial sizes of the receptive fields of the afferent neurons [2]. It is also suggested by the responses of the organs, for example acid or enzyme secretion, gallbladder contraction, or gastric relaxation, none of which appears to be finely graded or highly localized in the sense that, say, the movements of the fingers are finely controlled. Moreover, hormones such as cholecystokinin (CCK) that diffuse locally and in the bloodstream act on many afferent nerve endings. Consciously perceived sensations that are conducted by extrinsic primary afferent neurons are also generalized and usually difficult to locate to any particular

abdominal organ. Satiety is indirectly perceived in that one feels sated after a meal but the feeling of satiety is not directed to a particular organ.
Conscious perception of the state of the gastrointestinal tract is subject to psychosensory modulation [3­5]. Perception is enhanced when attention is paid to the gut and is diminished with inattention. Sensation is also diminished when a painless somatic stimulus is simultaneously applied [3]. A classification of extrinsic primary afferent neurons by the stimuli to which they respond, by the sensations to which they give rise, and by the functions they regulate is shown in Table 3.1.
Structural studies Large numbers of peripheral axons of extrinsic primary afferent neurons enter the gut. In animals such as cat and rabbit, the abdominal vagus contains about 20 000­30 000 primary afferent nerve fibers; the human abdominal vagus contains about 40 000­50 000 [6]. Spinal afferent fibers are also plentiful: in the greater splanchnic nerve of the cat, there are about 3000­4000; in the lumbar splanchnic nerves, about 4000­5000; and in the pelvic nerves, about 3500 [6]. Almost all of the afferent fibers entering the gut are unmyelinated

41

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Thoracolumbar spinal afferents

Brainstem Vagus nerve

Pelvic spinal afferents

Figure 3.2 The extrinsic primary afferent neurons that supply the digestive system. These can be divided into three broad categories: vagal primary afferent neurons (black), thoracolumbar spinal primary afferent neurons (green), and pelvic spinal primary afferent neurons (red).

and they become mixed with the processes of enteric neurons, from which they are indistinguishable by normal light and electron microscopy, with the exception of the intraganglionic laminar endings (IGLEs).
Three types of vagal afferent endings have been identified, mostly by anterograde tracing studies: intramuscular arrays [7,8], branching varicose axon endings that innervate the mucosa [9,10], and IGLEs.
An intramuscular array consists of an axon that supplies branches, sometimes 10 or more, several millimeters long and running parallel to the longitudinal or circular muscle. They are most numerous in the stomach but are found throughout the gastrointestinal tract, from the smooth muscle part of the esophagus to the distal colon, where they are

relatively rare [11]. The morphology of intramuscular arrays suggests that they are in-parallel length receptors, even though most physiological evidence suggests that vagal mechanoreceptors in the stomach are tension receptors [12].
Intraganglionic laminar endings were illustrated in 1929 by Lawrentjew [13], who showed, by their degeneration after vagal nerve section, that they are of vagal origin. Subsequently, their afferent nature was demonstrated when they were found to degenerate after extirpation of nodose ganglion cells but not after section of the vagus nerve central to the nodose ganglion [14]. The IGLE consists of numerous lamellae, generally about 2­5 m across, that interconnect with each other and form a discontinuous covering of myenteric ganglia. In the rat stomach, about six neurons are

42

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

Table 3.1 Extrinsic vagal and spinal gastrointestinal afferent neurons: simplified classification of neurons, sensations, and regulated functions

Region

Afferent neuron

Sensations

Regulated function

Esophagus Stomach
Duodenum
Jejunum, ileum Gallbladder Colon, rectum Anal canal

V, mechanoreceptor (L) V, thermoreceptor S, mechanoreceptor S, mucosal receptor
V, mechanoreceptor (tension) V, mucosal receptor (chemical, acid?)a V, hormone receptor V, hormone receptor S, mechanoreceptora S, collaterals to arterioles
V, mechanoreceptor (L) V, chemoreceptor V, chemoreceptor S, mechanoreceptor S, mucosal receptorb
V, mechanoreceptor (L) S, mechanoreceptora
S, mechanoreceptora
S, mechanoreceptora (L) S, chemoreceptor S, mechanoreceptor
S, mechanoreceptor, chemoreceptor S, thermoreceptor, nociceptor

None Heat Discomfort, pain Unknown
Fullness, satiety None Satiety Nausea Discomfort, pain Unknown
None None Satiety Discomfort, pain Unknown
None Discomfort, pain
Discomfort, pain, biliary colic
Fullness, urge to defecate Urge to defecate Discomfort, pain
Touch, presence of feces Discomfort, pain

Propulsion
Regurgitation
Gastric motility, feeding Acid secretion, gastrin release Feeding Vomiting Guarding, autonomic responses, illness behavior Gastric protection
Gastric emptying, acid secretion Gastric and pancreatic secretion Feeding Guarding, autonomic responses, illness behavior Involved in inflammatory response
Not known Guarding, autonomic responses, illness behavior, enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes
Guarding, autonomic responses, illness behavior, enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes
Defecation Defecation Guarding, autonomic responses, illness behavior, enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes
Defecation Guarding

a These and probably other receptors are sensitized and become reactive with inflammation, irritation, and mucosal damage. b Spinal afferent mucosal receptors are found throughout the small and large intestines. L, low threshold receptor; S, spinal; V, vagal.

covered by each IGLE [7]. Experiments have confirmed that IGLEs are mechanoreceptors [15]. Common in the esophageal, gastric, and duodenal myenteric ganglia, IGLEs occur at declining densities along the digestive tract until the rectum, where they are again common [11,16,17]. The IGLEs in the rectum arise from pelvic spinal afferent neurons. In rat, IGLEs have been reported to occur at a density of 6.3/mm2 in the gastric corpus, 3.3/mm2 in the duodenum, 0.6/mm2 in the jejunum and ileum, and 0.2/mm2 in the distal colon [11]. The proportion of ganglia innervated also decreases along the digestive tract until the rectum. Labeling by left vagal ganglion injection shows that IGLEs supply 88% of ganglia in the esophagus and 31% in the corpus; the proportion decreases to 1% in the distal colon [18,19]. The density of supply in the rectum is about 60 times that in the colon [17].

The mucosal vagal afferent endings consist of branching varicose fibers that come close up against the mucosal epithelium, and, in the esophagus, may enter the epithelium [9,10,20,21]. Morphologically, these fibers seem indistinguishable from the motor fibers and intrinsic afferent endings that supply the epithelium.
Less attention has been devoted to determining the identities of spinal afferent neurons with the use of neuronal tracers. In some species, however, a high proportion of spinal afferent neurons contains neuropeptides, particularly tachykinins and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) [22]. Where spinal nerve endings containing these peptides can be distinguished from nerve fibers of intrinsic origin, the peptides have proved to be useful markers. The axons of spinal afferent neurons provide a sparse network of varicose axons in the myenteric ganglia of the esophagus [23], stomach

43

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

[22,24], and small intestine [25]. They are prominent around arterioles in the gut wall [22,23,26,27] and they also branch within the lamina propria of the mucosa throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Rare fibers are found in the muscle layers [22,24,28]. In the cat esophagus, they penetrate deep into the squamous epithelium [23].
Functional subtypes identified by location of afferent endings Extrinsic primary afferents have been classified as mucosal receptors, muscle receptors, and serosal receptors on the basis of electrophysiological studies of the response patterns to various mechanical and chemical stimuli. The location of sensory endings ­ superficial (in the mucosa or the serosa) or deep (in the muscle or myenteric ganglia) ­ can be determined by testing the effect of removing or anesthetizing the mucosa or serosa. Electrophysiological studies, with the use of single-unit recording, imply that most vagal primary afferent fibers innervate the mucosa and muscle layers, whereas the spinal afferent fibers innervate the muscle layers and serosa but not the mucosa [29­31]. However, morphological data show that the axons of spinal primary afferent neurons innervate the mucosa of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. These spinal afferents may have nonmechanoreceptor functions.
Muscle and myenteric ganglion receptors Receptors that are sensitive to variations in muscle tension are found throughout the gastrointestinal tract [6]. These are almost always referred to as muscle receptors, although it is now clear that IGLEs are intimately associated with myenteric ganglia, even though they respond to muscle tension [17,32]. Increased discharge when the muscle contracts (i.e., when tension is increased but length is decreased) implies that most muscle receptors are tension receptors [33,34]. Muscle receptors exhibit a dynamic response that adapts slowly. Most vagal mechanoreceptors that innervate the gastric muscle fire at low frequency even when the stomach is empty. Thresholds for the activation of muscle receptors vary within the normal (i.e., nonpathological) range of pressures [35,36]. The same neurons may transmit noxious stimuli to the central nervous system in response to supraphysiological tensions.
Spinal afferent neurons include low- and high-threshold muscle receptors and silent nociceptors [37­39]. Silent nociceptors are neurons whose endings are not activated by mechanical forces, except when the tissue they innervate is injured or inflamed. Persuasive evidence suggests that the term "silent nociceptor" is a misnomer for most fibers so identified because these fibers, although unresponsive to intense mechanical stimuli, may be responsive to other (untested) stimuli; furthermore, not all mechanically insensitive neurons are nociceptors [40]. High-threshold muscle receptors of spinal primary afferent neurons, which are sen-

sitive to ischemia, are likely to be nociceptors [37,38]. Spinal mechanoreceptive afferent neurons are generally polymodal. Afferent neurons that respond to colonic distention also respond to bile salts, inflammatory mediators (a mixture of bradykinin, prostaglandin, 5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT], and histamine), and temperature [41]. These neurons may in fact be mucosal receptors or have collaterals in the mucosa.
Serosal receptors Serosal receptors seem to be activated by high-threshold mechanical stimuli, such as bowel movement, distention, and squeezing, but responses to gentle probing, light squeezing or puffs of air have also been reported [6]. Serosal receptors are also sensitive to ischemia. The serosa is continuous with the mesentery and the parietal peritoneum, where receptors with similar properties reside.
Mucosal receptors Mucosal receptors are found all along the gut. They respond vigorously to mucosal deformation but are likely to be polymodal ­ that is, able to respond to two or more stimuli, including mechanical deformation (stroking), lumenal chemicals (acid or nutrients), heat or cold, and, in some cases, increased lumenal osmolarity [6,42­46]. In contrast, studies in cats suggest that some mucosal receptors in the esophagus and stomach are selective for temperature [47], and that others in the small intestine are selective for nutrients, such as amino acids [48] and lipids [49]. This apparent selectivity, however, may be a consequence of testing a narrow range of stimuli [6,31]. A study of sheep showed that duodenal mucosal endings that respond to amino acids are also mechanoreceptors [44]. Nerve fiber recording did not reveal mucosal receptors that are sensitive to carbohydrates in rat [50], rabbit [51] or ferret [46] small intestine. Nevertheless, infusions of glucose, maltose, and mannose into the duodenum evoke reflex responses in rat stomach and pancreas by activating vagal afferents [52,53], implying that carbohydrate-sensitive endings are indeed present. Both slow and rapid adaptation to mucosal mechanical stimuli are encountered [6,44]. Responses to lumenal chemicals are generally slowly adapting [48,49]. Although present in the stomach and esophagus, thermal receptors appear to be absent from the duodenum [44].
Indirect activation of mucosal receptors by enteroendocrine cell products The stimulatory effects of nutrients on mucosal afferent endings in the small intestine are indirect, which is in accord with the separation of the lumenal environment from mucosal nerve endings by the intestinal epithelium. The alternative method of activation, directly after passage of lumenal chemicals across the mucosa, probably also occurs (e.g., diffusion of inorganic acid). CCK and 5-HT, which are released in the mucosa, activate the mucosal receptors but

44

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

not the muscle receptors of vagal primary afferent neurons [46,54­57]. A physiological role for CCK released from enteroendocrine cells and acting on vagal afferent endings has been demonstrated; the activation of vagal primary afferent neuron endings by lipid or protein in the duodenum is blocked by CCK1 receptor antagonists [58,59]. 5-HT appears to be an intermediate in the excitation of vagal primary afferent neurons by intralumenal hyperosmotic or hypoosmotic solution in the duodenum and by high concentrations (> 275 mM) of the monosaccharides glucose and mannose [53]. Increased discharge of vagal afferent neurons caused by these agents was blocked by the intravenous infusion of the 5-HT3/4 antagonist tropisetron, and by the 5-HT3 antagonist granisetron. In contrast, activation of afferent fibers by duodenal distention was not affected. The intraduodenal chemical stimuli did not elevate plasma 5-HT, implying that the site of action of 5-HT was in the mucosa near its points of release. The activation of afferents mediating vagovagal pancreatic reflexes depends on the release of both CCK and 5-HT from enteroendocrine cells [60].
Lumenal fat is a stimulus for reflexes that travel from the distal to more proximal ileum, the ileal brake [61]. The release of peptide YY from mucosal enteroendocrine cells of the mid and distal small intestine and colon leads to slowing of small intestinal transit. Although the neural pathway of this effect is not completely determined, it appears to be a neural reflex that passes through sympathetic ganglia [62].
Efferent effects of primary afferent neurons Ultrastructural studies show that afferent fibers contain numerous synaptic vesicles, similar to the endings of unmyelinated motor neurons or interneurons [20,63]. The axolemma of these fibers is sometimes naked, which suggests that neurotransmitters released by afferent fibers have good access to effector cells. Myenteric neurons are a target because frequent appositions of naked fibers arising from spinal primary afferent neurons occur on the cell bodies [63]. The afferent nerve endings contain bioactive peptides, including CGRP and tachykinins [22,25]. Glutamate, the primary transmitter at the central ends of primary afferent neurons, may also be released at their peripheral ends.
Several pharmacological and physiological studies have revealed muscle contraction in response to antidromic stimulation of spinal afferent nerve fibers [64,65], and one study has implicated axon reflexes in the initiation of the peristaltic reflex (see Chapter 2). Neuropeptides released from primary afferent nerve endings cause vasodilation [66­68] and stimulate myenteric neurons [69] and mast cells [70].
The effects of antidromic release of transmitter from afferent nerve endings on gastric and duodenal motility are most likely of trivial physiological importance [71]. By contrast, vasodilation caused by transmitter released from the peripheral processes of afferent neurons has an important role in mucosal protection (see section on tissue protection).

Roles of extrinsic primary afferent neurons Extrinsic primary afferent neurons signal to the central nervous system information that is necessary to regulate organs and behaviors beyond the immediate local territories of the afferent endings. The signals that reach the central nervous system convey information about several qualities of the gastrointestinal tract, including the state of distention, the presence of chemicals in the lumen (e.g., nutrients, irritants, and toxins), and the presence of tissue injury and inflammation. The signals can be decoded and interpreted consciously as satiety, pain, or hunger. They can also be used to direct digestive functions automatically: for example, esophageal propulsion, gastric relaxation in response to a meal, and gastric acid secretion can all be controlled through the vagus; defecation is controlled by the pelvic nerves; and water and electrolyte transport and blood flow, in relation to the relative needs of all organs, is regulated by sympathetic motor pathways.
Pain and discomfort Innervation of the gastrointestinal tract by pain fibers was long considered doubtful, because clearly injurious insults to the stomach, small intestine, and most of the large intestine are not perceived [6,72]. Conversely, there is conscious sensation from the esophagus (e.g., hot food or drink) and from the anal canal. Pain from the abdomen is diffuse, and its origin from a particular organ or site is usually not obvious.
However, it is now clear that the gastrointestinal tract is an origin of pain. Excessive distention (i.e., intralumenal pressure  30 mmHg) evokes pain and inflammation exacerbates it [73]. In humans, excessive distention of the stomach, gallbladder, small intestine, colon, or rectum causes pain that is not felt after bilateral section of the splanchnic (spinal afferent) nerves, which carry sensations of pain or discomfort from the abdominal viscera [74,75]. However, although pain from the gastrointestinal organs is mostly conducted through spinal afferent neurons, nociceptive information, notably from the esophagus, can also be conducted by vagal afferents [76]. The quality of the sensation from the digestive tract changes with the intensity of distention, i.e., from feelings of fullness, to discomfort, to pain [6].
Pain signals are believed to be mediated through the highthreshold activation of mechanoreceptors and, in pathological conditions, through afferent fibers that are unresponsive to pressures above the pain threshold in nonpathological conditions (e.g., unresponsive to a lumenal pressure of up to 70 mmHg). These unresponsive neurons (silent nociceptors) become mechanosensitive when tissue is inflamed or when they are exposed to inflammatory mediators [39]. At moderate pressures, low-threshold mechanosensitive afferent neurons are activated to cause reflexes that are unnoticed by a subject without inflammation or other gut pathology. Greater distention continues to activate these neurons and also activates higher threshold mechanoreceptors and

45

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

12

BP (mmHg)

8

4 (a) 1
12

5 10

Pain score

8

4

1 (b)

5 Number of distentions

10

Figure 3.3 Changes in blood pressure (a) and psychometric measure of pain perception (b) in human volunteers subjected to inflation of an intrarectal balloon. Successive inflations of the balloon cause more pronounced increases in blood pressure (a pseudoaffective response) and increased discomfort or pain. From Ness et al. [189], with permission from the International Association for the Study of Pain.

evokes feelings of fullness. Further distention can lead to discomfort and pain. Painful sensations are more likely, and occur at lower thresholds, if the gut is inflamed or if a functional bowel disorder exists, such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). This is because the nerve endings in inflamed tissues and in tissue affected by IBS are sensitized. In general, lowthreshold primary afferent endings are vagal in origin, and high-threshold nerve endings are of spinal origin. However, some spinal primary afferent neurons are activated by lowthreshold mechanical stimuli [37,77,78].
Visceral pain is accompanied by somatic and general autonomic reactions, including hunching, abdominal contraction, elevated heart rate, and increased blood pressure. In humans, the intensity of these reactions is directly related to the degree of pain (Fig. 3.3). The somatic and autonomic accompaniments to pain persist when pain itself is prevented by anesthesia. Because they are indications of a stimulus that would normally come to conscious attention, the somatic and autonomic responses observed in a subject under general anesthesia have been called pseudoaffective responses

[72,79]. Animal studies confirm that pain is conducted from the intestine through spinal afferent pathways. The neurons are rendered unresponsive by pretreatment with capsaicin, which, acting through type 1 transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRPV1) receptors, initially stimulates and then desensitizes the endings of primary afferent neurons. In newborn animals, and at high doses in older animals, capsaicin can cause degeneration of primary afferent neurons.
Chronic changes in the sensitivity of the intestine in IBS manifest as a decreased pain threshold to intestinal distention and exaggerated pseudoaffective responses [80­82]. Patients with IBS can feel motility changes that healthy individuals rarely detect. Moreover, contractions within the normal range of amplitude sometimes cause pain in patients with IBS [83,84]. These and other observations imply a longlasting increase in the sensitivity of spinal primary afferent mechanisms in IBS.
Nausea and vomiting The activation of vagal afferent fibers contributes to the nausea and vomiting induced by a number of agents, notably chemotherapy agents such as cisplatin. In animal models, retching or bursts of synchronous activity in respiratory motor neurons are indicators of nausea or vomiting activity. In ferrets, retching and emesis induced by cisplatin or cyclophosphamide were abolished by combined subdiaphragmatic vagotomy and splanchnic nerve section, and were substantially reduced by 5-HT3 receptor antagonists [85]. However, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists did not block retching caused by electrical stimulation of the central end of the severed vagus, leading to the hypothesis that the relevant 5-HT receptors are located peripherally, likely on the endings of vagal afferent neurons [86]. Subsequent demonstration of 5-HT release by nauseants led to the hypothesis that toxins that induce nausea and vomiting do so by provoking the release of 5-HT from enterochromaffin cells in the proximal small intestine [87]. The 5-HT then stimulates vagal afferent nerve endings, which take signals to the rather loosely defined medullary vomiting centers, including the area postrema and nucleus tractus solitarius. Consistent with the animal studies, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists effectively reduce chemotherapy-induced and postoperative nausea and vomiting in humans, their effectiveness as a treatment for vomiting being more profound [88­90]. Vagally mediated nausea and vomiting are also inhibited by type 1 neurokinin (NK1) receptor antagonists, which act at the central end of the vagal pathway [90].
Satiety The ingestion of food is dependent on feelings of hunger and satiety, as well as on social and cultural influences. The physiological control center for ingestive behavior is in the hypothalamus and is influenced by circulating hormones (e.g., ghrelin, leptin), olfactory and taste receptors, and

46

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

afferent nerve signals conducted from the digestive system to the central nervous system through the vagus nerves. The vagal signals for satiety relate to the volume of food in the stomach and to the chemical nature of the food products in the duodenum. An animal whose food is diverted by an esophageal cannula and never reaches the stomach provides a model for investigating control through vagal afferents. Studies in such sham-fed animals indicate that gastric distention has a satiating effect, and that the inhibition of eating caused by distention is lost after vagus nerve section [91,92]. Studies in which the movement of gastric contents is prevented and the composition of the contents is varied indicate that gastric volume, not the nutrients present, is signaled by the vagus [93,94]. Once the food has entered the duodenum, its nutrient content becomes a factor in influencing satiety. Thus, fat in the duodenum releases CCK from enteroendocrine cells, and the CCK, through CCK1 receptors, activates vagal endings and feeding is reduced [95]. CCK acts on mechanoreceptive tension receptors, presumably muscle receptors, as well as on mucosal chemosensitive receptors [43,96]. Other peptides of gut origin may have roles in determining satiety, possibly through actions on the vagus. These include bombesin, glucagon-like peptide, and ghrelin [95,97].
Vagovagal reflexes Stimuli resulting from the ingestion of food, and the presence of food in the stomach and upper intestine, activate vagovagal reflexes that regulate the activity of the stomach itself and the activity of the pancreas and gallbladder. These reflexes use afferent neurons that end in the nucleus tractus solitarius of the medulla oblongata, integrating circuits within the brainstem, and outputs through vagal efferent neurons that form synapses in enteric ganglia, from which neural connections are made with final effectors (smooth muscle or glands). Vagal afferent endings in the esophagus that are stimulated by swallowing cause a reflex relaxation of the proximal stomach, which is called receptive relaxation (i.e., a relaxation in advance of the arrival of the food bolus) [98]. The arrival of food in the stomach triggers another reflex through the vagus, the vagovagal accommodation reflex, which involves relaxation of the proximal stomach as well as acid secretion and increased contractile activity in the antrum [99,100]. A duodenal phase of vagovagal gastric relaxation is triggered by CCK, which is released in response to nutrients, particularly fat, in the lumen of the duodenum [59,101]. CCK acts on the peripheral ends of primary afferent neurons in the mucosa, leading to relaxation of the stomach and thus slowed gastric emptying. The presumed function of this reflex is to allow time for the assimilation of nutrients in the small intestine.
Afferent signals from the proximal stomach trigger transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations through vagovagal reflexes. These have a role in permitting the escape of gas from the stomach [102]. However, they also contribute to

the pathology of gastroesophageal reflux disease, and thus considerable effort has been expended to find ways to inhibit the activity of the receptors on these afferents [103,104].
Pancreatic function is also influenced by vagovagal reflexes. Nutrients in the upper intestine and stroking of the intestinal mucosa increase pancreatic secretion. This effect is reduced by treatment with capsaicin or by blocking efferent transmission in the pancreas with atropine [105,106]. Distention of the body of the stomach, but not the antrum, also increases pancreatic enzyme secretion, again through a vagovagal reflex [107]. Vagovagal reflexes also contribute to the conversion of intestinal motility from the fasted to the fed pattern [108]. The gallbladder is also primarily controlled through the vagus, rather than through enteric reflexes [109].
Reflexes mediated through spinal primary afferent neurons The nonnociceptive spinal afferents of the terminal bowel that are concerned with visceral reflexes (pelvic spinal afferent neurons, Fig. 3.2) are analogous to the vagal afferents involved in visceral reflexes [110]. Pelvic spinal afferents participate in the control of fecal continence and defecation; thus, injuries to the pelvic nerves, which carry many of the spinal primary afferent fibers from the descending colon and anal canal, cause derangements of defecation [111]. Defecation reflexes are initiated by rectal distention and by chemical or mechanical irritation of the rectoanal mucosa, implying that both muscle tension receptors and mucosal spinal afferent nerve fibers are involved in these reflexes [112].
The section on intestinofugal neurons discusses enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes that pass through prevertebral ganglia without entering the central nervous system. There are also intestinointestinal reflexes, passing through the central nervous system, in which spinal afferent neurons form the afferent arm and sympathetic pathways are the efferent pathway [113]. These pathways can be activated by distention and also by irritation within the abdominal cavity, such as handling of the intestine, or by infection of the abdominal cavity. It has been suggested that the reflex inhibition of motility through these spinal afferent pathways and through the prevertebral ganglia may facilitate each other, because synaptic excitation converges on the noradrenergic neurons in the prevertebral ganglia [114].
Tissue protection Neurotransmitters released from the peripheral ends of extrinsic primary afferent neurons may effectively restrict the deleterious consequences of tissue damage [115]. In the stomach, pretreatment with capsaicin compromises sensory neuron function and aggravates mucosal damage caused by acid, ethanol, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, and other chemicals [116­119]. Capsaicin alone is not injurious;

47

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Table 3.2 Pharmacological profile of extrinsic afferent endings and their therapeutic targets

Molecular target, compounds

Nature of afferent

Therapeutic purpose

References

5-HT3 receptors: granisetron, odansetron GABA-B receptor agonists
TRP (transient receptor potential), TRPV1 channels: antagonists, e.g., capsazepine NMDA receptors: peripherally restricted antagonists Somatostatin receptors: agonists, e.g., octreotide Purine P2X receptors Bradykinin receptors
Cholecystokinin 1 receptor agonists

Upper gastrointestinal tract Gastroesophageal junction Pain afferents
Pain afferents Pain afferents Pain afferents Pain afferents Satiety afferents

Vomiting, nausea
Treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome
Inflammatory pain Irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory pain Obesity (inhibition of food intake)

Sanger and Andrews, 2006 [90]
Blackshaw, 2001 [103], Cange et al., 2002 [176] Chan et al., 2003 [177], Sugiura et al., 2004 [178]
McRoberts et al., 2001 [179]
Bradette et al., 1994 [180], Schwetz et al., 2004 [181] Wynn and Burnstock, 2006 [182] Longhurst et al., 1984 [183], McLean et al., 1998 [184] Barrachina et al., 1997 [185]

Other receptors and ion channels on the endings of extrinsic afferent neurons include cannabinoid CB1 receptors, peptide YY receptors, acid-sensitive ion channels, galanin receptors, leptin receptors, and ghrelin receptors [82,186­188]. GABA, g-aminobutyric acid; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate.

in fact, the short-term effect of capsaicin is protective, primarily through the capsaicin-induced release of the sensory neurotransmitter, CGRP, from spinal afferent nerve endings [115]. Moreover, blocking CGRP receptors, or reducing the effectiveness of CGRP by immunoneutralization, diminishes gastric protection [120,121]. Application of capsaicin to the spinal afferent pathways, but not to the vagus nerves, blocks the CGRP-dependent hyperemic response to the acute application of capsaicin, indicating that gastric protection is dependent on the integrity of spinal afferent neurons [122]. Because the protection is reduced by the nerve conduction blocker tetrodotoxin applied to the stomach, axon reflexes are likely to be involved (i.e., action potential invasion of collateral branches of activated nerve endings) [117]. Tachykinins are often colocalized with CGRP in the gastric spinal afferent neurons, and data indicate that tachykinins, released from the spinal primary afferent endings and acting through NK2 receptors, contribute to gastric protection [123]. The protective mechanism involves vasodilation and increased mucosal blood flow; CGRP and tachykinins cause vasodilation by releasing nitric oxide from vascular endothelial cells and, thus, inhibition of nitric oxide synthase increases gastric damage [124]. Transmitter release from afferent endings in the colon also reduces the severity of damage caused by inflammation, at least in the acute phase [125].

Pharmacology of receptors and ion channels on extrinsic afferent endings The receptors and ion channels expressed by the endings of afferent nerves are potential therapeutic targets [82,126]. 5-HT3 receptors on the endings of vagal afferents in the gut have been targeted in the treatment of nausea and vomiting, particularly when induced by cancer chemotherapy [90]. -Aminobutyric acid (GABA)-B receptors have been identified as targets to inhibit vagovagal reflexes, thereby antagonizing vagovagal lower esophageal relaxation, which is the major cause of gastroesophageal reflux disease [103]. Other therapeutic targets are listed in Table 3.2.
Intrinsic primary afferent neurons
Intrinsic primary afferent neurons are the first neurons of motility, secretomotor and vasomotor reflexes in the small intestine and colon [127]. In these regions, the enteric nervous system is capable of controlling such functions in the absence of connections with the central nervous system. By contrast, the nerve circuits for reflexes that control motility, secretion, and blood flow in the stomach pass through the central nervous system. Esophageal functions are controlled through the brainstem, and the neural control of the pancreas and gallbladder is also extrinsic.

48

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

Neurons with Dogiel type II morphology have been identified as IPANs in the small intestine, and these neurons are also common in the large intestine [128]. However, they are absent from the esophagus, proximal stomach, and gallbladder, and are rare in the gastric antrum. Studies of neurons in the pancreas have not clarified whether Dogiel type II neurons are present. Although analysis of the circuitry in the small intestine indicates that the first neurons in the reflex pathways are Dogiel type II neurons, it is possible that other neurons in the circuits also respond to their physical and chemical environment. In fact, research suggests that reflexes in the colon can be initiated through other types of neuron [129].
Properties of intrinsic primary afferent neurons Dogiel type II neurons are multiaxonal, with one or more axons that lead to and branch in the lamina propria of the mucosa, just beneath the absorptive epithelium, and axons that enter the enteric ganglia and supply terminals around several types of nerve cells, including other IPANs, interneurons, and motor neurons. In addition, these neurons have distinct electrophysiological properties. They have broad action potentials that are carried by both Na+ and Ca2+ currents and are followed by early and late afterhyperpolarizing potentials. These neurons, unlike all other enteric neurons (at least in the guinea pig small intestine), do not receive prominent fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials. In other regions and species, fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials are more readily recorded from presumed IPANs. However, they do receive synaptic inputs through which slow excitation is mediated. This is unusual because neither spinal nor vagal afferent neurons receive synapses at their cell bodies [130], although the cell bodies of mesencephalic trigeminal primary afferent neurons do receive synapses [131]. Thus, IPANs differ from extrinsic sensory neurons of the digestive tract in that their excitabilities can be modified by synapses at the cell body.
Chemosensitive intrinsic primary afferent neurons Intracellular recordings taken from IPANs in the guinea pig small intestine show that IPANs respond to chemicals, such as inorganic acid and short-chain fatty acids at neutral pH, applied to the lumenal surface of the mucosa of the small intestine [132,133]. Application of a solution with a low Ca2+ and a high Mg2+ concentration did not prevent synaptic transmission. Thus, IPANs are not activated indirectly through other neurons that react to stimulation. Activation of submucosal and myenteric neurons by the application of glucose to the mucosa has also been reported [134].
Intrinsic primary afferent neurons probably detect changes in the chemical content of the gut lumen indirectly, through the release of hormones from enteroendocrine cells. Indirect action is inferred because the mucosal epithelium separates the nerve endings from the lumenal environment.

Substantial evidence suggests that 5-HT, a potent IPAN stimulant, acts as an intermediate in enteric reflexes. 5-HT is released when the mucosa is mechanically stimulated to elicit motility reflexes, and the reflex responses are antagonized by drugs that block 5-HT receptors [135­137]. Other hormones in gut endocrine cells, such as CCK and motilin, are released by nutrients and act on neurons; however, their roles as reflex intermediaries are untested. Research suggests that ATP released from mucosal epithelial cells can activate chemosensitive IPANs [138].
Stretch-sensitive intrinsic primary afferent neurons Intrinsic primary afferent neurons also respond to tension in the muscle and to direct distortion of their processes [139­141]. The neurons respond phasically at the beginning of a stretch or when their processes are directly deformed [140]. During maintained stretch, the muscle contracts more or less rhythmically, and IPANs continue to be activated [139]. The rate of discharge is proportional to the degree of distention. However, the ongoing discharge of action potentials is abolished if the muscle contraction is prevented by muscle relaxants, indicating that active tension in the muscle contributes to the excitation of the tension-sensitive IPANs. The involvement of the muscle is interesting because it has long been known that intestinal muscle cells are directly sensitive to stretch and respond to it by contracting [142]. This reaction of the smooth muscle may be integral to the response of IPANs during sustained stretch. The neurons themselves possess mechanosensitive ion channels, and when the processes of the neurons are distorted, they discharge action potentials [140,141,143].
Interestingly, IPANs are inhibited if their cell bodies are distorted or if a small area of their surface membrane is stretched [140]. This occurs through the opening of BK-type K+ channels on the cell soma, which appear to be directly stretch-sensitive. Myenteric nerve cell bodies are distorted by muscle movement [144], and it is possible that sufficient pressure in the intestinal wall may inhibit IPANs as part of a protective mechanism that limits the strength of reflex contraction of the intestine.
Mucosal mechanoreceptors Functional evidence for IPANs with cell bodies in submucosal ganglia comes from experiments that have localized the activity-dependent induction of c-Fos and the activitydependent uptake of styryl dyes. c-Fos immunoreactivity was detected in submucosal nerve cells after mucosal distortion by puffs of nitrogen gas ejected from a pipette [145]. Styryl dyes, which are taken up by active neuron endings and transported back to the cell bodies, have also been used to identify IPANs that are mucosal mechanoreceptors [134]. The results suggest that cell bodies of mucosal mechanoreceptors are in submucosal ganglia and project to the myenteric plexus. The activation of mucosal mechanoreceptors is

49

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

likely to be partly indirect, through the release of 5-HT from enterochromaffin cells in the mucosa [146]. Mechanical stimulation of the mucosa induces c-Fos expression in IPANs in submucosal ganglia, and this induction is blocked by 5-HT receptor antagonists [145].
Distention stimuli can activate both mucosal mechanoreceptors and distention-sensitive neurons (myenteric IPANs), explaining why both myenteric and submucosal neurons are activated by distention [134]. The presence of stretchsensitivity of neuron cell bodies in the submucosal ganglia, similar to that observed in myenteric neurons, has not yet been determined.
Possible polymodal nature of intrinsic primary afferent neurons It appears that intrinsic afferent neurons may be modality preferring, rather than modality specific [128]. For example, primary afferent neurons in myenteric ganglia that respond to chemicals applied to the mucosa can also respond to mechanical stimulation of the mucosa [133,147], whereas, under some circumstances, mechanical stimulation excites only neurons with cell bodies in submucosal ganglia [134].
Physiological roles of intrinsic primary afferent neurons Intrinsic reflexes that affect motility, water and electrolyte secretion, and blood flow all occur in the small intestine (for details of the reflex circuits, see Chapter 2). Each of these reflexes is evoked by similar stimuli, although it is not known whether the same, different, or overlapping populations of IPANs contribute to motility, secretomotor, and vasomotor reflexes.
Muscle motor reflexes have been studied as stereotypical responses of the circular muscle; that is, excitation oral and relaxation aboral can be evoked by distention of the muscle (effected without distorting the mucosa), by the application of chemicals to the mucosal surface, and by distortion of the mucosa [148­150]. These reflexes occur after the degeneration of extrinsic afferent nerve endings and therefore are the consequences of IPAN activation by sensory stimuli (see Chapter 2).
Secretomotor reflexes are initiated physiologically by chemical or mechanical interaction of the lumenal contents with the mucosa, or pathologically by toxins, such as cholera toxin or enterotoxins, in the lumen [151­153]. Enteric reflexes also cause HCO3- secretion in response to duodenal acidification [154]. The enteric secretomotor circuits consist of IPANs with their endings in the mucosa and nerve circuits that pass through the myenteric and submucosal plexuses and feed back to secretomotor neurons with cell bodies in the submucosal ganglia [128,155]. The secretomotor neurons stimulate the epithelial cells to pump Cl- ions, which are accompanied by water, into the lumen.
Local vasodilator reflexes in the small intestine are caused by mechanical or chemical irritation of the mucosa, and sub-

stantial evidence indicates that the vasodilator neurons are intrinsic to the intestine and transmission from them is predominantly noncholinergic [156­158]. It is presumed that the first neurons in these reflexes are the IPANs, but this has not been directly shown. In fact, of the reflexes in the intestine, the vasomotor reflexes are the least studied. The same motor neurons have axons that branch to supply both the secretory epithelium and arterioles; thus, some secretomotor and vasodilator reflexes may share the same final neurons (see Chapter 2). This makes physiological sense because a proportion of the secreted water and electrolytes comes from the vasculature [128].
In summary, the roles of IPANs are to signal changes in the state of the intestine that are the consequences of the presence and nature of its contents. The information is conveyed to other neurons of the enteric nervous system that integrate the information and cause appropriate changes in mixing and propulsive activity, in water and electrolyte transport, and in local blood flow.
Intrinsic primary afferent neurons as nociceptors In the small intestine and colon, protective secretory and motility responses are initiated by irritants that are included in enemas, by toxins, by bacterial products, and by parasitic infestations. The intestine exhibits exaggerated secretomotor reflexes, which are manifested as diarrhea, when excessive levels of bacteria and bacterial toxins overwhelm the gut lumen [153,159]. Powerful propulsive reflexes are triggered by bacteria or parasites in the gut lumen to expel these organisms [160­163]. Thus the IPANs appear to act as detectors of noxious conditions in the gut, in addition to reacting to benign stimuli to elicit enteric reflexes. The plant lectin IB4 appears to bind specifically to nociceptive neurons, but not to nonnociceptive neurons, in dorsal root and nodose ganglia [164,165]. It is thus significant that enteric IPANs also have high-affinity binding sites for IB4 [166].
Intestinofugal neurons
Intestinofugal neurons are an unusual type of neuron. Their cell bodies are in the gut wall, and their processes run toward the central nervous system and form synapses in prevertebral sympathetic ganglia. Their presence was deduced by Kuntz and Saccomanno in the 1930s [167], who found that distention of one region of the gastrointestinal tract inhibits motility in other regions and that these enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes persist after connections with the central nervous system are severed, provided that the integrity of the connections with prevertebral sympathetic ganglia is maintained. Methods to study these reflexes in vitro were developed in the early 1970s [168], and, since that time, the organization of the pathways has been studied in considerable detail [114,128]. The location of the cell bodies of intestinofugal

50

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

neurons in the myenteric ganglia of rats and guinea pigs was determined by injecting retrogradely transported dye into prevertebral ganglia [169­172]. In pig, some intestinofugal neurons have cell bodies in submucosal ganglia [173]. Intestinofugal neurons are most numerous in the large intestine; in the small intestine they increase in number distally, and they are rare in the stomach. The axons of intestinofugal neurons form excitatory synapses with the cell bodies of those sympathetic neurons in the prevertebral ganglia that regulate motility and secretion. They do not connect with vasoconstrictor neurons. The axons of the sympathetic neurons project back to the gut. All intestinofugal neurons have the same primary transmitter, acetylcholine [114,174,175].
Roles of intestinofugal neurons The roles of intestinofugal neurons have been analyzed almost exclusively in relation to motility control, although these neurons also innervate sympathetic neurons that inhibit water and electrolyte secretion in the intestine (see Chapter 2). The intestinofugal neurons that affect motility are in the afferent limbs of enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes. These reflexes appear to act primarily on parts of the gastrointestinal tract that are proximal to the sites from which they are initiated [114]. Thus, the reflexes are one of the mechanisms by which more distal parts of the intestine regulate the proximal regions from which they receive products of digestion. The enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes also appear to have a protective role in the gastrointestinal tract. For example, enterogastric reflexes slow gastric emptying, thereby protecting the duodenal mucosa from acid and osmotic stress.
Overview
The gastrointestinal tract can be regarded as a sensory organ. It has three detecting systems: neurons, endocrine cells, and the gut immune system. The neural detection of sensory information is through both intrinsic sensory (primary afferent) neurons and extrinsic sensory neurons. The neural sensory system is responsible for detecting physiological and pathological states of the digestive system and its environment. The detected information is used to govern: (1) reflexes confined within the gut wall (intrinsic reflexes) that change motility, blood flow, and transepithelial fluid transfer; (2) extrinsic, but peripheral, reflexes between digestive organs; (3) reflexes through the central nervous system that are not consciously perceived; and (4) conscious sensation, such as satiety, hunger, discomfort, pain, and nausea. Although many of the effects mediated through the afferent neurons of the digestive system have been elegantly dissected, the subtleties of their interactions are still being unraveled. The challenge remains to establish a good linkage between what is known of the responses of individual pri-

mary afferent neurons and the integration of the information they provide to yield an output, either a conscious experience or a physiological response.
References
1. Furness JB, Kunze WA, Clerc N. Nutrient tasting and signaling mechanisms in the gut. II. The intestine as a sensory organ: neural, endocrine, and immune responses. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G922.
2. Powley TL, Holst MC, Boyd DB, Kelly JB. Three-dimensional reconstructions of autonomic projections to the gastrointestinal tract. Microsc Res Tech 1994;29:297.
3. Coffin B, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Somatic stimulation reduces perception of gut distention in humans. Gastroenterology 1994; 107:1636.
4. Ford MJ, Camilleri M, Zinsmeister AR, Hanson RB. Psychosensory modulation of colonic sensation in the human transverse and sigmoid colon. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1772.
5. Accarino AM, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Attention and distraction: effects on gut perception. Gastroenterology 1997;113:415.
6. Sengupta JN, Gebhart GF. Gastrointestinal afferent fibers and sensation. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:483.
7. Berthoud HR, Powley TL. Vagal afferent innervation of the rat fundic stomach: morphological characterization of the gastric tension receptor. J Comp Neurol 1992;319:261.
8. Phillips RJ, Baronowsky EA, Powley TL. Afferent innervation of gastrointestinal tract smooth muscle by the hepatic branch of the vagus. J Comp Neurol 1997;384:248.
9. Clerc N, Condamin M. Selective labelling of vagal sensory nerve fibers in the lower esophageal sphincter with anterogradely transported WGA-HRP. Brain Res 1987;424:216.
10. Berthoud HR, Kressel M, Raybould HE, Neuhuber WL. Vagal sensors in the rat duodenal mucosa: distribution and structure as revealed by in vivo DiI tracing. Anat Embryol 1995;191:203.
11. Wang FB, Powley TL. Topographic inventories of vagal afferents in gastrointestinal muscle. J Comp Neurol 2000;421:302.
12. Phillips RJ, Powley TL. Tension and stretch receptors in gastrointestinal smooth muscle: re-evaluating vagal mechanoreceptor electrophysiology. Brain Res Rev 2000;34:1.
13. Lawrentjew BJ. Experimentelle-morphologische Studien über den feineren Bau des autonomen Nervensystems. II. Über den Aufbau der Ganglien der Speiserohre nebst einigen Bemerkungen über das Vorkommen und die Verteilung zweier Arten von Nervenzellen in dem autonomen Nervensystem Z. Mikrosk. Anat Forsch 1929; 18:233.
14. Rodrigo J, De Felipe J, Robles Chillida EM, et al. Sensory vagal nature and anatomical access paths to esophagus laminar nerve endings in myenteric ganglia. Determination by surgical degeneration methods. Acta Anat 1982;112:47.
15. Zagorodnyuk VP, Brookes SJ. Transduction sites of vagal mechanoreceptors in the guinea pig esophagus. J Neurosci 2000;20: 6249.
16. Castelucci P, Robbins HL, Furness JB. P2X2 purine receptor immunoreactivity of intraganglionic laminar endings in the mouse gastrointestinal tract. Cell Tissue Res 2003;312:167.
17. Lynn PA, Olsson C, Zagorodnyuk V, et al. Rectal intraganglionic laminar endings are transduction sites of extrinsic mechanoreceptors in the guinea pig rectum. Gastroenterology 2003;125:786.
18. Berthoud HR, Patterson LM, Neumann F, Neuhuber WL. Distribution and structure of vagal afferent intraganglionic laminar endings IGLEs in the rat gastrointestinal tract. Anat Embryol 1997;195:183.
19. Neuhuber WL, Kressel M, Stark A, Berthoud HR. Vagal efferent and afferent innervation of the rat esophagus as demonstrated by

51

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

anterograde DiI and DiA tracing: focus on myenteric ganglia. J Auton Nerv Syst 1998;70:92. 20. Neuhuber WL. Sensory vagal innervation of the rat esophagus and cardia: a light and electron microscopic anterograde tracing study. J Auton Nerv Syst 1987;20:243. 21. Kressel M, Berthoud HR, Neuhuber WL. Vagal innervation of the rat pylorus: an anterograde tracing study using carbocyanine dyes and laser scanning confocal microscopy. Cell Tissue Res 1994;275:109. 22. Green T, Dockray GJ. Characterization of the peptidergic afferent innervation of the stomach in the rat, mouse and guinea-pig. Neuroscience 1988;25:181. 23. Clerc N, Mazzia C. Morphological relationships of choleragenoid horseradish peroxidase-labeled spinal primary afferents with myenteric ganglia and mucosal associated lymphoid tissue in the cat esophagogastric junction. J Comp Neurol 1994;347:171. 24. Furness JB, Lloyd KC, Sternini C, Walsh JH. Evidence that myenteric neurons of the gastric corpus project to both the mucosa and the external muscle: myectomy operations on the canine stomach. Cell Tissue Res 1991;266:475. 25. Gibbins IL, Furness JB, Costa M, et al. Co-localization of calcitonin gene related peptide-like immunoreactivity with substance P in cutaneous, vascular and visceral sensory neurons of guinea-pigs. Neurosci Lett 1985;57:125. 26. Costa M, Furness JB, Llewellyn Smith IJ, Cuello AC. Projections of substance P-containing neurons within the guinea-pig small intestine. Neuroscience 1981;6:411. 27. Furness JB, Papka RE, Della NG, et al. Substance P-like immunoreactivity in nerves associated with the vascular system in guineapigs. Neuroscience 1982;7:447. 28. Mazzia C, Clerc N. Ultrastructural analysis of spinal primary afferent fibers within the circular muscle of the cat lower esophageal sphincter. Histochem Cell Biol 2000;113:235. 29. Mei N. Gastrointestinal chemoreception and its behavioural role. In: Booth DA (ed). Neurophysiology of Ingestion. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1993:44. 30. Grundy D. Speculations on the structure/function relationship for vagal and splanchnic afferent endings supplying the gastrointestinal tract. J Auton Nerv Syst 1988;22:175. 31. Grundy D, Scratcherd T. Sensory afferents from the gastrointestinal tract. In: Wood JD (ed). Handbook of Physiology: The Gastrointestinal System. Volume 16. Washington, D.C.: American Physiological Society, 1989:593. 32. Zagorodnyuk VP, Chen BN, Brookes SJH. Intraganglionic laminar endings are mechano-transduction sites of vagal tension receptors in the guinea-pig stomach. J Physiol (Lond) 2001;534:255. 33. Iggo A. Gastrointestinal tension receptors with unmyelinated afferent fibres in the vagus of the cat. Q J Exp Physiol 1957;42:130. 34. Blackshaw LA, Grundy D, Scratcherd T. Vagal afferent discharge from gastric mechanoreceptors during contraction and relaxation of ferret corpus. J Auton Nerv Syst 1987;18:19. 35. Sengupta JN, Kauvar D, Goyal RK. Characteristics of vagal esophageal tension-sensitive afferent fibres in the opossum. J Neurophysiol 1989;61:1001. 36. Ozaki N, Sengupta JN, Gebhart GF. Mechanosensitive properties of gastric vagal afferent fibers in the rat. J Neurophysiol 1999;82:2210. 37. Pan HL, Longhurst JC. Ischaemia-sensitive sympathetic afferents innervating the gastrointestinal tract function as nociceptors in cats. J Physiol (Lond) 1996;492:841. 38. Sengupta JN, Saha JK, Goyal RJ. Differential sensitivity to bradykinin of esophageal distension-sensitive mechanoreceptors in vagal and sympathetic afferents of the opossum. J Neurophysiol 1992;68:1053. 39. Jänig W. Neurobiology of visceral afferent neurons: neuroanatomy, functions, organ regulations and sensations. Biol Psychol 1996; 42:29. 40. Gebhart GF, Sengupta JN. On visceral nociceptors. In: Besson JM, Guilbaud G, Ollat H (eds). Peripheral Neurons in Nociception:

Physiopharmacological Aspects. Paris: John Libbey Eurotext, 1994: 23. 41. Su X, Gebhart GF. Mechanosensitive pelvic nerve afferent fibers innervating the colon of the rat are polymodal in character. J Neurophysiol 1998;80:2632. 42. Leek BF. Abdominal and pelvic visceral receptors. Br Med Bull 1977;33:163. 43. Cottrell DF, Iggo A. The responses of duodenal tension receptors in sheep to pentagastrin, cholecystokinin and some other drugs. J Physiol (Lond) 1984;354:477. 44. Cottrell DF, Iggo A. Mucosal enteroceptors with vagal afferent fibers in the proximal duodenum of sheep. J Physiol (Lond) 1984;354:497. 45. Mei N, Garnier L. Osmosensitive vagal receptors in the small intestine of the cat. J Auton Nerv Syst 1986;16:159. 46. Blackshaw LA, Grundy D. Effects of cholecystokinin CCK-8 on two classes of gastroduodenal vagal afferent fibre. J Auton Nerv Syst 1990;31:191. 47. El Ouazzani T, Mei N. Electrophysiologic properties and role of vagal thermoreceptors of lower esophagus and stomach of cat. Gastroenterology 1982;83:995. 48. Jeanningros R. Vagal unitary responses to intestinal amino acid infusions in the anaesthetised cat: a putative signal for protein induced satiety. Physiol Behav 1982;28:9. 49. Mélone J. Vagal receptors sensitive to lipids in the small intestine of the cat. J Auton Nerv Syst 1986;17:231. 50. Clarke GD, Davison JS. Mucosal receptors in the gastric antrum and small intestine of the rat with afferent fibres in the cervical vagus. J Physiol (Lond) 1978;284:55. 51. Cottrell DF. Mechanoreceptors of the rabbit duodenum. Q J Exp Physiol 1984;69:677. 52. Raybould HE, Holzer H. Dual capsaicin sensitive afferent pathways mediate inhibition of gastric emptying in rat induced by intestinal carbohydrate. Neurosci Lett 1992;141:236. 53. Zhu JX, Wu XY, Owyang C, Li Y. Intestinal serotonin acts as a paracrine substance to mediate vagal signal transmission evoked by luminal factors in the rat. J Physiol (Lond) 2001;530:431. 54. Blackshaw LA, Grundy D. Effects of 5-hydroxytryptamine 5-HT on the discharge of vagal mechanoreceptors and motility in the upper gastrointestinal tract of the ferret. J Auton Nerv Syst 1993;45:51. 55. Blackshaw LA, Grundy D. Effects of 5-hydroxytryptamine on discharge of vagal mucosal afferent fibres from the upper gastrointestinal tract of the ferret. J Auton Nerv Syst 1993;45:41. 56. Grundy D, Bagaev VA, Hillsley K. Inhibition of gastric mechanoreceptor discharge by cholecystokinin in the rat. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G355. 57. Richards W, Hillsley K, Eastwood C, Grundy D. Sensitivity of vagal mucosal afferents to cholecystokinin and its role in afferent signal transduction in the rat. J Physiol (Lond) 1996;497:473. 58. Raybould HE. Capsaicin-sensitive vagal afferents and CCK in inhibition of gastric motor function induced by intestinal nutrients. Peptides 1991;12:1279. 59. Hölzer HH, Turkelson CM, Solomon TE, Raybould HE. Intestinal lipid inhibits gastric emptying via CCK and a vagal capsaicinsensitive afferent pathway in rats. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G625. 60. Li Y, Hao Y, Zhu J, Owyang C. Serotonin released from intestinal enterochromaffin cells mediates luminal non-cholecystokininstimulated pancreatic secretion in rats. Gastroenterology 2000; 118:1197. 61. Lin HC, Zhao X-T, Wang L, Wong H. Fat-induced ileal brake in the dog depends on peptide YY. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1491. 62. Zhao X-T, Wang L, Lin HC. Slowing of intestinal transit by fat depends on naloxone-blockable efferent, opioid pathway. Am J Physiol 2000;278:G866. 63. Mazzia C, Clerc N. Ultrastructural relationships of spinal primary afferent fibers with neuronal and non neuronal cells in the myenteric plexus of the cat esophago-gastric junction. Neuroscience 1997;80:925.

52

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

64. Barthó L, Szolcsányi J. The mechanism of the motor response to periarterial nerve stimulation in the small intestine of the rabbit. Br J Pharmacol 1980;70:193.
65. Fandriks L, Jonson C, Delbro D. Blockade of substance P receptors inhibits non-nicotinic, non-adrenergic colonic contractions induced by stimulation of the lumbar sympathetic nerves to the feline large intestine. Acta Physiol Scand 1985;124:565.
66. Thiefin G, Raybould HE, Leung FW, et al. Capsaicin-sensitive afferent fibers contribute to gastric mucosal blood flow response to electrical vagal stimulation. Am J Physiol 1990;259:1037.
67. Holzer P, Livingston EH, Guth P. Neural, metabolic, physical and endothelial factors in the regulation of the gastric circulation. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1994:1311.
68. Vanner S, MacNaughton WK. Capsaicin-sensitive afferent nerves activate submucosal secretomotor neurons in guinea pig ileum. Am J Physiol 1995;269:G203.
69. Takaki M, Nakayama S. Effects of mesenteric nerve stimulation on the electrical activity of myenteric neurons in the guinea pig ileum. Brain Res 1988;442:351.
70. Castagliulo I, Lamont JT, Letourneau R, et al. Neuronal involvement in the intestinal effects of clostridium difficile toxin A and vibrio cholerea enterotoxin in rat ileum. Gastroenterology 1994;107:657.
71. Neya T, Mizutani M, Yanagihara M, Nakayama S. Antidromic activation of vagal and sympathetic afferents does not produce intestinal contractions in dogs. Brain Res 1990;517:64.
72. Ness TJ, Gebhart GF. Visceral pain: a review of experimental studies. Pain 1990;41:167.
73. Ness TJ, Gebhart GF. Inflammation enhances reflex and spinal neuron responses to noxious visceral stimulation in rats. Am J Physiol 2001;280:G649.
74. Ray BS, Neill CL. Abdominal visceral sensation in man. Ann Surg 1947;126:709.
75. Bingham JR, Ingelfinger FJ, Smithwick RH. The effect of sympathectomy on abdominal pain in man. Gastroenterology 1950;15:18.
76. Lennerz JK, Dentsch C, Bernardini N, et al. Electrophysiological characterization of vagal afferents relevant to mucosal nociception in the rat upper oesophagus. J Physiol (Lond) 2007;582:229.
77. Clerc N, Mei N. Thoracic esophageal mechanoreceptors connected with fibers following sympathetic pathways. Brain Res Bull 1983;10:1.
78. Sengupta JN, Saha JK, Goyal RK. Stimulus-response function studies of esophageal mechanosensitive nociceptors in sympathetic afferents of opossum. J Neurophysiol 1990;64:796.
79. Woodworth RS, Sherrington CS. A pseudaffective reflex and its spinal path. J Physiol (Lond) 1904;31:234.
80. Camilleri M, Choi MG. Review article: irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1997;11:3.
81. Munakata J, Naliboff B, Harraf F, et al. Repetitive sigmoid stimulation induces rectal hyperalgesia in patients with irritable bowel syndrome Gastroenterology 1997;112:55.
82. Buéno L, Fioramonti J, Garcia-Villar R. Pathobiology of visceral pain: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic implications. III. Visceral afferent pathways: a source of new therapeutic targets for abdominal pain. Am J Physiol 2000;278:G670.
83. Connell AM, Jones FA, Rowlands EN. Motility of the pelvic colon. Part IV. Abdominal pain associated with colonic hypermotility after meals. Gut 1965;6:105.
84. Kellow JE, Eckersley GM, Jones MP. Enhanced perception of physiological intestinal motility in the irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 1991;101:1621.
85. Hawthorn J, Ostler KJ, Andrews PL. The role of the abdominal visceral innervation and 5-hydroxytryptamine M-receptors in vomiting induced by the cytotoxic drugs cyclophosphamide and cis-platin in the ferret. Q J Exp Physiol 1988;73:7.
86. Milano S, Grélot L, Chen Z, Bianchi AL. Vagal-induced vomiting in decerebrate cat is not suppressed by specific 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. J Auton Nerv Syst 1990;31:109.

87. Cubeddu LX, O'Connor DT, Hoffmann I, Parmer RJ. Plasma chromogranin A marks emesis and serotonin release associated with dacarbazine and nitrogen mustard but not with cyclophosphamidebased chemotherapies. Br J Cancer 1995;72:1033.
88. Walton SM. Advances in use of the 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2000;1:207.
89. Fujii Y, Tanaka H, Kawasaki T. Preoperative oral granisetron for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting after breast surgery Eur J Surg 2001;167:184.
90. Sanger GJ, Andrews PL. Treatment of nausea and vomiting: gaps in our knowledge. Autonom Neurosci 2006;129:3.
91. Gonzalez MF, Deutsch JA. Vagotomy abolishes cues of satiety produced by gastric distension. Science 1981;212:1283.
92. Deutsch JA. Dietary control and the stomach. Prog Neurobiol 1983;20:313.
93. Phillips RJ, Powley TL. Gastric volume detection after selective vagotomies in rats. Am J Physiol 1998;271:R766.
94. Mathis C, Moran TH, Schwartz GJ. Load-sensitive rat gastric vagal afferents encode volume but not gastric nutrients. Am J Physiol 1998;274:R280.
95. Smith GP. The controls of eating: brain meanings of food stimuli. Prog Brain Res 2000;122:173.
96. Hölzer HH, Raybould HE. Vagal and splanchnic sensory pathways mediate inhibition of gastric motility induced by duodenal distension. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G603.
97. Asakawa A, Inui A, Kaga T, et al. Ghrelin is an appetite-stimulatory signal from stomach with structural resemblance to motilin. Gastroenterology 2001;120:337.
98. Cannon WB, Lieb CW. The receptive relaxation of the stomach. Am J Physiol 1911;29:267.
99. Abrahamsson H, Jansson G. Vago-vagal gastro-gastric relaxation in the cat. Acta Physiol Scand 1973;88:289.
100. Andrews PL, Grundy D, Scratcherd T. Reflex excitation of antral motility induced by gastric distension in the ferret. J Physiol (Lond) 1980;298:79.
101. Forster ER, Green T, Elliot M, et al. Gastric emptying in rats: role of afferent neurons and cholecystokinin. Am J Physiol 1990; 258:G552.
102. Martin CJ, Patrikios J, Dent J. Abolition of gas reflux and transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation by vagal blockade in the dog Gastroenterology 1986;91:890.
103. Blackshaw LA. Receptors and transmission in the brain-gut axis: potential for novel therapies. IV. GABAB receptors in the braingastroesophageal axis. Am J Physiol 2001;281:G311.
104. Dent J. From 1906 to 2006 ­ a century of major evolution of understanding of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;24:1269.
105. Li Y, Owyang C. Endogenous cholecystokinin stimulates pancreatic enzyme secretion via vagal afferent pathway in rats. Gastroenterology 1994;107:525.
106. Li Y, Owyang C. Pancreatic secretion evoked by cholecystokinin and non-cholecystokinin-dependent duodenal stimuli via vagal afferent fibes in the rat. J Physiol (Lond) 1996;494:773.
107. Blair EL, Brown JC, Harper AA, Scratcherd T. A gastric phase of pancreatic secretion. J Physiol (Lond) 1966;184:812.
108. Code CF, Marlett JA. The interdigestive myoelectric complex of the stomach and small bowel of dogs. J Physiol (Lond) 1975;246: 289.
109. Mawe GM, Moses PL, Pozo MJ. Motility of the biliary tract. In: Yamada T (ed). Textbook of Gastroenterology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilikins, 2003:248.
110. Sengupta JN, Gebhart GF. Mechanosensitive afferent fibers in the gastrointestinal and lower urinary tracts. In: Gebhart GF (ed). Visceral Pain, Progress in Pain Research and Management. Volume 5. Seattle, WA: IASP Press, 1995:75.
111. Gonella J, Bouvier M, Blanquet F. Extrinsic nervous control of motility of small and large intestines and related sphincters. Physiol Rev 1987;67:902.

53

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

112. Christensen J. The motility of the colon. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:991.
113. Furness JB, Costa M. The adrenergic innervation of the gastrointestinal tract. Ergeb Physiol 1974;69:1.
114. Szurszewski JH, Miller SM. Physiology of prevertebral ganglia. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:795.
115. Holzer P. Neural emergency system in the stomach. Gastroenterology 1998;114:823.
116. Holzer P, Sametz W. Gastric mucosal protection against ulcerogenic factors in the rat mediated by capsaicin-sensitive afferent neurons. Gastroenterology 1986;91:975.
117. Holzer P, Livingston EH, Saria A, Guth PH. Sensory neurons mediate protective vasodilation in rat gastric mucosa. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G363.
118. Uchida M, Yano S, Watanabe K. Involvement of CGRP, substance P and blood circulation in aggravating mechanism of absolute ethanol-induced antral lesions by capsaicin treatment in rats. Jpn J Pharmacol 1993;62:123.
119. Brzozowski T, Konturek PC, Sliwowski Z, et al. Role of capsaicinsensitive sensory nerves in gastroprotection against acid-independent and acid-dependent ulcerogens. Digestion 1996;57:424.
120. Lambrecht N, Burchert M, Respondek M, et al. Role of calcitonin gene-related peptide and nitric oxide in the gastroprotective effect of capsaicin in the rat. Gastroenterology 1993;104:1371.
121. Merchant NB, Goodman J, Dempsey DT, et al. The role of calcitonin gene-related peptide and nitric oxide in gastric mucosal hyperemia and protection. J Surg Res 1995;58:344.
122. Li DS, Raybould HE, Quintero E, Guth PH. Role of calcitonin generelated peptide in gastric hyperemic response to intragastric capsaicin. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G657.
123. Stroff T, Plate S, Seyed EJ, et al. Tachykinin-induced increase in gastric mucosal resistance: role of primary afferent neurons, CGRP, and NO. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G1017.
124. Whittle BJ, Lopez Belmonte J, Moncada S. Regulation of gastric mucosal integrity by endogenous nitric oxide: interactions with prostanoids and sensory neuropeptides in the rat. Br J Pharmacol Chemother 1990;99:607.
125. Reinshagen M, Patel A, Sottili M, et al. Action of sensory neurons in an experimental rat colitis model of injury and repair. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G79.
126. Kirkup AJ, Brunsden AM, Grundy D. Receptors and transmission in the brain-gut axis: potential for novel therapies. I. Receptors on visceral afferents. Am J Physiol 2001;280:G787.
127. Furness JB, Jones C, Nurgali K, Clerc N. Intrinsic primary afferent neurons and nerve circuits within the intestine. Prog Neurobiol 2004;72:143.
128. Furness JB. The Enteric Nervous System. Oxford: Blackwell, 2006:xiii.
129. Spencer NJ, Smith TK. Mechanosensory S-neurons rather than AHneurons appear to generate a rhythmic motor pattern in guinea-pig distal colon. J Physiol (Lond) 2004;558:577.
130. Willis WD, Coggeshall RE. Sensory Mechanisms of the Spinal Cord. New York: Plenum Press, 1991.
131. Honma S, Moritani M, Zhang LF, et al. Quantitative ultrastructure of synapses on functionally identified primary afferent neurons in the cat trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus. Exp Brain Res 2001;137:150.
132. Kunze WA, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Identification of sensory nerve cells in a peripheral organ, the intestine of a mammal. Neuroscience 1995;66:1.
133. Bertrand PP, Kunze WA, Bornstein JC, et al. Analysis of the responses of myenteric neurons in the small intestine to chemical stimulation of the mucosa. Am J Physiol 1997;273:G422.
134. Kirchgessner AL, Liu MT, Gershon MD. In situ identification and visualization of neurons that mediate enteric and enteropancreatic reflexes. J Comp Neurol 1996;371:270.

135. Neya T, Mizutani M, Yamasato T. Role of 5-HT3 receptors in peristaltic reflex elicited by stroking the mucosa in the canine jejunum. J Physiol (Lond) 1993;471:159.
136. Foxx Orenstein AE, Kuemmerle JF, Grider JR. Distinct 5-HT receptors mediate the peristaltic reflex induced by mucosal stimuli in human and guinea pig intestine. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1281.
137. Grider JR, Kuemmerle JF, Jin JG. 5-HT released by mucosal stimuli initiates peristalsis by activating 5-HT4/5-HT1p receptors on sensory CGRP neurons. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G778.
138. Bertrand PP, Bornstein JC. ATP as a putative sensory mediator: activation of intrinsic sensory neurons of the myenteric plexus via P2X receptors. J Neurosci 2002;22:4767.
139. Kunze WA, Furness JB, Bertrand PP, Bornstein JC. Intracellular recording from myenteric neurons of the guinea-pig ileum that respond to stretch. J Physiol (Lond) 1998;506:827.
140. Kunze WA, Clerc N, Furness JB, Gola M. The soma and neurites of primary afferent neurons in the guinea-pig intestine respond differentially to deformation. J Physiol (Lond) 2000;526:375.
141. Mao Y, Wang B, Kunze W. Characterization of myenteric sensory neurons in the mouse small intestine. J Neurophysiol 2006;96:998.
142. Bülbring E. Correlation between membrane potential, spike discharge and tension in smooth muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1955; 128:200.
143. Wood JD. Electrical discharge of single enteric neurons of guineapig small intestine. Am J Physiol 1973;225:1107.
144. Gabella G, Trigg P. Size of neurons and glial cells in the enteric ganglia of mice, guinea-pigs, rabbits and sheep. J Neurocytol 1984; 13:49.
145. Kirchgessner AL, Tamir H, Gershon MD. Identification and stimulation by serotonin of intrinsic sensory neurons of the submucosal plexus of the guinea pig gut: activity-induced expression of Fos immunoreactivity. J Neurosci 1992;12:235.
146. Pan H, Gershon MD. Activation of intrinsic afferent pathways in submucosal ganglia of the guinea pig small intestine. J Neurosci 2000;20:3295.
147. Bertrand PP, Kunze WA, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Electrical mapping of the projections of intrinsic primary afferent neurons to the mucosa of the guinea-pig small intestine. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1998;10:533.
148. Hukuhara T. Der Einfluss des Atropins auf die Dunndarmbewegung Tohoku. J Exp Med 1951;54:21.
149. Furness JB, Costa M. The Enteric Nervous System. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1987.
150. Yuan SY, Furness JB, Bornstein JC, Smith TK. Mucosal distortion by compression elicits polarized reflexes and enhances responses of the circular muscle to distension in the small intestine. J Auton Nerv Syst 1991;35:219.
151. Frieling T, Wood JD, Cooke HJ. Submucosal reflexes: distentionevoked ion transport in the guinea-pig distal colon. Am J Physiol 1992;263:G91.
152. Cooke HJ, Reddix RA. Neural regulation of intestinal electrolyte transport. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:2083.
153. Lundgren O. Enteric nerves and diarrhoea. Pharmacol Toxicol 2002;90:109.
154. Flemström G. Gastric and duodenal mucosal secretion of bicarbonate. In: Johnson LR (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1994:1285.
155. Lundgren O, Svanvik J, Jivegård L. Enteric nervous system. I. Physiology and pathophysiology of the intestinal tract. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34:264.
156. Vanner S, Jiang MM, Surprenant A. Mucosal stimulation evokes vasodilation in submucosal arterioles by neuronal and nonneuronal mechanisms. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G202.
157. Vanner S, Surprenant A. Neural reflexes controlling intestinal microcirculation. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G223.
158. Vanner S, MacNaughton WK. Submucosal secretomotor and vasodilator reflexes. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:39.

54

Sensory neurons of the gastrointestinal tract CHAPTER 3

159. Lundgren O, Peregrin AT, Persson K, et al. Role of the enteric nervous system in the fluid and electrolyte secretion of rotavirus diarrhea. Science 2000;287:491.
160. Sukhdeo MV, Croll NA. Gut propulsion in mice infected with Trichinella spiralis. J Parasitol 1981;67:906.
161. Mathias JR, Nogueira J, Martin JL, et al. Escherichia coli heat-stable toxin: its effect on motility of the small intestine. Am J Physiol 1982;242:G360.
162. Collins SM. The immunomodulation of enteric neuromuscular function: implications for motility and inflammatory disorders. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1683.
163. Vallance BA, Blennerhassett PA, Collins SM. Increased intestinal muscle contractility and worm expulsion in nematode-infected mice. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G321.
164. Stucky CL, Lewin GR. Isolectin B4-positive and -negative nociceptors are functionally distinct. J Neurosci 1999;19:6497.
165. Gerke MB, Plenderleith MB. Binding sites for the plant lectin Bandeiraea simplicifolia I-isolectin B4 are expressed by nociceptive primary sensory neurones. Brain Res 2001;911:101.
166. Hind A, Migliori M, Thacker M, et al. Primary afferent neurons intrinsic to the intestine, like primary afferent neurons of spinal and cranial sensory ganglia, bind the lectin, IB4. Cell Tissue Res 2005; 321:151.
167. Kuntz A, Saccomanno G. Reflex inhibition of intestinal motility mediated through decentralized prevertebral ganglia. J Neurophysiol 1944;7:163.
168. Crowcroft PJ, Holman ME, Szurszewski JH. Excitatory input from the distal colon to the inferior mesenteric ganglion in the guineapig. J Physiol (Lond) 1971;219:443.
169. Kuramoto H, Furness JB. Distribution of nerve cells that project from the small intestine to the coeliac ganglion in the guinea-pig. J Auton Nerv Syst 1989;27:241.
170. Messenger JP, Furness JB. Distribution of enteric nerve cells that project to the coeliac ganglion of the guinea-pig. Cell Tissue Res 1992;269:119.
171. Messenger JP, Furness JB. Distribution of enteric nerve cells projecting to the superior and inferior mesenteric ganglia of the guinea-pig. Cell Tissue Res 1993;271:333.
172. Furness JB, Koopmans HS, Robbins HL, Lin HC. Identification of intestinofugal neurons projecting to the coeliac and superior mesenteric ganglia in the rat. Autonom Neurosci 2000;83:81.
173. Timmermans JP, Barbiers M, Scheuermann DW, et al. Occurence, distribution and neurochemical features of small intestinal neurons projecting to the cranial mesenteric ganglion in the pig. Cell Tissue Res 1993;272:49.
174. Mann PT, Furness JB, Pompolo S, Mäder M. Chemical coding of neurons that project from different regions of intestine to the coeliac ganglion of the guinea pig. J Auton Nerv Syst 1995;56:15.

175. Sharkey KA, Lomax AEG, Bertrand PP, Furness JB. Electrophysiology, shape and chemistry of intestinofugal neurons projecting from guinea pig distal colon to inferior mesenteric ganglia. Gastroenterology 1998;115:909.
176. Cange L, Johnsson E, Rydholm H, et al. Baclofen-mediated gastrooesophageal acid reflux control in patients with established reflux disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2002;16:869.
177. Chan CLH, Facer P, Davis JB, et al. Sensory fibres expressing capsaicin receptor TRPV1 in patients with rectal hypersensitivity and faecal urgency. Lancet 2003;361:385.
178. Sugiura T, Bielefeldt K, Gebhart GF. TRPV1 function in mouse colon sensory neurons is enhanced by metabotropic 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor activation. J Neurosci 2004;24:9521.
179. McRoberts JA, Coutinho SV, Marvizón JC, et al. Role of peripheral N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptors in visceral nociception in rats. Gastroenterology 2001;120:1737.
180. Bradette M, Delvaux M, Staumont G, et al. Octreotide increases thresholds of colonic visceral perception in IBS patients without modifying muscle tone. Dig Dis Sci 1994;39:1171.
181. Schwetz I, Naliboff B, Munakata J, et al. Anti-hyperalgesic effect of octreotide in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:123.
182. Wynn G, Burnstock G. Adenosine 5'-triphosphate and its relationship with other mediators that activate pelvic nerve afferent neurons in the rat colorectum. Purinergic Signalling 2006;2:517.
183. Longhurst JC, Kaufman MP, Ordway GA, Musch TI. Effects of bradykinin and capsaicin on endings of afferent fibres abdominal visceral organs. Am J Physiol 1984;247:552.
184. McLean PG, Picard C, Garcia-Villar R, et al. Role of kinin B1 and B2 receptors and mast cells in post intestinal infection-induced hypersensitivity to distension. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1998;10:499.
185. Barrachina MD, Martínez V, Wang L, et al. Synergistic interaction between leptin and cholecystokinin to reduce short-term food intake in lean mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:10455.
186. Broberger C, Hökfelt T. Hypothalamic and vagal neuropeptide circuitries regulating food intake. Physiol Behav 2001;74:669.
187. Page AJ, Brierley SM, Martin CM, et al. Different contributions of ASIC channels 1a, 2, and 3 in gastrointestinal mechanosensory function. Gut 2005;54:1408.
188. Page AJ, Slattery JA, Milte C, et al. Ghrelin selectively reduces mechanosensitivity of upper gastrointestinal vagal afferents. Am J Physiol 2007;292:G1376.
189. Ness TJ, Metcalf AM, Gebhart GF. A psychophysiological study in humans using phasic colonic distension as a noxious visceral stimulus. Pain 1990;43:377.

55

A COMPONENTS
4 Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors
Laurence J. Miller

Organization of the gut endocrine system, 57 History of gastrointestinal endocrinology, 58 Hormone secretory cells, 59 Endocrine cell localization and characterization, 60 Biosynthesis and processing of gastrointestinal hormones, 61

Hormone and transmitter molecules, 63 Measurement of hormones, 63 Receptors, 64 Hormone-specific insights, 68 Hormones in gastrointestinal disease, 79

The gastrointestinal endocrine system represents the largest and most complex endocrine organ in the body. Whereas traditional endocrine organs are composed of a solid mass of hormone-secreting cells that are homogeneous, or at least organized with a defined spatial orientation relative to one another, the sources of the gastrointestinal regulatory molecules are single endocrine cells and peptidergic neurons that are scattered along the length of the digestive tract. They all share the property of producing and secreting polypeptides. Because these hydrophilic molecules cannot cross a lipid bilayer, they must interact with other molecules that span the plasma membrane of target cells, which can activate the intracellular machinery of those cells. These membrane protein targets of gastrointestinal hormone action are called receptors. They have specialized domains for ligand recognition that are accessible to the extracellular space, as well as effector domains for molecular interactions or enzymatic activity that are located intracellularly. The diversity and design of the gastrointestinal endocrine system also necessitate broadening the basic concept of classical endocrinology, which requires that a hormone be delivered to its targets by way of the bloodstream. Although the bloodstream delivers some gastrointestinal hormones, the gastrointestinal endocrine system may also use more direct and focused means of transmitter delivery.
The endocrine cells are scattered among the epithelial cells of the mucosal lining of the gut and the ductular elements that enter the gut. They have an open or closed morphology. Endocrine cells with an open morphology can sense the composition of chyme and secretions through processes that extend into the lumen. A closed morphology facilitates
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

sensing of the interstitial environment [1,2]. Peptidergic neurons also exist and are organized into syncytia, which extend between and along layers of the mucosa and into the solid digestive organs. These neurons are classified as extrinsic or intrinsic depending on the location of their cell bodies. Extrinsic parasympathetic innervation comes from the vagus and pelvic nerves, whereas sympathetic innervation comes from various sympathetic ganglia. The major source of peptidergic nerves is intrinsic to the gut and is affected little by sympathectomy or vagotomy. Numerous varieties of both endocrine cells and peptidergic neurons exist in the gastrointestinal tract. Each type of cell has its own distinct distribution and is able to sense and respond to a unique set of stimuli, resulting in the synthesis and secretion of a single predominant peptide.
Each hormone or neurotransmitter affects only those target cells possessing the appropriate receptors on their surface. This area of research has become even more complex and interesting in recent years with the realization that receptors can interact with each other and with additional allosteric modulators to change their selectivity and biological responsiveness [3­5]. Cells that can be regulated include the vast spectrum of epithelia, smooth muscle cells, and neurons residing at all levels of the digestive tract. Responses span the temporal spectrum, from rapid and transient to delayed and prolonged. The former includes effects on behavior or sensation, secretory or absorptive phenomena, motor events, and metabolic events. The more prolonged effects typically involve cellular growth, differentiation, or morphogenesis.
The combination of unique stimuli, limited distribution of distinct types of hormone-secreting cells, and exquisite selectivity of target cells and their responses provides almost unlimited opportunities for regulation. This elegant system integrates digestive functions at all levels of the gastrointestinal tract, thereby optimizing the digestion and absorption of

56

Endocrine

Autocrine

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

Neurocrine

Paracrine

Distant target cell
Figure 4.1 Modes of delivery of gastrointestinal regulatory peptides from endocrine cells and nerves, illustrating endocrine, autocrine, neurocrine, and paracrine mechanisms.

nutrients. For all these reasons, the gastrointestinal endocrine system has been referred to as the brain of the gut.
Organization of the gut endocrine system
The organization of the gastrointestinal endocrine system is the key to its power and flexibility. Acutely regulated gastrointestinal events are dynamic, complex, and interrelated; the ingestion of a meal initiates changes in secretion, absorption, and transit along the gut and in its associated digestive organs, and the net composition of chyme and its rate of delivery vary markedly over time and space. More delayed and prolonged effects on the differentiation and growth of enteric cells are equally important for the optimal digestive responses to an individual's dietary habits and nutritional requirements. Given the diversity in size and composition of ingested meals, the gastrointestinal endocrine system must be capable of highly varied programs of responses, not only to ensure proper assimilation of the nutrients but also to make eating the pleasurable experience it represents for most people.
The gastrointestinal endocrine system must be responsive both to intralumenal digestive events and to systemic status. The combination of open and closed endocrine cells and nerves provides sensitivity toward both worlds, recognizing that the general health, nutritional status, and metabolic needs of the organism can modify the optimal nutritional impact of a meal. With each hormone-secreting cell sensitive to its local environment, and with each cell strategically located, endocrine cells of the same type in two different locations likely secrete their peptides at different times, reflecting the dynamic changes occurring along the length of

the gut after a meal. An additional level of control is made possible by the route of delivery and the mode of action of the secreted regulatory peptide. This can be endocrine, autocrine, neurocrine, or paracrine (Fig. 4.1).
The term endocrine specifically refers to hormonal delivery by way of the bloodstream, providing a mechanism to transport the hormone to distant sites. If this circulation traverses a specialized organ, such as the portal circulation through the liver, the opportunity exists to extract a particular hormone efficiently from the blood, thereby preventing broad systemic distribution. This can differentially affect certain molecular forms of the same hormone; for example, short molecular forms of cholecystokinin (CCK) are extracted in a single pass through the liver, whereas long forms pass through to the systemic circulation [6]. Specialized circulatory delivery systems are also relevant to gastrointestinal peptides, such as the islet­acinar portal circulation that provides high concentrations of peptides to the surrounding pancreatic acinar cells [7].
Autocrine loops are postulated to exist whereby the peptide synthesized by a cell affects that same cell. This may occur after secretion into the interstitial space, such that back-diffusion allows high local concentrations of peptide to interact with receptors on the plasmalemmal surface of the hormone-secreting cell. Such regulatory loops may even exist within cells. Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins), which are proximal effectors of hormonally stimulated events at the level of the plasmalemma, may also reside on secretory granule membranes [8].
Neurocrine delivery of peptides usually involves their local release adjacent to a target cell bearing relevant receptors [9]. Neurons are particularly well suited for this mode of delivery because they can have highly specialized long processes that

57

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

(a) Extracellular

F YT

IY T

T T Y
Cl­

Y

F

I Y

I

M

H Y
F

Intracellular

(b) Extracellular

E

S

S N
I

S N T S N N M (NH2)

SGLA

STL

PYKT F
VE

Y G
I

F

V V

I

V TL

Y

V

L S

A GL
S

Y

T M

N

L F

S

V

L I

T IG N

G

V L

I

I A

D

L

IV M

V

S

A

C S

L

F

L

I K V
N R
HM

i1
LG

E Y N N
V T

Y F C

D R

V

TK P

e2

VD TG

e1

WP L G

P

V

V D

C

L WL

L Y

D

VS

V A

N V

S

N

N L

L

I

SI F

RE

V G

CY

VI IF

D

W FI

L

P

A W
LF

A I

L

SV

W AA

A

I

M

Q

F F

S N A

A

Y

TF

A

T A

G I
A Y

F

P

L I
I

V M
T

L

V HW

Y

MI

GS

AR

YA

i2

K T T

S K S

RR

L

T

Y

VK P

I KK DK

i3 17 aa

e3

F T

G

A

PC

I

NP

I

V

L V

M

Y

N A
W

I

P

T

F

I L

A L
A

I

N

T

V

WT

G

I W

Y

LY

VII

C N

I T

S

I

LT R

T

T

V

K K E R

S

P

P

I NA
C C Y
A L
G
N A T F

P

C
V L

H

Y K

L

N I

H K

G A

KT

T K

R (COOH)

K

KKKP P

Intracellular

Figure 4.2 Allosteric binding sites on receptors as possible drug targets. Illustrated models show a ligand-gated ion channel (a) and the muscarinic acetylcholine G proteincoupled receptor (b). The proposed orthosteric sites for ligands are shown in purple, and the allosteric sites for ligands are shown in turquoise. From Christopoulos [217], with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.

terminate adjacent to potential target cells. This mode of delivery also provides a steep gradient of transmitter concentrations from the point of release, thereby limiting the action to receptor-bearing cells in the region of release.
Paracrine delivery reflects the identical process originating within an endocrine cell rather than a peptidergic neuron. These cells are also capable of developing specialized processes that allow the secretion of a key transmitter in approximation with its target cell. The first identified example of this was the relationship between somatostatin-secreting cells and gastrin-secreting cells in the gastric antrum [10].
Once a regulatory peptide is delivered to its target cell, a high level of regulatory diversity is still provided by the specificity of receptors expressed on each cell and by an array of potential signaling and regulatory molecules. A given endocrine cell can further regulate hormone-stimulated events in several different ways: by altering coupling events between receptor and proximal effector, by modifying the complement of molecules intrinsic to each signaling pathway, and by cross-talk between the molecules involved in signaling pathways. Each cell can also regulate the receptors it expresses, a phenomenon highly relevant to any understanding of the gastrointestinal endocrine system. This regulation can take the form of modification of the number of receptors on the cell surface, modification of the ability of those receptors to bind ligands or to initiate signaling, movement of receptors into different cellular compartments, and modification of the total cellular complement of receptors by effects on receptor synthesis and degradation [11­13].
A given type of receptor may be present on a wide variety of cells of the body, but the secretion of its hormonal agonist may affect only a small subset of those cells. This may reflect the different limited delivery systems previously discussed. It may also reflect a gradient in delivery by diffusion from a point source, with potential target cells also expressing different numbers of receptors on their surfaces. Receptors on distinct cells may be in different states of sensitization or

desensitization. A certain type of cell may express a receptor differently at each stage of its life, depending on cell growth, the stage in the cell cycle, and other active metabolic and biochemical processes within the cell.
Receptor molecules can also be allosterically modulated by interactions with other receptors or with nonreceptor membrane or cytoplasmic proteins (Fig. 4.2) [3,5,14]. This type of interaction has been shown to modify specificity or binding affinity, as well as biological responses to agonist ligands. It also can modify the duration of action and regulation of the receptor. The cellular environment of a receptor is thus particularly important.
The gastrointestinal endocrine system represents a system of substantial complexity, which is dynamic and responsive to feedback and cross-regulation at the levels of both the hormones and the receptors. It is precisely because of this complexity that the system is so sensitive and has such extraordinary capabilities to keep us well nourished and pleased with our dining experiences.
History of gastrointestinal endocrinology
Classical endocrinology and gastrointestinal endocrinology were born together in 1902 with the discovery of the first hormone, secretin, by Bayliss and Starling [15] and the recognition that chemical messengers can be carried in the bloodstream. This earliest period in gastrointestinal endocrinology has been termed the juice-physiology era [16]. The discovery of gastrin by Edkins followed quickly in 1905 [17]. This flourish of activity in the gastrointestinal hormone field was followed by many quiescent years, while the field of classical endocrinology achieved steady and substantial growth. The solid and homogeneous endocrine organs could be studied with relative ease, whereas methods had not yet been developed to gain analogous insights into the scattered diverse gastrointestinal endocrine cells.

58

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

Gastrointestinal endocrinology finally achieved its status as a distinct discipline in the chemical era, when a long series of candidate hormones was discovered by means of the techniques of purification and peptide sequencing. The first was gastrin, whose structure was determined in 1964 after it had been extracted from a tumor [18]. Subsequently, the number of recognized potential regulators of digestive function expanded logarithmically. The Gastrointestinal Hormone Laboratory, founded by Mutt and Jorpes at the Karolinska Institutet [19], was the site of the initial chemical characterization of secretin, CCK, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), motilin, gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), and many other candidate structures.
The next key advance was also methodological ­ the development of radioimmunoassay to detect or quantify minute quantities of molecules. Application of this methodology to the quantification of a hormone by Yalow and Berson [20,21] and its application to CCK [22] initiated the immunological era of gastrointestinal endocrinology. The usefulness of antibodies was appreciated quickly; these were applied to the localization of hormone-secreting cells by immunohistochemistry and to the quantification of peptide hormones by radioimmunoassay. The usefulness of radiolabeled peptide hormones was also recognized quickly. The radiolabeling of gastrointestinal hormones to high specific radioactivity made it possible to directly demonstrate the binding of hormones to receptors. The competition-binding technique made it possible to identify receptor subtypes, to define the cellular localization of receptors, and to quantify receptor density on a cell.
Since the 1970s, gastrointestinal endocrinology has become increasingly biochemical and molecular. Gastrin led the way into the new era of the molecular biology of peptides [23]. A more biochemical understanding of hormones excited interest in the biochemistry of receptors. During this era of molecular receptorology [23], receptors increased in status from representing simple sites of hormone binding to being the focus of intense interest. It was critical to understand the structure of receptor molecules before the details of binding, activation, and regulation became meaningful.
The first insights into the structure of receptors came from affinity labeling approaches [24,25], which represented a logical extension of the receptor-binding assay described. These approaches involved the use of a radiolabeled form of the hormone, as rich a source of receptor as possible, and a chemical method to link the two molecules together covalently. The siting of a photolabile group within the pharmacophoric domain of a hormone has been particularly successful in the covalent labeling of hormone receptors and their domains [26].
The most powerful insights have come from cloning the complementary DNA (cDNA) encoding the receptors. Hybridization screening based on partial sequence information

quickly moved to expression cloning, bypassing the need for receptor purification and sequencing. Ultimately, the most powerful approach became in silico cloning, which is based on the identification of recognized signatures in sequence databases.
Once identified, a receptor cDNA offers remarkable possibilities. The deduced amino acid sequence provides insights into the receptor class represented. By finding its position in a phylogenetic tree, additional insights can come from analogy with studies of the closest known members of the family [27]. This can take the form of mutagenesis studies that provide insights into structure­function relationships. Chimeric receptors that combine specific regions of two or more receptors can be useful in identifying which domain is important for a given function [28]. Also, truncations and site mutants can help localize such regions [29]. Such receptor constructs can be constructed rapidly and expressed transiently to gain new insights. It is also possible to produce stable cell lines that express such constructs, and to modify the expression of natural or mutagenized hormones and receptors in laboratory animals. A variety of transgenic and null (i.e., knockout) animals are available to explore the impact of such modifications in an intact animal.
The era of molecular conformation and molecular interaction is ongoing [23]. Now that the primary structures of receptors have been collected and categorized, investigators are studying molecular conformations, both resting and active. Also generating substantial interest are the sites and molecular determinants of binding and activation, as well as the use of such insights for the rational design of useful pharmaceuticals. We are witnessing dramatic advances in drug development resulting from novel strategies of synthesizing and screening vast libraries of potential receptor ligands [30]. These have led to the successful development of numerous small-molecule nonpeptide antagonists, and even nonpeptide agonists, for peptide hormone receptors [31].
Hormone secretory cells
Several cellular sources exist for the synthesis and secretion of gut hormones. As previously noted, these are the numerous types of endocrine cells that are isolated and scattered throughout the gut mucosa, as well as the neurons contained within the enteric nervous system. Both cell types share many features: (1) the machinery for peptide biosynthesis and processing; (2) the packaging of products for export into secretory granules and the exocytic secretion of these products; and (3) the specialized processes that may facilitate focused delivery of secretory products. Based on these shared characteristics, a similar embryogenesis has also been postulated. This section focuses on each of these features as they relate to the sources of gastrointestinal hormones and neurotransmitters.

59

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

SG CV
G
ER N

Cleavage, amidation Phosphorylation, glycosyl processing, cleavage Sulfation, glycosylation
Translation, fatty acid acylation

Figure 4.3 The synthesis of proteins or peptides for export (i.e., secretion) from polarized epithelial cells follows a highly conserved biosynthetic route. Synthesis begins at the level of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and proceeds through the Golgi apparatus (G), condensing vacuoles (CV), and secretory granules (SG) before exocytosis at the apical pole of the cell.

All types of intestinal epithelial cell appear to be derived from a single type of pluripotent stem cell precursor [32,33]. Gastrointestinal endocrine cells continuously differentiate and follow the highly organized vertical paths of migration along the crypt to villous axis. These cells resemble the endocrine cells of the pancreatic islets, with similar embryological associations and evolutionary relationships reflecting common endodermal cell origins.
In contrast, the enteric neurons are derived from the neural crest and the neuroectoderm [34,35]. Of note, the phenotype of cells derived from the neural crest is most dependent on the environmental influences in the regions to which they migrate, rather than on the level of the neural axis from which they originate [34,36]. The complexities of cell types and interactions typical of the enteric nervous system result largely from the mesenchymal substrate that these cells contact. The factors responsible for the development and differentiation of each of the gastrointestinal mucosal endocrine cells are even less well understood.
Despite this apparent difference in their developmental origins, the gastrointestinal endocrine cells and the enteric peptidergic neurons share many biological and biochemical specializations that are necessary for polypeptide synthesis, processing, and secretion. Key in this sequence of events is the packaging of the peptide product for export into a secretory granule. The details of this process were clearly defined by Jamieson and Palade [37], who studied the pancreatic acinar cell (Fig. 4.3). The identical processes appear to exist in the gastrointestinal endocrine cell.

Figure 4.4 Electron micrograph of a gastrointestinal endocrine cell in the human jejunum. This cell extends from the lumen to just above the basal membrane and includes the typical electron-dense secretory granules in its basal pole. From Solcia et al. [218], with permission from Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Endocrine cell localization and characterization
Some gastrointestinal endocrine cells can be recognized by the relatively distinct ultrastructural appearance of their secretory granules [1,2] (Fig. 4.4). Other gastrointestinal endocrine cells can be tentatively identified not only according to the appearance of their secretory granules but also according to their position along the digestive tract. However, more specific techniques are required to identify most endocrine cells and any of the peptidergic nerves. These techniques are directed toward the polypeptides themselves or to the genes and messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules encoding them. Peptide antisera have been most useful in

60

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

Genomic DNA (nucleus)

Exon 1 5 flanking sequence

Intron 1

Exon 2

Gene transcription

Exon 3 Intron 2

3 flanking sequence

Figure 4.5 The gene structure and the molecular biological events leading to protein synthesis. Posttranscriptional processing events that occur in the nucleus include splicing, capping, and polyadenylation of the RNA to produce mature mRNA. Mature mRNA is transported into the cell cytoplasm, where it directs translation at the surface of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER).

Primary RNA transcript (nucleus)
RNA splicing and processing

mRNA (cytoplasm)

m7Gppp

Prepropeptide (ER)

Translation Signal

AAAAA

the immunohistochemical localization of peptides, while in situ hybridization has been successfully used to localize relevant hormone mRNA.
Immunohistochemistry has become a standard technique to localize any antigen in a tissue section to which specific antisera have been raised. With the current understanding of the primary structure of the molecular forms of a given hormone, and of the unique and shared domains within that structure, it is easy to choose a potentially useful antigenic epitope. By conjugating that peptide to a hapten, a strongly immunogenic antigen can be produced. Most endocrine cells and peptidergic nerves concentrate their peptides in secretory granules in preparation for secretion, providing an ideal target with multiple copies for immunolocalization. A potential problem relates to the ability to fix these soluble compounds without interfering with antibody recognition. Trials of different fixatives and conditions of fixation may be necessary to achieve an optimal signal.
In situ hybridization is an analogous localization technique based on the specific interaction of an oligonucleotide probe with its complementary sequence within the cell [38]. A complementary, single-stranded, antisense riboprobe to an mRNA molecule provides optimal sensitivity and specificity. Here, too, multiple choices exist: fluorescent, colorimetric, or radioactive detection [39]. Limited copy number for a specific mRNA may represent a problem when applying this technique to some hormone genes.
Biosynthesis and processing of gastrointestinal hormones
Most gastrointestinal hormones and neurotransmitters discussed in this chapter are single-chain polypeptides. All are

encoded by single-copy genes containing one or more exons that determine the primary amino acid sequence by a series of nucleotide triplets known as codons (Fig. 4.5). For the multiple-exon genes, these coding regions are separated by noncoding introns. While still in the nucleus, the DNA sequences are transcribed by RNA polymerase II to produce pre-mRNA. The noncoding regions of the gene, particularly those upstream of the site of the initiation of transcription (i.e., the 5 flanking sequence), often contain cis-active regulatory sequences that influence the rate of transcription. Regulation of gene expression typically occurs slowly, over a number of hours, whereas hormone secretion of prepackaged product occurs rapidly, being initiated within seconds of stimulation. The pre-mRNA sequences complementary to the exons are normally spliced together whereas those complementary to the introns are eliminated to form the mature mRNA.
Alternative processing of a single gene may occur and there may be more than one distinct product within a single gene. Examples of this include the proopiomelanocortin gene, which contains sequences for -endorphin, corticotropin, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone [40], and the proenkephalin gene, which contains five copies of the [Met]enkephalin sequence and one copy of the [Leu]enkephalin sequence [41]. The VIP, neuromedin A, and peptide histidine isoleucine (PHI) sequences all exist within a single gene [42]. Another phenomenon is the production of distinct gene products by alternative splicing of a single gene, such as occurs in the production of calcitonin and calcitonin generelated peptide [43]. Similarly, alternative splicing of a single gene product may also occur [44]. Alternative splicing of several hormone receptors can yield products of different lengths with short deletions or insertions compared with the predominant species [45,46].

61

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Endoplasmic reticulum Prepropeptide
Golgi apparatus

Signal
Signal peptidase

Immature secretory vesicles Secretory vesicles

Protein tyrosyl sulfotransferase SO3 SO3
Propeptide kinase
PO4 Trypsin-like endopeptidases
Carboxypeptidase H exopeptidase Gly
Trypsin-like endopeptidases

NH2 Gly

NH2 Amidating
NH2 enzyme (monooxygenase)

Gly Gly

Figure 4.6 Posttranslational processing events that occur in distinct cellular compartments in preparation for secretion of a peptide from the cell. These types of reactions are used selectively for different secretory products.

The fully spliced mRNA is translocated to the cell cytoplasm where translation occurs (Fig. 4.6). Translation is the process of producing the preprohormone polypeptide chain that is encoded by the mRNA. Peptide synthesis begins on the ribosome bound to the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Peptides destined for export have a characteristic aminoterminal signal sequence that leads to their segregation within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum [47]. As the nascent chain crosses into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, the signal sequence is bound to a signal-recognition particle and cleaved by a signal peptidase to yield the prohormone. Also, posttranslational modifications may begin cotranslationally. For example, sulfation, phosphorylation, glycosylation, and amidation may continue as the peptide moves through the Golgi apparatus and into secretory granules that are at various stages of maturity. The ultrastructural appearance of these secretory granules can be characteristic of a particular type of gastrointestinal endocrine cell. The large secretory granules typify regulated pathways of exocytosis, with constitutive secretory pathways most commonly using much smaller vesicular structures. Glycosylation is a multistep process that occurs as the peptide moves through each of these compartments. Tyrosine sulfation seems to occur early in biosynthesis, within the Golgi apparatus [48].

A unique posttranslational processing event that is particularly relevant for peptide hormones is the selective cleavage of the prohormone into fragments of different lengths, with each form possessing biological activity [49]. Examples of multiple, biologically active forms of a hormone include gastrin and CCK; the multiple forms of these hormones share the carboxyl-terminal sequence that is critical for activity. This endoproteolytic processing occurs during biosynthesis while the product traverses the late Golgi cisternae and early secretory granule compartments. Dibasic amino acid residues are a common location for such processing. Trypsin-like endopeptidases, such as PC1 and PC2, which are uniquely expressed in endocrine and neuroendocrine cells, have been described to be important in the endoproteolytic processing of gastrointestinal hormones [50,51].
Carboxyl-terminal amidation is a very common posttranslational modification of gastrointestinal hormones [52,53]. It occurs in about half of the recognized hormones and peptide neurotransmitters and was the basis of a discovery strategy used early in the chemical era by Tatemoto and Mutt [54]. A series of enzymatic reactions is necessary to yield an amidated product: (1) cleavage at a site of dibasic residues; (2) trimming of the remaining basic residues by carboxypeptidase H; and (3) conversion of the glycine-extended intermediate to the corresponding carboxyl-terminal amide with an -amidating monooxygenase. These processes occur within the secretory granules.
The processing of gastrin in the antral G cell is an excellent example of these processes [55]. The biologically active region of this peptide that is key for binding to its classic receptor has been carefully isolated to the carboxyl-terminal tetrapeptide amide of the mature forms of gastrin [56,57]. The gastrin gene is composed of three exons, with exons 2 and 3 possessing the coding sequences [58­60]. The primary mRNA transcript is processed to eliminate about three kilobases of intron sequence between the first two exons and 130 bases of intron sequence between exons 2 and 3. This is translated to yield preprogastrins of 101-amino acid residues in man and 104-amino acid residues in rat and pig. The signal peptide is then cleaved to yield progastrin, which rapidly undergoes further proteolysis at Arg57,58, Lys74,75, and Arg94,95 to yield four fragments. The Arg94,95 cleavage is followed by carboxypeptidase H trimming of carboxyl-terminal basic residues and conversion of the Gly-extended intermediate to the carboxyl-terminal amide. G34 and G17 are the major products of these cleavages. Serine phosphorylation and tyrosine sulfation may also occur [61,62]. One of the sites of serine phosphorylation is Ser96, immediately adjacent to the site of cleavage at the dibasic residues, which ultimately results in carboxyl-terminal amidation. Tyrosine sulfation can occur at Tyr87 and Tyr103. Whether these modifications affect physiological processing remains unclear [63].
Posttranslational modifications of gastrointestinal hormones may affect their activity. Most of the amidated hormones

62

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

require this modification for recognizable activity. A critical modification in CCK peptides is the sulfation of the tyrosine that is seven residues from the carboxyl terminus, with desulfated CCK more than 1000-fold less potent than the sulfated form [64]. Although the structurally related gastrin peptides can also exhibit tyrosine sulfation six residues from the carboxyl terminus, this modification has little or no impact on gastrin receptor binding or hormone activity.
Hormone and transmitter molecules
The hydrophilicity and the solubility of hormones and neurotransmitters prevent them from traversing the lipid bilayer in their target cells and necessitate the presence of a receptor molecule in those target cells with which they can interact. By first principles, peptides are also flexible. The peptide bonds linking the amino acid residues are stable and strong, broken only by peptidase enzymes under normal biological conditions. This flexibility enables peptides to sample a large range of potential conformational space, but makes it somewhat difficult to predict the relevant conformation of these molecules as they bind to their targets. Some insights have come from observing the conformationally constrained analogues of some hormones, but such insights are limited [65].
Advances in peptide chemistry have facilitated the synthesis of small peptides. Peptide synthesis can be achieved in solution or by solid phase techniques in which one amino acid residue is added at a time to a growing chain of residues [66]. This technique can be used to produce the natural peptides themselves, or analogues that can provide important primary structure and activity information.
Gastrointestinal hormones can be categorized according to: (1) their predominant localization in endocrine cells or peptidergic neurons; (2) their localization to different levels of the gastrointestinal tract; (3) their rapid effects vs more prolonged effects on growth and differentiation; or (4) the presence of structural similarities between the hormones themselves (Table 4.1). A single peptide hormone can be found in endocrine cells and nerves, it can be present at several levels of the gastrointestinal tract, and it can have both acute and chronic growth-regulatory effects. This is also true for families of structurally related hormones. A single peptide can interact with and activate more than one type of receptor. Only by appreciating the scope of options for these peptides and their receptors can the complexity and the power of the gastrointestinal endocrine system be understood.
Measurement of hormones
Hormone concentrations can be quantified by bioassay or by a type of competition binding assay, such as radioimmunoassay or receptor-binding assay [21,67]. Before the chemical

Table 4.1 Organization schemes for gastrointestinal hormones, neuropeptides, and locally secreted growth factors according to their cell of origin, anatomical location, and structural similarities

Location

Hormone

Cell type

Endocrine cells Stomach Duodenum/jejunum
Ileum/colon
Pancreas

Gastrin Somatostatin
Secretin CCK GIP Somatostatin Motilin
Enteroglucagon PYY Neurotensin Somatostatin
Insulin Glucagon PP Somatostatin

G D
S I K D M
L L N D
B A D1 D

Neuropeptides CGRP CCK Dynorphin Enkephalins (Leu and Met) Galanin GRP Motilin NPY PHM PYY Somatostatin Substance K (neurokinin A) Substance P VIP

Locally secreted growth factors (fibroblasts, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, hematopoietic cells) EGF FGF IGF PDGF TGF-a, TGF-b

Structurally similar families Gastrin­CCK family: gastrin, CCK Pancreatic polypeptide family: PP, PYY, NPY Tachykinin family: substance P, GRP Somatostatin family: somatostatin Motilin family: motilin, ghrelin Secretin family: secretin, VIP, PACAP, GIP, glucagon, GLP-1 Tyrosine kinase receptor family: EGF, FGF, IGF, PDGF

CCK, cholecystokinin; CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; EGF, epidermal growth factor; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; GIP, glucosedependent insulinotropic peptide; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide-1; GRP, gastrin-releasing peptide; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; NPY, neuropeptide Y; PACAP, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PHM, peptide HM; PP, pancreatic polypeptide; PYY, peptide YY; TGF, transforming growth factor; VIP, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.

63

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

characterization of hormones, concentrations could be determined only in an activity assay. However, the specificity of an activity assay is unreliable because more than one hormone can produce the same response and because antagonistic agents can influence the net activity. The determination of the chemical identity of many hormones has facilitated the assay of unpurified samples.
Competition binding assays are based on the competitive inhibition of the specific binding of a radiolabeled form of the hormone to an antibody or receptor. The radiolabeled and natural hormones compete for binding to the antibody or receptor. Radioimmunoassay benefits from the availability of specific antibodies that are easy to handle and store. In contrast, radioreceptor assay depends on the preparation of a receptor, which may be difficult to produce and store in an active form.
For all hormone assays, sample collection and handling are critical, and sampling conditions should be reproducible. Samples are usually collected during fasting because hormone concentrations may increase in the postcibal period. Gastrin, CCK, secretin, GIP, and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) all increase transiently after a meal, whereas concentrations of most neurotransmitters (e.g., VIP) change minimally [68]. After sample collection, low temperature and protease inhibitors minimize hormone degradation.
Knowledge of hormone concentrations in the circulation can provide important insights. Elevated basal levels may reflect excess secretion or reduced clearance. Excess secretion may develop if hormone-secreting cells proliferate, as occurs in gastrin cell hyperplasia, or if cells have lost their feedback inhibitory mechanisms and secrete constitutively, as occurs in various types of endocrine cell neoplasia. Because polypeptide hormones are cleared by the kidneys, high levels of hormones may be measured in patients with renal failure [69]. In some settings it may be useful to measure hormone concentrations serially after some type of stimulus, such as the ingestion of a meal or the perfusion of a region of the intestine, to define the timing and characteristics of a normal stimulated response. There are provocative tests for some endocrine tumors, such as secretin stimulation of gastrin in gastrinoma [70].
The confirmation of the role of a hormone in a particular physiological process is not simple. Determination of the physiological activity of a particular gut peptide is based on the following criteria: (1) there is a relationship between the appearance of the hormone in the circulation and the physiological event; (2) the physiological effect can be reproduced by infusion of pure or synthetic hormone to achieve the same serum concentration observed under physiological conditions; and (3) the physiological activity can be inhibited by infusion of a specific antibody or receptor antagonist, when available [71]. The circulating concentrations of the hormone that produce the biological effect should be similar for the natural peptide released physiologically and the synthetic

peptide infused into the experimental subject. When multiple molecular forms of a hormone exist, it is important for the infusion to reproduce the forms naturally observed as closely as possible.
Unfortunately, it is more difficult to determine the relevant concentration of gastrointestinal hormones at the level of their receptors. Interstitial concentrations can vary significantly over short distances. There is no good, reproducible method to collect the relevant fluid to measure hormone concentrations at their site of action. This is a particular problem for hormones and neurotransmitters released through paracrine or neurocrine mechanisms.
Receptors
Receptor molecules also have a special place in gastrointestinal endocrinology. A molecule that spans the lipid bilayer in the target cell, such as a receptor, is required for mediating the effects of the hydrophilic hormones and transmitters that cannot cross the plasma membrane to activate intracellular machinery. The receptor molecule has two spatially distinct domains: one domain to bind ligands that approach the molecule from the extracellular side of the membrane, and a second to initiate activity cascades within the cell. The cellular response can be triggered by a ligand-induced conformational change that activates an enzymatic activity intrinsic to the receptor. Alternatively, the ligand-induced change in the conformation of the receptor can expose a receptor domain that interacts with an important intracellular molecule, with the interaction initiating the cascade of signaling events typical of that receptor and ligand pair.
With the primary structures of most receptors now known, insights into the structural basis of cell activation are being advanced rapidly. Gastrointestinal hormone receptors are grouped into three broad classes according to their membrane topology: (1) the single-transmembrane receptors; (2) receptors with subunits that traverse the membrane multiple times; and (3) the G protein-coupled receptors that traverse the membrane seven times (Fig. 4.7).
The largest group of single-transmembrane receptors possess intrinsic ligand-triggered enzyme activity. This group includes ligand-triggered protein tyrosine kinases, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor, insulin-like growth factor receptors, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, fibroblast growth factor receptor, and transforming growth factor receptors [72­74]. These molecules have extracellular ligand-binding domains and intracellular kinase domains. On activation, these molecules associate into dimers and are autophosphorylated. In addition to the phosphorylation of the receptors themselves, various members of this group phosphorylate and activate phospholipase C, GTPase-activator proteins, and intracellular tyrosine and serine/threonine kinase cascades. These events are closely associated with cell

64

(a) Single transmembrane (TM)

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4
Agonist ligand

(b) Ligand-gated channels ­ multi-TM subunits

Y-P P-Y

Tyrosine kinase

Figure 4.7 Peptide hormone receptors can be divided into three groups according to their membrane topology. The basal conformations are shown on the left and activated states on the right. (a) The single-transmembrane (TM) receptors dimerize; some also possess intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity that contributes to the autophosphorylation of the complex. (b) The ligand-gated complexes undergo a conformational change that opens the channel. (c) The G protein-coupled receptors become associated with their heterotrimeric G proteins, which then initiate the signaling cascade.

(c) G protein-coupled receptors ­ 7TM

g Ga
b

growth, differentiation, and oncogenesis. Ligand-triggered membrane guanylate cyclases also exist, such as the receptor for atrial natriuretic peptide [75]. There is also a group of single-transmembrane receptors that does not appear to have any intrinsic enzymatic activity, but rather function by dimerization and initiation of cascades of modular interactions. These include receptors for growth hormone, erythropoietin, prolactin, and several cytokines [76,77].
The second group of receptors (ligand-gated channels) have subunits that span the membrane multiple times and associate to form pores or channels [78]. Proteins with four transmembrane domains are the most common subunit structure, with ligand binding resulting in a conformational change that regulates the size and permeability of the channel. Examples include the nicotinic acetylcholine, GABA-A, 5-HT3 (serotonin), glycine, and glutamate receptors. The best characterized is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. This complex is composed of five membrane-spanning units (, , , , and ), each having four transmembrane domains, which associate to form a central cation-conducting channel.
The last group ­ the heptahelical G protein-coupled receptors ­ is by far the largest group of gastrointestinal hormone receptors and the largest group of receptors in the body [79­81]. More than 2000 of these have been identified, if receptors for taste and odorants are included, representing 1%­5% of the genome of different species. They are activated by extraordinarily diverse ligands, ranging from photons to larger peptides and even to very large glycoproteins and viral particles. There is a somewhat parallel organization of groups of these receptors with structurally similar groups

of ligands [27]. The heptahelical receptor proteins typically have no intrinsic enzymatic activity, but rather signal by associating on their cytosolic face with heterotrimeric G proteins [82,83]. These can then regulate a variety of effectors, such as phospholipase C and adenylate cyclase. These receptors have seven segments of about 20­25 hydrophobic residues representing the putative transmembrane helices (Fig. 4.8). The most highly conserved residues in each family of G protein-coupled receptors are located in these domains. Typically, there are sites of potential N-linked glycosylation in predicted ectodomains. This posttranslational modification likely plays an important role in helping the receptors fold and maintain their solubilities during biosynthesis. There are often serine- and threonine-rich areas in predicted cytosolic domains of these receptors that may be sites for phosphorylation and, thereby, receptor regulation.
The heterotrimeric G proteins consist of three subunits ­ , , and  [84,85]. The -subunit has intrinsic GTPase activity and is the site of guanine nucleotide binding. The - and subunits remain bound together, binding to the GDP-bound -subunit as a paired unit. There is a cycle of agonist binding to the receptor, association of the GDP-bound G protein heterotrimer, GTP displacement of GDP, dissociation of the GTPbound -subunit from the -dimer, hydrolysis of the GTP, and reassociation of the GDP-bound -subunit with  (Fig. 4.9). Crystal structures have been solved for these G protein complexes, providing insights into the molecular interactions between receptor and G protein and between G protein and effectors. Although early attention focused on the GTPbound -subunit as the molecule that interacts with effector

65

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

NH2 Ectodomain

Y Y

Glycosylation

Cytosol

C C
I II III IV V VI VII

P PP Phosphorylation

HOOC

P

Fatty acid acylation
G protein interactions P

IV II III
V VII VI

I

Figure 4.8 A prototypical G protein-coupled receptor depicted from the side (top) and looking down on the transmembrane helices (bottom). Each receptor is predicted to have seven hydrophobic segments traversing the lipid bilayer, with most having sites of N-linked glycosylation in the ectodomain and sites of phosphorylation in cytosolic domains. Also shown is the position of a highly conserved disulfide bond linking the second and third extracellular loops, and a position of fatty acid acylation that is present in the carboxyl-terminal tail of some of these receptors.

H+ R

Ga g b

H + R*

g Ga + b
GDP Pi

+

Ga

+

g b

GTP

Ga g b
GDP

+

GTP GDP

H R*
H R*
g Ga
b GDP

Effector Effector
Figure 4.9 Cycles of G protein-coupled receptor activation and proximal signaling events at the level of the plasma membrane, which occur in response to agonist occupation. The earliest step is an induced conformational change in the receptor (asterisk) that facilitates its association with a G protein. At that point, the G protein is in its GDP-bound trimeric state. The receptor association facilitates GTP exchange for the GDP, which in turn results in the dissociation of the ternary complex and dissociation of the GTP-bound a-subunit from the bg-dimer. Both of these can move on to interact with effectors in other compartments within the cell. The a-subunit of the G protein has intrinsic GTPase activity that results in the elimination of one of the phosphates and reassociation of the trimeric form of the G protein.

proteins to activate them, the -dimer clearly also plays this role for many effector proteins [86,87]. In mammals, genes for 16 -subunits, 4 -subunits, and 7 -subunits have been isolated. The innumerable combination of these various subunits into heterotrimers contributes to the vast diversity of effects and regulatory properties of peptide hormones.
The G protein-coupled receptors relevant to the gastrointestinal hormones fall into two families. Most of the small and carboxyl terminal-amidated peptides, which have focused domains for receptor binding at the carboxyl terminus, are members of the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family. The larger peptides with diffuse pharmacophoric domains with amino-terminal determinants of specificity tend to be members of the secretin receptor family [88]. A notable exception is the amino-terminal-specific receptor for motilin, which has been cloned and identified as a member of the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family [89]. The binding of most agonists acting through this superfamily of receptors is influenced by hydrolysis-resistant analogues of GTP. This property provides an important clue that an action is mediated by this class of receptors.

Like the hormones, the gastrointestinal hormone receptors are all the products of single genes. Most do not have signal sequences and they do not undergo extensive proteolytic processing. Alternative splicing is particularly common in the secretin family of G protein-coupled receptors, in which multiple exons are the rule [90]. The alternatively spliced products can differ substantially in ligand-binding specificity and activation characteristics. The genes encoding the gastrointestinal hormone receptors have been known for less time than those encoding the hormones themselves. As a result, less is known about regulation of the receptor genes. Many receptors undergo substantial posttranslational modifications. Most of the G protein-coupled receptors are glycosylated. This feature helps to establish the appropriate folding and solubilities for biosynthetic transport to the cell surface, and likely helps to protect the receptors from proteolysis [91,92]. Palmitoylation of Cys residues within the carboxyl-terminal tail is common in many G protein-coupled receptors [93]. This modification may bring another loop up to the plasma membrane, and may have a role in regulating access for G protein coupling. Receptor phosphorylation is

66

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

another common posttranslational modification, but it occurs predominantly after the mature receptor has been inserted into the plasma membrane [94].
Most of the gastrointestinal hormone receptors are present on the cell surface in small to moderate numbers; there are typically fewer than several thousand molecules per cell. In such low numbers and given the very low concentrations of most of the circulating natural ligands, high-affinity and specific-binding interactions between hormone and receptor are critical. The receptor is an ideal target for regulating the sensitivity of the system. The pharmaceutical industry recognizes this and targets numerous drugs to act at cell surface receptors. Receptors are also a site of substantial endogenous regulation. A shift in the accessibility of the receptor-binding domain to the ligand or a reduction in the number of receptors on the cell surface affects the sensitivity of the signaling system.
Receptors are dynamic molecules that have a life cycle in the cell (Fig. 4.10). Most receptors are synthesized at a slow rate, relying on reversible regulatory processes that conserve receptor molecules. The resting cell has a fixed complement of mature receptors on its surface and a small number of molecules in the biosynthetic pathway within the cell. Agonist occupation often initiates many events that can influence the receptor. By definition, agonist occupation of every receptor initiates signaling processes within the cell. The details of these events vary with the receptor class, family, and even the particular ligand being bound or the cell

in which the receptor is expressed. Within many signaling cascades are protein kinases and phosphatases that feed back and act on the receptor itself. For G protein-coupled receptors, this can uncouple the receptor from its proximal G protein effector [13]. For receptor tyrosine kinases, autophosphorylation is critical. Many receptors undergo internalization processes that remove them from the surface, thus removing the potential for further stimulation [11,12]. This mechanism protects the cell from damage caused by overstimulation. Some internalized receptors travel to the lysosome and are degraded, whereas others are recycled to the cell surface. For many ligand-occupied receptors, both molecules internalize together and move through the proximal endocytic cascade, in which the endosome becomes acidified and releases the ligand. The ligand can then move independently from its receptor. To be certain of the details of these processes, both ligand and receptor must be studied.
Receptor characterization and quantification Receptors can be characterized on the basis of their biological activities or their receptor-binding properties. The availability of analogues of a given hormone that have a spectrum of activities from full agonist to partial agonist to antagonist simplify the characterization of biological activity. If an activity is mediated by a particular receptor, the receptor antagonist should inhibit it in a competitive manner. Such an activity assay can be used to screen for compounds that are

Figure 4.10 Events in the life cycle of a receptor in a cell. In the basal state, most of the receptor is usually at the level of the plasma membrane (PM). Agonist occupation results in changes in receptor conformation, biochemical modifications, and trafficking through the cell, which impact on accessibility for ligand binding, proximal effector coupling, and signaling events. The cycle is completed by reversal of the biochemical changes and the return of the receptor to the original cellular compartment. Because some receptor is lost to degradation, new synthesis can also replenish the cellular complement of receptor. The details of these cycles differ depending on the ligand, receptor, and cell type.

Cycle of receptor signaling and regulation

Receptor synthesis

Native state of receptor

 Conformation

Resensitization
Receptor degradation

Ligand binding

Initiate signaling

 Coupling

Biochemical changes (phosphorylation)

Receptor internalization
Deep

Receptor internalization
Sub PM  Access (location)

Receptor "insulation" PM

67

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

active at a particular receptor. This type of assay is necessary to determine if a new receptor ligand is an agonist or an antagonist.
The binding characteristics of receptors have been the subject of intense investigation [95]. The availability of radiolabeled forms of hormones with high specific radioactivities that bind normally to their receptors provides a tool to analyze binding. The law of mass action should apply to the binding. Numerous software programs are capable of analyzing the binding data generated from this type of experiment. For such data and analysis to be valid, binding must be performed under conditions in which the concentration of radioligand is below the dissociation constant (Kd) and in which binding is permitted to reach steady state or equilibrium. The method of separating bound and free ligand should be rapid and efficient. The saturability of the binding is a critical feature that focuses on biologically relevant binding of appropriate affinity.
Biochemical characterization of receptors can be performed by affinity labeling [26,96]. This represents a variant of a receptor-binding study in which the specifically bound radioligand is covalently bound to the receptor molecule and subsequently purified. This method, which has provided many important insights into the nature of the receptor molecules, is the only way to study posttranslational modifications of the receptor. By far the most valuable insight

into biochemical characterization of receptors has come from cDNA cloning and sequence analysis.
Hormone-specific insights
Gastrin­cholecystokinin family The gastrin­CCK family of peptides is composed of the multiple molecular forms of the gastrin and CCK peptides, all sharing the same carboxyl-terminal pentapeptide amide (Fig. 4.11). Evolutionary studies of gastrin and CCK suggest a common precursor peptide, with these hormones diverging late in evolution [97­99]. Because the biological information in both is highly localized to relatively small pharmacophoric domains at the carboxyl terminus, various molecular forms of each of different lengths share these domains. These forms provide an opportunity for differential regulation, clearance, and activity. Both gastrin and CCK have well-established physiological actions.
Gastrin The major biologically active forms of gastrin are 17- and 34amino acid peptides that have a tyrosine residue six residues from the carboxyl terminus, which may (gastrin-17-II, gastrin34-II) or may not (gastrin-17-I, gastrin-34-I) be sulfated. This posttranslational modification of gastrin appears to have no

Type B CCK/gastrin

Gastrin-34-I

receptor

Q L G P Q G P P H L V A D P S K K Q G P W L E E E E E A Y G W M D F NH2

Gastrin-34-II

SO3

QLGPQGPPHLVADPSKKQGPWLEEEEEA Y G W M D

F NH2

Gastrin-17-I

QGPWLEEEEEA Y G W M D

Gastrin-17-II

SO3 QGPWLEEEEEA Y G W M D

CCK-58 VSQRTDGESRAHLGALLARYIQQAR

SO3

KAPSGRMSIVKNLQNLDPSHRISDRD Y M G W M D

CCK-39

SO3

YIQQARKAPSGRMSIVKNLQNLDPSHRISDRD Y M G W M D

CCK-33

SO3

KAPSGRMSIVKNLQNLDPSHRISDRD Y M G W M D

CCK-8

SO3 DY M G W M D

F NH2 F NH2 F NH2 F NH2 F NH2 F NH2

Type A CCK receptor

Figure 4.11 The variable molecular forms of gastrin and cholecystokinin (CCK). All share the same carboxyl-terminal pentapeptide amide. Shown are the critical domains for recognition by type A CCK receptors and type B CCK/gastrin receptors.

68

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

functional significance, as all forms are equally potent and efficacious at the gastrin (type B CCK) receptor. The critical information in gastrin peptides is in the carboxyl-terminal tetrapeptide amide, with most extensions and modifications of that domain well tolerated. Gastrin-17 is cleared from the circulation faster (half-life of 7 min) than gastrin-34 (half-life of 30 min) [60], meaning that most gastrin in the circulation during fasting is gastrin-34, whereas the major form released after a meal is gastrin-17. The greatest proportion (> 95%) of gastrin in the normal circulation is fully processed and contains a carboxyl-terminal phenylalanine amide [100]. Within some tissues, gastrin can be produced but not fully processed, resulting in the presence of nonamidated and carboxylextended forms of this peptide. Also, in gastrin-producing neoplasms, incomplete processing may result in the release of large quantities of nonamidated forms into the peripheral circulation. This has even been proposed as an assay for such neoplasms.
The major site of gastrin expression in the adult is open endocrine cells (G cells) in the gastric antrum. Low levels of gastrin are present in the vagus nerve and in pituitary corticotrophs, and transient expression is observed in fetal pancreatic islets and colon [101,102]. This hormone is found in a number of neoplasms [103,104]. The highest levels of processed and autonomously secreted gastrin come from islet cell tumors (gastrinomas) in the Zollinger­Ellison syndrome (see Chapter 71) [105]. Unprocessed forms of gastrin have been found in some colon, lung, and ovarian cancers.

Sensitive radioimmunoassays for mature and biologically active gastrin are widely available, and specialized assays have been developed to detect unprocessed forms of this hormone.
Gastrin secretion from antral G cells is regulated by lumenal, paracrine, endocrine, and neural stimuli [106]. Ingestion of a meal is a strong stimulant of the secretion of this hormone. Small peptides, aromatic amino acids (e.g., phenylalanine and tryptophan), and calcium in a meal are key contributors to its stimulatory effect. Coffee, wine, and beer have also been reported to be stimulants, but the ethanol and caffeine components are not major contributors. Of interest, the carbohydrate and fat components of a meal contribute little to the gastrin response. There is an important feedback loop whereby the major result of gastrin stimulation, acid secretion, results in a lowered intragastric pH and reduced G cell secretion of gastrin (Fig. 4.12). This is mediated by the paracrine effect of somatostatin. The neurocrine mediator GRP stimulates G cell secretion. Sympathetic innervation and parasympathetic innervation have complex effects. Sham feeding and gastric distention both stimulate gastrin release, and atropine can enhance this effect.
The classic target for gastrin is the gastric parietal cell, which secretes hydrochloric acid. This effect is mediated by a G protein-coupled receptor, which is identical to the most abundant CCK receptor present in the central nervous system (i.e., type B CCK receptor). This receptor is in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family and closely resembles

Amino acids, peptides +

Antral region
H+ +

Lumen

-

G cell

D cell

Stomach

Oxyntic region H+
Parietal cell

Interstitium +
GRP, ACh

- SS14 Gastrin

++
GRP, VIP

D cell +

SS14 - +

Hist ECL + cell + ++
ACh ACh

Gastrin

Figure 4.12 The regulation of gastric acid secretion by gastrin represents a complex series of interactions and feedback mechanisms. Some of the key components of this cycle are stimulatory events (+) and inhibitory events (­). Acetylcholine (ACh) stimulates the ECL (enterochromaffin-like) cell, the parietal cell, and the gastrin-producing G cell. Gastrin-releasing peptide

(GRP) stimulates both the G cell and the D cell. Gastrin stimulates the D cell, the parietal cell, and also the ECL cell, which then secretes histamine (Hist) to also stimulate the parietal cell. Somatostatin (SS14) secreted by the D cell inhibits both the G cell and the parietal cell. Acid (H+) secreted by the parietal cell has regulatory effects as well. VIP, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.

69

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

the type A CCK receptor. This is particularly interesting given the likely shared evolutionary relationship between gastrin and CCK. The receptors also probably evolved from a common precursor, with divergence at some point. It is not yet clear whether the hormones or receptors diverged first, or how the relationship between the molecular basis of binding and activation might compare at these two receptors. Both receptors are coupled with Gq/11.
The structural specificity of ligand binding to these two receptors is quite distinct [107,108]. The type B CCK/gastrin receptor requires only the carboxyl-terminal tetrapeptide amide for high-affinity binding and activation. It recognizes all forms of gastrin and CCK almost equally (CCK-8  gastrin = CCK-8-desulfate = CCK-4). In contrast, the type A CCK receptor has more stringent requirements. At this target, the carboxyl-terminal heptapeptide amide of CCK is required, with the sulfated tyrosine being critical for high-affinity interaction (CCK-8 >> gastrin = CCK-8-desulfate > CCK-4). Gastrin is recognized poorly, being more than 1000-fold less potent and binding with similarly low affinity.
The type B CCK receptor is also expressed on enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells of the gastric mucosa, on smooth muscle cells at various levels along the gastrointestinal tract, and on diffuse domains of the brain. Antagonists acting at this receptor (such as L-365260) have been reported to inhibit gastric acid secretion [109]. However, this result can also be accomplished by a number of other pharmacological routes, such as the use of histamine H2 receptor antagonists or hydrogen­potassium ATPase inhibitors, which are already in wide clinical use. The most useful application for gastrin receptor antagonists may be for their neuronal effects, which reduce anxiety and panic attacks [110].
As noted, a major physiological effect of gastrin is the stimulation of gastric acid secretion. Of interest, isolated parietal cells respond weakly to gastrin alone [111,112]. This response is augmented in the presence of histamine or acetylcholine, both of which provide potentiating interactions. Thus, the action of gastrin in vivo to stimulate its receptor on the ECL cell and thereby stimulate histamine release helps provide the optimal background for a brisk acid secretory response. Gastrin has also been shown to stimulate histidine decarboxylase, a key enzyme in histamine synthesis.
In addition to its acute roles in stimulating acid and histamine secretion, gastrin also appears to function as a growth factor to stimulate mucosal proliferation [113,114]. Its role as a growth factor may be unique, with different tissue-specific expression during development and in adult life. During the fetal period, gastrin is expressed in pancreatic islets and in colonic epithelium. Islet expression ends at birth as these cells undergo terminal differentiation. The trophic effect on the gastric oxyntic epithelium has been suggested by the hyperplasia associated with the hypergastrinemia of Zollinger­Ellison syndrome and by the atrophy associated with low levels of gastrin after antrectomy. Chronic high-

level gastrin stimulation has also been correlated with enterochromaffin cell hyperplasia. Further, in gastrin receptordeficient mice generated by gene targeting (i.e., receptor knockout animals), the gastric mucosa was remarkably atrophic, even in the presence of hypergastrinemia [115].
In humans, more than 95% of gastrin peptides normally secreted are fully processed and amidated; the percentage of Gly-extended forms is small. Levels of Gly-extended gastrin may be higher in achlorhydria and in neoplasms such as gastrinomas and colon carcinoma [116]. Although the Glyextended gastrins are several orders of magnitude less potent than processed gastrin in stimulating acid secretion, they may be equipotent or even more potent than processed gastrin in some growth activities that may be observed in these pathological states [117,118].
Cholecystokinin Like gastrin, CCK is found as diverse forms sharing a carboxylterminal heptapeptide amide. Unlike gastrin, which has sulfated and unsulfated forms, only unsulfated forms of CCK are found in the normal circulation. This is consistent with the structure­activity relationship previously described. Although CCK-8 and possibly CCK-33/39 were thought to be the major forms of this hormone in the circulation, CCK58 and possibly CCK-83 may be more prominent [119]. It is difficult to measure these very large forms because they are readily cleaved to smaller forms and because little standardized peptide has been available for characterization and validation of assays. No substantial differential biological effects of the molecular forms of CCK have been described. Much less is understood about the proteolytic processing of CCK than of gastrin. Although the processing enzymes are likely to be analogous, the order of cleavages and the mechanisms for tissue-specific processing are not understood. Like gastrin, the various molecular forms are cleared from the circulation at different rates. The small form, CCK-8, has a halflife of only about 1 min and is cleared almost quantitatively in a single pass through the portal circulation [120,121]. Larger forms are not cleared by the liver but seem to be metabolized by various capillary beds and by the kidney.
CCK is predominantly produced in endocrine I cells scattered throughout the proximal two-thirds of the small intestine [122]. It is also found in less abundance in various enteric neurons and in pancreatic islets. CCK-secreting endocrine neoplasms have not been well documented in the literature. The brain contains a large amount of CCK, but the regulation of peptide synthesis and release in the brain is poorly understood.
Both protein and fat components of meals stimulate secretion of CCK from I cells; carbohydrates are ineffective [123]. Long-chain triglycerides and fatty acids, both aromatic and aliphatic amino acids (e.g., phenylalanine, tryptophan, valine, and methionine), and small peptides can all stimulate CCK secretion. Unlike the tests used to measure gastrin

70

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

Oxyntic region

CCK-RF

+ I cell

-

+

Protein, fat

+ CCK

Amylase, lipase, trypsin
+
Absorbable products of digestion

Figure 4.13 One of the regulatory cycles for CCK action on the pancreatic acinar cell. Nutrient ingestion results in the release of CCK-releasing factors (CCK-RF) into the intestinal lumen. These act on the I cells to secrete CCK, which stimulates pancreatic exocrine secretion. The proteolytic enzymes (particularly trypsin) then degrade the CCK-releasing factors, thereby terminating the cycle.
levels, the measurement of CCK is not straightforward. CCK appears to be present in the circulation in much lower concentrations (basal values: < 1 pM CCK vs 100 pM gastrin). Also, because the most common carboxyl terminal-directed antibodies can cross-react with both hormones, a selective radioimmunoassay is difficult to establish. A few radioimmunoassays are used in research that incorporate antisera directed against the amino-terminal region of CCK-8 that includes the tyrosine sulfate [124]. A bioassay that can distinguish CCK from gastrin is commonly used for research applications [125].
Feedback regulation is also involved in CCK secretion (Fig. 4.13) [126­128]. The major targets of this hormone are the rodent pancreatic acinar cells and human pancreatic neurons. When pancreatic exocrine cells are stimulated to release digestive enzymes that make their way into the lumen of the intestine, CCK secretion is reduced. Lumenal administration of a trypsin inhibitor results in increased levels of CCK and increased pancreatic enzyme secretion. Bile acids in the lumen also appear to have a regulatory effect on this feedback phenomenon [129]. Two candidates for endogenous CCK-releasing factors have been described [130,131]. Both have their activities inhibited by trypsin and fulfill the initial expectations of such a mediator, but additional studies are still necessary to define their potential roles in normal physiology.

The type A CCK receptor is structurally similar to the type B CCK/gastrin receptor (50% identical, 66% homologous) [108,132]. It is a member of the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family. This receptor has substantial structural specificity, recognizing the carboxyl-terminal heptapeptide amide of CCK, with a clear requirement for the tyrosine sulfate, the carboxyl-terminal phenylalanine amide, the nonoxidized state of the methionine residues, and the residues in almost every position of this peptide. Only the amino terminus is freely available for extension or modification without interference with the binding and biological activity of CCK. The understanding of the molecular basis of the binding of the natural agonist peptide to this receptor has improved substantially as direct evidence of contacts in the extracellular loop and tail domains have been defined for almost every residue within the CCK pharmacophore [133]. Nonpeptidyl antagonists (e.g., L-364718, lorglumide, PD140548) and even a nonpeptidyl agonist are available for selective action on this receptor [31,134]. None of these reagents has reached clinical use. The antagonists induce gallbladder stasis; their use, therefore, is complicated by gallstone formation. The agonist theoretically could provide a new mechanism to achieve satiety, but its trophic effect may carry unacceptable risks.
CCK is interesting for the diversity of its established physiological and biological effects [135]. Almost all of its actions relate to nutrient homeostasis. Its major digestive effects are to stimulate pancreatic acinar cell secretion of zymogens and to stimulate gallbladder muscularis smooth muscle cell contraction. Both of these events result in the delivery of key ingredients for digestion to the intestinal lumen. It also causes contraction of the pylorus to slow gastric emptying, providing optimal nutrient delivery for digestion. A key neuronal effect of this hormone is to satiate appetite. Less well-established effects include modification of enteric and colonic transit, reduction in acid secretion by its role as a somatostatin secretagogue, stimulation of secretion of PP, and an insulinotropic effect.
Pancreatic polypeptide family The pancreatic polypeptide family includes PP, peptide YY (PYY), and neuropeptide Y (NPY). These peptides have extensive homology within their carboxyl-terminal domains, with absolute conservation of an arginine­tyrosine amide. PYY and NPY have extensive overall homology with each other. These three peptides also show cross-recognition of a group of three receptors. Each peptide has a unique distribution and unique functions. Their role in appetite regulation has become a subject of considerable interest [136,137].
Pancreatic polypeptide PP was originally identified as a contaminant in preparations of insulin extracted from pancreatic islets. It is a 36-amino acid peptide that is predicted to have a globular shape, resulting

71

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

from interactions between a polyproline helix and an helix [138,139]. Its biological activity resides in its carboxylterminal hexapeptide amide, with the carboxyl-terminal tyrosine amide being the critical residue for this activity. It has a short half-life in the circulation (about 7 min), with renal clearance apparently most important.
PP cells are found in the periphery of pancreatic islets and scattered within the parenchyma of the pancreatic head and uncinate lobe, in contrast to the distribution of glucagon in the pancreatic body and tail. There is a clear PP response to the ingestion of a meal. The response is biphasic; the early increase is neurally mediated and inclusive of cephalic and vagal phases. In many ways, secretion of PP correlates with vagal tone. The nutrients that stimulate gastrin and CCK secretion also stimulate PP secretion. Secretion of this hormone also appears to be stimulated by CCK, gastrin, GRP, neuromedins B and C, and secretin.
Although several biological effects of PP have been proposed, debate continues. This hormone has been thought to inhibit pancreatic exocrine secretion, but antibody neutralization studies have failed to show any effect on pancreatic secretion. A metabolic role as an inhibitor of hepatic glucose production has also been proposed.
A series of receptor subtypes that recognize the pancreatic polypeptide family of peptides has been proposed, which are identified as Y1­Y6; only the Y1, Y2, Y4, and Y5 receptors have been found in humans [137]. All are structurally related members of the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family of the G protein-coupled superfamily of receptors. The PP1-preferring receptor is able to recognize pancreatic polypeptide better than either of the other family members (PP >> NPY = PYY) [140]. Both of the Y1 and Y2 receptors recognize PYY and NPY similarly, and much better than PP (PYY  NPY >> PP). There are selective agonists that distinguish between these receptors, with [Leu31,Pro34]PYY and [Leu31,Pro34]NPY selective for the Y1 receptor, and carboxyl-terminal fragments (PYY[3­36], PYY[13­36], and NPY[13­36]) selective for the Y2 receptor [141].
Perhaps the best current use of PP is as a marker for islet cell tumors. Plasma levels of PP are also elevated in diabetes mellitus and in a high percentage of islet cell carcinomas and multiple endocrine neoplasia. The percentage of positive values varies with the type of endocrine tumor; VIP-secreting tumors have very high levels and gastrin-secreting tumors have substantially lower levels.
Peptide YY PYY is also a 36-amino acid peptide. It is found in highest concentrations in enteroendocrine cells in the distal small intestine and colon, mainly in the basal crypts of L cells [142­144]. It can act through endocrine mechanisms after release into the bloodstream, or through paracrine mechanisms with specialized basal processes surrounding columnar cells in the vicinity of the endocrine cells. It is released

in response to meals. Fat is the major stimulant but other nutrients (e.g., carbohydrate) and bile acids also stimulate secretion. Neuronal release mechanisms have also been postulated, and in some malabsorptive states, high circulating levels have been observed. GRP can also stimulate its release. Like PP, PYY has a short half-life in the circulation.
The actions of PYY are largely inhibitory [145,146]. It inhibits gastrointestinal motility, pancreatic and gastric secretion, and chloride secretion. It has been given the name ileal brake because it helps to establish longer contact times when nutrients reach the distal gut and colon. PYY has also been shown to have trophic effects, but the physiological significance of this action is not yet clear.
Neuropeptide Y NPY is a 36-amino acid peptide that is structurally homologous to PYY [147,148]. It appears to be the neurotransmitter equivalent of PYY, found in the central and peripheral nervous systems. It is one of the most abundant peptides in the brain, along with CCK. It is found in enteric neurons, alone or colocalized with other neuropeptides [149,150]. It is especially prominent in sympathetic neurons that innervate blood vessels.
Postulated effects of NPY include the stimulation of appetite, alteration of circadian rhythms, vasoconstriction, ethanol consumption, and neuronal development [151­ 153]. It has many of the same effects as PYY because they both recognize the same receptors, but its physiological role relates mainly to its anatomical distribution.
Tachykinin family The tachykinins are a group of biologically active peptides sharing the carboxyl-terminal consensus sequence -Phe-XGly-Leu-Met-NH2 [154 ­157]. Included in this group are substance P, GRP, the neuromedins, and many mollusk and amphibian peptides (bombesin, physalaemin, eledoisin, kassinin, and phyllomedusin). These peptides are neurotransmitters in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. The pharmacophoric domain of the tachykinins is predominantly within the carboxyl terminus and well circumscribed. Consistent with this feature, the receptors for this family are in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family of the G protein-coupled superfamily of receptors. Tachykinins are present in a wide variety of cells, including glial, smooth muscle, epithelial, endothelial, glandular, and immune cells.
Substance P (neurokinin A) Substance P is an 11-amino acid peptide amide that is widely distributed in the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral and enteric nervous systems [157,158]. Its highest concentrations along the digestive tract are in neurons of the esophagus, proximal small intestine, and colon. Substance P stimulates esophageal and intestinal peristalsis and pancreatic

72

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

P N S N A S

AMA P R E R K AGC K N F

S

AGCKN F F

S

S W CST F

S C

S

T

F

T

K Somatostatin 28 14

F W
K T

Figure 4.14 Structures of somatostatin-14 and somatostatin-28, as well as two prominent synthetic agonist analogues, octreotide and lanreotide, that incorporate unnatural amino acids and terminal blocking groups, prolonging biological action.

Octreotide

D-F C
S S T-OL C

F D-W
K T

Lanreotide

D-Nal C Y
S D-W
SK T CV

secretion, and it inhibits biliary secretion and somatostatin secretion. It likely plays a sensory role along the digestive tract, participating in the afferent limb of various reflexes and possibly mediating pain impulses. In the central nervous system it probably acts as a neuromodulator.
Gastrin-releasing peptide GRP was originally isolated during a search for an analogue to the amphibian peptide bombesin [159]. Like bombesin, GRP stimulates gastrin secretion. It is present in neurons of the stomach, intestine, and colon, as well as in the brain and spinal cord. It also stimulates the release of CCK, motilin, neurotensin, enteroglucagon, insulin, somatostatin, and substance P, and it can stimulate pancreatic acinar cell secretion and gut motility. The release of secretin from S cells is not stimulated by GRP. It may also play a role as an excitatory neurotransmitter, acting on enteric interneurons. Like several of the peptides discussed, GRP appears to have trophic activity. Receptors for this peptide have been described on small cell carcinomas of the lung, where a trophic response may have clinical significance [160].
Several of the neuromedins were isolated during a search for mammalian homologs of the amphibian peptides. Neuromedin C shares its carboxyl-terminal decapeptide amide with GRP. Neuromedin B is related to ranatensin.
Four receptor subtypes, BB1, BB2, BB3, and BB4, are recognized for this class of ligands [161]. The BB1 receptor recognizes neuromedin B with highest affinity (neuromedin B  bombesin > GRP). The BB2 receptor recognizes GRP best (GRP  bombesin >> neuromedin B). The BB3 receptor has a high degree of homology with the BB1 and BB2 receptors but binds both GRP and neuromedin B with low affinities. Its natural ligand has not yet been identified. Its presence has been reported in reproductive organs and lung carcinoma; it

may not have a relationship with the gastrointestinal tract. The BB4 receptor was isolated from frog brain and has a unique pharmacological profile ­ it is highly dependent on the penultimate phenylalanine residue for agonist activity, and it has a unique capability for antagonist recognition [162].
Somatostatin family The two molecular forms of somatostatin are 28 and 14 amino acids in length, with somatostatin-14 representing the carboxyl-terminal domain of somatostatin-28 [163­166]. Both forms of somatostatin contain a critical disulfide bond giving them a cyclic structure (Fig. 4.14). Amino acid residues 7­10 within the short cyclic structure of somatostatin-14 are also critical for activity. Although this hormone was originally identified for its ability to inhibit growth hormone, it is now recognized as having a much broader significance.
Somatostatin is synthesized and secreted from both neurons and enteroendocrine cells, with the latter (D cells) present as either open or closed [167,168]. In the stomach, there are highly specialized D cells with characteristic long processes that extend to G cells, parietal cells, and chief cells. These configurations make somatostatin one of the most flexible regulators of the gastrointestinal tract. Its multiple roles as hormone, paracrine transmitter, neurotransmitter, and neuromodulator reflect this flexibility. Along the digestive tract, 90% of somatostatin is present in the mucosa and 10% in the neuromuscular layers. In the stomach, pancreas, and neuromuscular layers of the intestine, somatostatin-14 is the predominant form, whereas both somatostatin-14 and somatostatin-28 are found in the mucosa of the bowel. Somatostatin-14 has a very short half-life of 1­3 min, whereas somatostatin-28 has a half-life of about 15 min. The degradation sites of this hormone are not well defined, but they likely involve capillary beds.

73

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Motilin F V P I F T Y G E L Q RMQ E ­ K E R N K GQ
Ghrelin G S S F L S P E HQ R V QQ R K E S K K P P AK L Q P R
O C=O (CH2)6CH3
-Octanoyl group

Figure 4.15 Alignment of sequences of motilin and ghrelin, members of the motilin family. Ghrelin has a unique posttranslational modification of the serine residue in position 3, representing O-n-octanoylation.

Most of the biological effects of somatostatin are inhibitory. It inhibits gastric, pancreatic, biliary, and even salivary secretion, in addition to inhibiting the release of a broad variety of gastrointestinal hormones. These include gastrin, CCK, secretin, PP, GIP, motilin, glucagon, and insulin. It also inhibits gut motility, but this effect results from its ability to inhibit cholinergic neurons. Somatostatin decreases splanchnic and portal blood flow.
Somatostatin receptors are in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family of the G protein-coupled superfamily of receptors. There are five recognized receptor subtypes: SSTR1, SSTR2, SSTR3, SSTR4, and SSTR5 [169­171]. These receptors are structurally homologous but each couples to distinct G proteins and has a distinct tissue distribution. They are most closely related to the opioid receptors, with which they share about 40% homology. Based on structural similarity, there are two groups of somatostatin receptors: SSTR1 is related to SSTR4, and SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5 are related to each other. SSTR5 is unique among the somatostatin receptors because it has a higher affinity for somatostatin-28 than for somatostatin-14. SSTR1 is found in the stomach and intestine. These receptors most prominently couple to adenylate cyclase; some receptors also activate potassium channels and voltage- and potassium-dependent calcium channels. The somatostatin receptor may also activate a protein tyrosine phosphatase, although the precise molecular mechanism for this is unclear.
An analogue of somatostatin that is a long-acting cyclic agonist peptide has become a highly useful clinical reagent. It represents an 8-amino acid cyclic peptide with unnatural residues that make it resistant to proteolysis. It has been used in the imaging and treatment of gastrointestinal hormonesecreting tumors, diarrheal disorders, and carcinoid syndrome [166,172].
Motilin family Motilin is a 22-amino acid linear peptide that was originally recognized as being secreted into the circulation in a cyclic manner that correlated with increased motor activity along the bowel. It has become one of the most important endogenous prokinetic peptides, and its receptor is recognized as a

useful pharmacological target, activated by erythromycin [173,174]. The cDNA encoding the motilin receptor was cloned in 1999. Sequence analysis showed that it was a member of the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family of the G protein-coupled superfamily of receptors, having closest homology to a group of growth hormone secretagogue receptors. The molecular basis of its binding has received more recent attention [175,176]. One extremely interesting aspect of studying the growth hormone secretagogue receptor was the discovery of ghrelin, an endogenous agonist ligand representing a 28-amino acid peptide that has a high degree of homology with motilin, and a unique posttranslational modification of O-n-octanoylation of the Ser residue in position 3 (Fig. 4.15) [177].
Only a single motilin receptor cDNA has been identified, even though there is pharmacological evidence for more than one pattern of response to this hormone [178]. Examination of the molecular basis of these varied responses will likely become an area of active exploration.
Protease-activated receptor family Proteases, such as trypsin, have traditionally not been thought of as signaling molecules. There is evidence, however, of distinct G protein-coupled receptors in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family of G protein-coupled receptors that are activated by proteolytic cleavage of an amino-terminal peptide sequence [179,180]. This makes an endogenous peptide ligand at the new amino-terminal end of the receptor accessible for binding to the remainder of the receptor, thus providing a novel molecular mechanism of action. To date, two such receptors have been identified ­ the thrombin receptor (or protease-activated receptor 1) and the protease-activated receptor 2 [181,182]. A receptor activation mechanism that requires proteolytic cleavage has substantial implications for receptor regulation, particularly for ensuring the inability to resensitize [183].
These receptors are believed to play roles in the linkage of tissue injury and vascular leakage to cellular responses, such as occurs in hemostasis, inflammation, and angiogenesis. Roles have also been postulated for these receptors in the intestine and pancreas.

74

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.16 Alignment of sequences of members of the secretin family. The aminoterminal domain is most critical for agonist action, whereas the pharmacophore extends throughout the entire peptide sequence.

Secretin H S D G T F T S E L S R L R E G A R L Q R L L Q G L L NH2
VIP H S D A V F T D N Y T R L R K Q M A V K K Y L N S I L N NH2
PACAP H S D G I F T D S Y S R Y R K Q M A V K K Y L A G V L NH2
GIP Y A E G T F I S D Y S I A M D D I R Q Q D F V N W L L AQKGKKSDWHKNITQ
Glucagon H S Q G T F T S D Y S K Y L D S R R A Q D V F QW L MN T

Chemokine family The chemokines constitute an extremely large family of ligands and receptors, with biological activities best described for leukocytes [184­186]. Although not specific to the gastrointestinal tract, this system has great relevance to it. More than 40 distinct human chemokines have been described and assigned extremely varied original names based on the tissue or cell of origin, the target cell type, the size of the molecule, or the action. A more coherent nomenclature that correlates with the organization of the receptors for these ligands was proposed in 1999 [187]. This system classifies chemokines by their structure into four groups, based on the number and the spacing of conserved cysteine residues: C, CC, CXC, and CX3C. The CC, CXC, and CX3C cytokines have 4 conserved cysteine residues, with the first two such residues being adjacent to one another or having one or three other residues between them respectively. The C cytokines have only two conserved cysteine residues, representing the second and fourth cysteine residues that are present in the other groups of chemokines.
The chemokine receptors are in the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. They typically recognize more than one chemokine, but these are usually members of a single chemokine family. The receptor nomenclature is based on the ligand specificity, starting with CC or CXC, and followed by R and a number. Of this group, 18 chemokine receptors have been cloned, and these express 25%­80% sequence identity among themselves.
Another interesting feature of the chemokines and their receptors is the substantial diversity of structure across species, with up to 55% sequence divergence reported. The pressure for the rapidity of evolution of these structures has not been established. Also of note are the nonchemokine ligands for these receptors, which include HIV; the chemokine receptor seems to play an important role as a coreceptor for the virus, permitting its entry into the target cell. On tumor cells, these receptors may determine the metastatic pattern.

Secretin family The secretin family of hormones is characterized by homology that is most evident in the amino-terminal half of these moderately large polypeptides (Fig. 4.16). Members of this family with known hormone and receptor sequences include secretin [188], VIP [189], pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), GIP [190], glucagon, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), calcitonin, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), parathyroid hormone [191], corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), and growth hormone-releasing factor (GHRF) [192,193]. Some of these are not relevant to the gastrointestinal tract and are not discussed further. It must be recognized, however, that insights from any members of this family may provide important clues relevant to the entire family. Based on the structural homology of hormones, it is expected that the PHI receptor also belongs to this family, although a distinct receptor for this peptide has not yet been cloned.
The pharmacophoric domains of these hormones are rather diffuse and spread throughout their primary sequences, usually requiring peptide analogues to span essentially the entire length of the natural hormones for maintenance of biological activity. In some of these hormones, the amino-terminal residue and a free amino terminus are particularly important. This observation implies the interesting notion that amino terminal-extended precursor forms may not be biologically active. In fact, few of the hormones in the secretin family have more than one molecular form, as is so common for peptide hormones belonging to the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family. Some truncated forms of the secretin family hormones have been synthesized and found to continue to bind with high affinity, but these possess markedly reduced biological activity. Another interesting feature of this family is that its members stimulate dual signaling cascades; low concentrations typically stimulate adenylate cyclase, and higher concentrations stimulate intracellular calcium responses. This may also occur in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic receptor family, but it is less common.

75

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Secretin Secretin holds a special place in gastrointestinal endocrinology and in endocrinology generally. Its discovery in 1902 by Bayliss and Starling [15] established the concept of hormones as chemical messengers that travel through the bloodstream to control the function of a target organ. As such, the discovery of secretin gave birth to the whole field of endocrinology. It was therefore the first gastrointestinal hormone, although not the first one to be characterized chemically. Secretin clearly has important physiological functions. Because of its relatively large size and the chemical difficulties encountered in working with this peptide and with its receptor, a detailed molecular understanding of this hormone has been delayed substantially. The cloning of cDNAs for members of this receptor family charged this field with new life and excitement, and it continues to be a fertile area for investigation.
Secretin is a 27-amino acid linear peptide with important residues scattered throughout the length of the hormone [194]. It is synthesized in endocrine cells (S cells) that are most abundant in the duodenum and proximal jejunum and present in reduced numbers throughout the distal small intestine. The major stimulus for secretin secretion is unbuffered hydrogen ions as they traverse the duodenum. This stimulus becomes apparent when the duodenal pH decreases to 4 or lower. Secretin secretion can also be stimulated by nutritional acids, such as fatty acids, and by ethanol and components of spicy foods (e.g., 1-phenylpentanol). Bile acids appear to enhance stimulated secretin release. Of interest, the S cell is one of the few enteroendocrine cells that is not responsive to GRP. However, the existence of a secretinreleasing peptide has been postulated. Like most of the peptide hormones, secretin has a short half-life of less than 3 min in the circulation. Renal clearance appears to be the predominant mode of elimination.
The major effect of secretin is the secretion of bicarbonate from biliary and pancreatic ductular epithelium and Brunner glands. This nicely completes the regulatory cycle, with the acid stimulant of secretin release neutralized by the bicarbonate secreted in response to this hormone. It has been estimated that secretin is responsible for 80% of the bicarbonate response to a meal. In nonhuman species, secretin has also been shown to inhibit gastric secretion and gastric motility, to lower esophageal sphincter tone, and to stimulate insulin release and colonic mucus secretion, but these are likely not physiological actions in humans.
Consistent with these observations, the most prominent targets for secretin include ductular epithelial cells in the biliary tree and pancreas, and Brunner gland cells [193]. Receptors are also believed to be expressed on pancreatic acinar cells of some species, vascular smooth muscle in selected organs, some enteric smooth muscle (particularly in the region of the lower esophageal sphincter), and some enteric mucosal cells. These targets were initially characterized as

having a potent biological response to secretin, and a lesser response to VIP. However, such studies are difficult to interpret because of the cross-recognition of many peptides in the family by receptors in the family. Now that the structure of the receptors is better understood, the expression of receptors on distinct cells has become easier to identify.
The secretin receptor cDNA was initially cloned in 1991 by Ishihara and colleagues [188]. Its structure appeared to have the seven hydrophobic helical transmembrane domains typical of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily, but other features of the receptor were unique. In fact, the level of homology with previously cloned receptors in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic family was only 12%. Subsequent cloning of cDNAs encoding receptors for calcitonin and parathyroid hormone, which are more similar to secretin receptors, defined a new class of G protein-coupled receptors. The most highly conserved areas are in the transmembrane domains, and a particularly long amino-terminal tail contains six highly conserved cysteine residues that are highly sensitive to reducing and cysteine-reactive reagents. The pattern of these disulfide bonds has been experimentally defined, and is conserved throughout the secretin receptor family [195]. Another such bond that is likely to be present is the connection between cysteine residues in the first and second extracellular loops, in positions that are conserved throughout the entire superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors. This bond has been characterized for other receptors in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic family [196].
Various studies including mutagenesis and photoaffinity labeling have shown the importance of the amino-terminal tail and extracellular loop domains of this receptor for secretin binding and activation [193]. This finding is consistent with the general theme for this superfamily, in which increasingly larger ligands bind to domains moving from the confluence of intramembranous helices to the cellular surface, and ultimately to the extracellular loop and tail domains. An important and novel mechanism for the activation of the secretin family of receptors has been proposed, suggesting that binding of the peptide ligand to the aminoterminal domain results in a conformational change in this domain, exposing an endogenous agonist that interacts with the core of the receptor to activate it (Fig. 4.17) [197].
Despite having new signature sequences unique to the secretin receptor family, the secretin receptor seems to signal and to be regulated much like the receptors in the rhodopsin/-adrenergic family [198]. The secretin receptor is coupled to both Gs and Gq/11. The most potent response to hormonal stimulation is an increase in adenylate cyclase, and less potent is the stimulation of intracellular calcium. The secretin receptor is phosphorylated in response to agonist stimulation, and this phosphorylation interferes with G protein coupling. Like most G protein-coupled receptors, this receptor is internalized after agonist occupation. The details of the molecular basis of these events are being explored.

76

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

NH2

4 5

32 1
7

6

Figure 4.17 Proposed mechanism for the activation of class B G proteincoupled receptors. The peptide ligand-binding domain is within the large and complex amino terminus, exposing an endogenous epitope within this domain which acts as a secondary ligand that interacts with the receptor body. From Beinborn [219], with permission from the American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide VIP is a 28-amino acid linear peptide with close structural homology to secretin [199]. Conformational studies have supported similar structures as well. Unlike the hormone secretin, VIP is exclusively a neurotransmitter. In addition to being present in enteric neurons, VIP is also present in neurons of the brain, spinal cord, lung, urogenital system, and other endocrine organs. VIP has a very short half-life of less than 1 min in the circulation. Accordingly, plasma levels are quite low and unresponsive to the ingestion of a meal. High plasma levels have been reported in the setting of watery diarrhea­hypokalemia­achlorhydria syndrome associated with a VIP-producing endocrine tumor (VIPoma) [200].
The VIPoma syndrome provides insight into potential targets and actions of VIP. The normal physiological role of VIP is difficult to determine because of the local actions and absence of reagents with which to dissect its role from those of other related transmitters. Among the potential actions are stimulation of enteric smooth muscle, stimulation of pancreatic exocrine and intestinal secretion, inhibition of gastric acid secretion, and modification of immune function and gastrointestinal blood flow. The list of tissues and cells containing VIP receptors includes pancreatic acini, pancreatic and biliary ductular epithelial cells, gastric and intestinal epithelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, lymphocytes, and a number of epithelial tumors. Direct effects on enteric smooth muscle cells and modulatory effects on interneurons have been demonstrated. VIP is a key candidate for mediating descending relaxation of the peristaltic reflex and relaxa-

tion at the lower esophageal sphincter, the internal anal sphincter, and the tenia coli.
Two VIP receptors have been cloned: VIP1 (or VPAC1) and VIP2 (or VPAC2) [201]. Both are typical members of the secretin family of G protein-coupled receptors. VIP is also well recognized by the PACAP (or PAC1) receptor [202]. Both the VIP1 and VIP2 receptors have similar structural specificities for VIP, PACAP, and PHI (VIP = PACAP > PHI). Secretin is recognized weakly by the VIP1 receptor, and not at all by the VIP2 receptor. The selectivity of the PACAP receptor is quite distinct (PACAP > VIP > PHI). Another interesting feature of the PACAP receptor is prominent alternative splicing, yielding variants that differ in both ligand recognition and intracellular signal transduction pathways. The specific tissue and cellular distribution of these receptors is being characterized.
Studies with chimeric constructs incorporating domains of the VIP and secretin receptors have also supported the importance of the amino-terminal domain of these receptors in their selectivity for binding and initiation of active conformations [203]. Such observations indicate the need to understand more about the conformation of the ectodomain of these receptors in an effort to contribute to the rational design of drugs that might act on this important family of receptors.
Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide PACAP is a 27-amino acid linear peptide that was initially isolated from ovine brain [204]. Unusual for this family of hormones, there is also a second molecular form, PACAP-38, which consists of PACAP with a carboxyl-terminal extension of 11 amino acids. Like many other brain peptides, PACAP is also present in the gastrointestinal tract, in nerve fibers, and in myenteric and submucous ganglia. PACAP-38 is the predominant peptide in nonenteric locations (e.g., brain, lung, and testes), whereas PACAP-27 is predominant in the intestine. Like VIP, the low circulating levels of PACAP are unresponsive to the ingestion of a meal.
Because of the high degree of homology between PACAP and VIP and the relationship of their receptors, interest has been focused on this neurotransmitter, even though it does not yet have proven physiological functions. Candidate functions include relaxation effects on colonic smooth muscle, stimulation of pancreatic exocrine secretion, and vasodilation.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide GIP was originally called gastric inhibitory peptide, until it became clear that inhibition of acid secretion is not a physiological action of this hormone. Instead, its most prominent effect is to stimulate insulin production in a glucose-dependent manner, hence the name glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide. A 42-amino acid linear peptide homologous to secretin and glucagons [205,206], GIP is produced in K cells in the proximal intestinal crypts. This peptide hormone is secreted

77

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

predominantly in response to the ingestion of a meal, with fat the major nutrient stimulant. Both the secretion of GIP and the response of target organs to GIP are affected by cholinergic tone. GIP has a half-life of 18 min, which is longer than that of most gastrointestinal peptides.
The GIP receptor, like the peptide, is homologous to other members of the secretin receptor family [190]. This is also true for the description of its coupling, signaling, and regulatory events.
The main established biological function for GIP is its role as a stimulant of insulin secretion (incretin) [207]. Incretins provided the explanation for the greater insulin responses to nutrients administered orally as opposed to parenterally. There have been many proposed candidates to mediate this action, but GIP and GLP-1 are considered important. For GIP to exert this effect on the cells of the pancreatic islet, the serum glucose level must be above 110 mg/dL, thus providing protection against hypoglycemia. Other metabolic effects of GIP have been described, such as inhibition of hepatic glucose output, inhibition of fat absorption, and inhibition of lipoprotein lipase. The physiological role of GIP in mediating these effects is not clear.
Tyrosine kinase receptor family The receptors in this family are quite distinct from the G proteincoupled receptors. All are single-transmembrane receptors and all have prominent effects on cell growth (Fig. 4.18). Some also affect cell survival, differentiation, and movement. Perturbations of several tyrosine kinase receptors have been

Class

I

II

III

Cys -s-s- -s-s-
Cys -s-s-

Cys

Tyr kinase

EGF-R

IGF-R

PDGF-R

Figure 4.18 The three classes of tyrosine kinase receptor. All possess cysteine-rich regions in the ectodomain and tyrosine kinase catalytic domains in the cytoplasm. The classification of tyrosine kinase receptors into the three classes is dependent on the continuity and spacing of these regions, as well as the subunit structure necessary to achieve a functional unit for the class II receptors.

associated with tumorigenesis. Many G protein-coupled receptors also appear to mediate effects on cell growth, but they do so through a distinct mechanism. Activation of G proteincoupled receptors can also stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation events; however, most of the substrates are distinct from those phosphorylated in response to activation of the tyrosine kinase receptor family [208].
Epidermal growth factor Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a 53-amino acid singlechain polypeptide that contains three intramolecular disulfide bonds. Additional ligands in this family include transforming growth factor-, amphiregulin, betacellulin, heparin-binding EGF, and the neuregulins. All share the sequence motif CX7 CX2­3 GXCX10­13 CXCX5 GXRC. All are produced as single-transmembrane proteins with an amino-terminal proregion, a mature growth factor region ranging in length from 50 to 87 residues, and a relatively short cytosolic domain. Members of the EGF family are active both while anchored to the membrane and after proteolytic processing to release the mature growth factor domain [72].
There are four members of the EGF receptor subfamily, including the EGF receptor encoded by erbB and proteins encoded by erbB-2, erbB-3, and erbB-4. All are singletransmembrane glycoproteins that incorporate two distinct cysteine-rich regions in the ectodomain and a tyrosine kinase catalytic domain and typical sites of potential phosphorylation in cytoplasmic regions. Receptor dimerization or oligomerization is a typical initial step in signaling that is induced by agonist binding. This is followed by crossphosphorylation on tyrosine residues of the receptor and the recruitment of kinase substrates and other signaling proteins. Many of these substrates have Src-homology-2 (SH2) domains. A large number of potential signaling cascades have been described, including the Ras, Raf, and MAP kinase pathways and the JAK/STAT pathways [209,210]. EGF signaling also includes activation of phosphatidylinositol pathways, with activation of protein kinase C isozymes and increases in intracellular Ca2+.
Many gastrointestinal functions can be affected by this family of hormones and receptors. Included among the most prominent effects are inhibition of gastric acid secretion, protection against injury, and stimulation of intestinal cell growth. There are also putative growth-stimulatory and -inhibitory effects on a number of gastrointestinal tumors. This provides many interesting possibilities for therapeutic uses of agonists and antagonists acting at these receptors [211].
Fibroblast growth factors Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are a group of polypeptides with angiogenic and mitogenic activities that are active in tissue repair and in modulating tissue differentiation. FGFs induce chemotactic activities in fibroblasts and endothelial

78

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

cells [74]. Nine members of the FGF family have been identified, each with a conserved core sequence of about 120 residues and with high affinity for heparin and glycosaminoglycans. FGF1, also known as acidic fibroblast growth factor, and FGF2, also known as basic fibroblast growth factor, are not efficiently secreted, whereas all other forms possess signal peptides and are secreted. FGF7 is also known as keratinocyte growth factor (KGF).
Receptors for the FGFs are monomeric and, like other growth factor receptors, they possess a tyrosine kinase domain. Unlike that of most such receptors, the tyrosine kinase domain of these receptors is discontinuous, with a 14residue interruption. Also, the FGF receptors have two or three immunoglobulin-like domains within an extracellular domain. At least four distinct genes encode FGFR-1 through FGFR-4. FGFR-1 and FGFR-2 also have multiple alternatively spliced forms. All four types of FGFR can be activated by either the acidic or basic forms of FGF (FGF1 or FGF2). FGF7 (KGF) binds only to the KGFR, which is a distinct splice variant of the FGFR-2. Heparin sulfate proteoglycans on the cell surface can also bind these growth factors, but with low affinity. It has been postulated that this is a site for the collection of the ligand in preparation for binding to its highaffinity receptor.
Autophosphorylation of the FGF receptors occurs and is a mechanism for regulation. Tyrosine phosphorylation occurs in response to FGF binding, thereby opening and exposing the kinase domain. Phospholipase C- can associate with the tyrosine-phosphorylated receptor. Activation also stimulates Shc association with a kinase domain of the receptor, which leads to activation of Grb2/SOS. This in turn leads to the typical series of events activated by other growth factors, such as activation of Raf-1, MAP kinase kinase, and MAP kinase.
FGF receptors can form homodimers or heterodimers. The composition of the dimer can determine the details of the signaling initiated. Signaling cascades appear to be quite similar to those described for the EGF receptors.
Biological actions for this group of hormones include prominent effects on angiogenesis through effects on endothelial cells. Also described are effects on fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and various neuronal cells. Like other growth factors, FGFs also have been implicated in tumorigenesis.
Insulin-like growth factors Insulin-like growth factors (IGF-1 and IGF-2) are singlechain polypeptides that are homologous to proinsulin [73]. These hormones were first recognized by the demonstration that the addition of insulin antiserum to neutralize insulin activity failed to inhibit all activities attributed to that hormone. The IGFs are structurally related to insulin, but they bind poorly to traditional insulin receptors. Like insulin, the IGFs have both A and B domains. Unlike insulin, they lack the C domain, which is cleaved in the processing of insulin to achieve its mature 2-chain form. IGFs remain a single chain,

although they fold to achieve a conformation similar to that of insulin.
Like the insulin receptor, the type 1 IGF receptor consists of a heterotetrameric structure with two -subunits and two -subunits, both of which come from a single gene product. Disulfide bonds link the complex, with the -subunits residing entirely outside the cell and possessing the binding determinants, and the -subunits spanning the plasma membrane and containing the tyrosine kinase domain intracellularly. As in the insulin receptor, signaling involves tyrosine autophosphorylation, as well as association and phosphorylation of other substrates.
In addition to the receptor, there are soluble circulating and interstitial IGF-binding proteins (IGFBP-1 to -6). They may affect the volumes of distribution and half-lives of IGF and thereby modify its biological activities. IGFs affect the growth and differentiation of a variety of tissues.
Toll-like receptor family All multicellular organisms have innate immunity as a form of host defense against microbes. Infection or infestation leads to early defenses at the levels of phagocytic leukocytes, endothelial cells, and mucosal epithelial cells, with responses mediated by receptors that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns, such as the lipopolysaccharide in bacterial cell walls. Activation of such receptors leads to biological responses that are designed to clear the offending stimulus and to protect the organism. The toll-like receptors are a particularly interesting group of this type of receptor that can recognize and distinguish between various classes of pathogens [212]. They are located on monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, intestinal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells. A major signaling target of these receptors is the activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) transcription factors, which can affect the expression of various cytokines, adhesion molecules, acute phase proteins, and inducible enzymes.
The toll-like receptors represent a family of singletransmembrane molecules having multiple copies of leucinerich repeats in their unique extracellular domain and a cytoplasmic toll/1R (TIR) motif that is related to that found in the interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor. Because of the latter motif, these receptors signal like the IL-1 receptor. They are thought to dimerize and bind to adapter proteins that initiate signaling. These receptors may represent interesting and possibly productive targets for the treatment of inflammatory and immune-mediated diseases.
Hormones in gastrointestinal disease
As critical as gastrointestinal hormones and their receptors are for the integration and regulation of digestive function in health, their major interest for the clinician is in regard to

79

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

hormone-secreting tumor syndromes. These syndromes can be dramatic expressions of unregulated overactivity of one particular hormone, without the advantage of the normally active mechanisms for feedback inhibition. Such tumors are typically of the islet cell type, arising in the pancreas, although the duodenum is another common location for gastrinomas. The two most common and dramatic presentations of such tumors, excluding the insulinomas and glucagonomas typically seen by the endocrinologist, are gastrin-secreting and VIP-secreting islet cell tumors [166,200]. Gastrin is produced in the fetal pancreas but is not normally produced at all in the adult pancreas. VIP is a normal pancreatic neurotransmitter that is present in very low concentrations under normal circumstances. The syndromes of gastrin overproduction in the Zollinger­Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma) and VIP overproduction in the Verner­Morrison syndrome or watery diarrhea­hypokalemia­achlorhydria syndrome (VIPoma) are discussed in detail elsewhere in this book (see Chapter 71). Knowledge of the biological actions of these peptides based on the previous discussion should provide good insight into these clinical syndromes.
The clinical contributions of the gastrointestinal endocrine system to other gastrointestinal diseases is less clear because of the redundancy of the control mechanisms, with more than one hormone and neurotransmitter serving similar functions. Common disturbances of gastrointestinal function, such as irritable bowel syndrome, peptic ulcer disease, gallstone disease, dysmotility states, and even pancreatitis, may be influenced by a diverse menu of hormones and neurotransmitters. Only when the choice of selective pharmacological agonists and antagonists is similarly broad will the roles of these agents be unraveled. The reduced clearance of several of these hormones from the circulation in renal insufficiency can be associated with a broad spectrum of results because of the antagonistic effects of elevated peptides [69]. Because nutrient absorption is needed to stimulate the secretion of many gastrointestinal hormones, circulating levels can be influenced markedly by syndromes of maldigestion, such as occurs in pancreatic insufficiency or celiac disease.
Some gastrointestinal peptides and analogues have reached clinical practice. They have numerous diagnostic applications. Pentagastrin is the agent of choice for gastric acid secretory testing [213]. CCK is used for pancreatic function testing, as well as in radiographic studies of gallbladder emptying and pancreatic duct size [214]. Secretin is administered in a provocative test for gastrinoma [70]. Glucagon is used to relax the gastrointestinal smooth muscle activity to facilitate endoscopic, radiological, and intubation procedures [215].
In addition to having diagnostic applications, potent agonist analogues of somatostatin are now commonly used as therapeutic agents (see structures of octreotide and lanreotide in Fig. 4.14). A long-acting depot form of lanreotide that can be injected intramuscularly is now available. These ligands have highest affinities for receptor subtypes 2 and 5, with

moderate affinity for subtype 3 and very low affinity for subtypes 1 and 4. Somatostatin and its analogues suppress hormone release and hormone action of a number of gastrointestinal peptides. They are being used to treat the diarrhea and flushing of metastatic carcinoid syndrome, the secretory diarrhea of the VIPoma syndrome, the skin lesions of the glucagonoma syndrome, and other refractory diarrheal syndromes and fistulae [216]. Although these agents effectively inhibit acid hypersecretion in gastrinoma, there are better methods for controlling acid secretion, such as hydrogen­ potassium ATPase inhibitors and histamine H2 receptor antagonists. Somatostatin agonists have helped to relieve symptoms of islet cell tumors, and in rare cases they have induced islet cell tumor regression. They are also being tested for action against other epithelial carcinomas. More selective somatostatin receptor antagonists are being developed.
Gastrointestinal hormones, such as gastrin-releasing hormone and gastrin, have been implicated as autocrine growth factors in various epithelial malignancies. Antagonists directed toward blocking the action of these peptides may have important clinical applications in the future.
References
1. Fujita T, Kobayashi S. The cells and hormones of the GEP endocrine system ­ the current of the studies. In: Fujita T (ed.). Gastro-EnteroPancreatic Endocrine System. A Cell-Biological Approach. Tokyo: Igaku Shoin, 1973:1.
2. Polak JM. Endocrine cells of the gut. In: Makhlouf GM (ed.). Handbook of Physiology ­ The Gastrointestinal System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989:63.
3. Franco R, Canals M, Marcellino D, et al. Regulation of heptaspanningmembrane-receptor function by dimerization and clustering. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:238.
4. Langmead CJ, Christopoulos A, Langmead CJ, Christopoulos A. Allosteric agonists of 7TM receptors: expanding the pharmacological toolbox. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006;27:475.
5. Angers S, Salahpour A, Bouvier M. Dimerization: an emerging concept for G protein-coupled receptor ontogeny and function. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2002;42:409.
6. Gores GJ, LaRusso NF, Miller LJ. Hepatic processing of cholecystokinin peptides. I. Structural specificity and mechanism of hepatic extraction. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G344.
7. Murakami T, Hitomi S, Ohtsuka A, et al. Pancreatic insulo-acinar portal systems in humans, rats, and some other mammals: scanning electron microscopy of vascular casts. Micros Res Tech 1997;37:478.
8. Schmid A, Schulz I. Different time courses of GTP[gamma-S]induced exocytosis and current oscillations in isolated mouse pancreatic acinar cells. Pflugers Arch 1996;432:876.
9. Furness JB. Types of neurons in the enteric nervous system. J Auton Nerv Syst 2000;81:87.
10. Larsson LI, Goltermann N, De ML, et al. Somatostatin cell processes as pathways for paracrine secretion. Science 1979;205:1393.
11. Roettger BF, Rentsch RU, Pinon D, et al. Dual pathways of internalization of the cholecystokinin receptor. J Cell Biol 1995;128:1029.
12. Roettger BF, Rentsch RU, Hadac EM, et al. Insulation of a G proteincoupled receptor on the plasmalemmal surface of the pancreatic acinar cell. J Cell Biol 1995;130:579.
13. Rao RV, Roettger BF, Hadac EM, Miller LJ. Roles of cholecystokinin receptor phosphorylation in agonist-stimulated desensitization of

80

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

pancreatic acinar cells and receptor-bearing Chinese hamster ovary cholecystokinin receptor cells. Mol Pharmacol 1997;51:185. 14. Langmead CJ, Christopoulos A. Allosteric agonists of 7TM receptors: expanding the pharmacological toolbox. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006;27:475. 15. Bayliss WM, Starling EH. On the causation of the so-called "peripheral reflex secretion" of the pancreas. Proc R Soc Lond [Biol] 1902;69:352. 16. Rehfeld JF. Historical background. In: Bloom SR, Polak JM (eds). Gut Hormones. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1981:10. 17. Edkins JS. On the chemical mechanisms of gastric secretion. Proc R Soc Lond [Biol] 1905;76:376. 18. Gregory RA, Tracy HJ. The constitution and properties of two gastrins extracted from hog antral mucosa. Gut 1964;5:103. 19. Mutt V, Jorpes E. Hormonal polypeptides of the upper intestine. Biochem J 1971;125:57. 20. Yalow RS, Berson SA. Assay of plasma insulin by immunological methods. Nature 1959;184:1648. 21. Yalow RS. Radioimmunoassay: a probe for the fine structure of biologic systems. Med Phys 1978;5:247. 22. Muller JE, Straus E, Yalow RS. Cholecystokinin and its COOHterminal octapeptide in the pig brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977;74:3035. 23. Miller LJ. A historical perspective of gastrointestinal endocrinology ­ the new age of molecular receptorology. Gastroenterology 1992;102:2168. 24. Galardy RE, Craig LC, Jamieson JD, Printz MP. Photoaffinity labeling of peptide hormone binding sites. J Biol Chem 1974;249:3510. 25. Galardy RE, Hull BE, Jamieson JD. Irreversible photoactivation of a pancreatic secretagogue receptor with cholecystokinin COOHterminal octapeptides. J Biol Chem 1980;255:3148. 26. Dong M, Liu G, Pinon DI, Miller LJ. Differential docking of high-affinity peptide ligands to type A and B cholecystokinin receptors demonstrated by photoaffinity labeling. Biochemistry 2005;44:6693. 27. Kolakowski LF. GCRDb: a G-protein-coupled receptor database. Recept Chan 1994;2:1. 28. Park CG, Ganguli SC, Pinon DI, et al. Cross-chimeric analysis of selectivity of secretin and VPAC(1) receptor activation. J Pharmacol Exp Therap 2000;295:682. 29. Miller LJ, Lybrand TP. Molecular basis of agonist binding to the type A cholecystokinin receptor. Pharmacol Toxicol 2002;91:282. 30. Houghten RA, Pinilla C, Blondelle SE, et al. Generation and use of synthetic peptide combinatorial libraries for basic research and drug discovery. Nature 1991;354:84. 31. Aquino CJ, Armour DR, Berman JM, et al. Discovery of 1,5-benzodiazepines with peripheral cholecystokinin (CCK-A) receptor agonist activity. 1. Optimization of the agonist "trigger". J Med Chem 1996;39:562. 32. Cheng H, Leblond CP. Origin, differentiation and renewal of the four main epithelial cell types in the mouse small intestine. V. Unitarian theory of the origin of the four epithelial cell types. Am J Anat 1974;141:537. 33. Thompson EM, Fleming KA, Evans DJ, et al. Gastric endocrine cells share a clonal origin with other gut cell lineages. Development 1990;110:477. 34. LeDouarin NM, Dupin E, Ziller C. Genetic and epigenetic control in neural crest development. Curr Opin Genet Develop 1994;4:685. 35. Furness JB. Types of neurons in the enteric nervous system. J Auton Nerv Syst 2000;81:87. 36. LeDouarin NM, Ziller C. Plasticity in neural crest cell differentiation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1993;5:1036. 37. Jamieson JD, Palade GE. Synthesis, intracellular transport, and discharge of secretory proteins in stimulated pancreatic exocrine cells. J Cell Biol 1971;50:135. 38. Gall JG, Purdue ML. Nucleic acid hybridization in cytological preparations. Methods Enzymol 1971;38:470. 39. Singer RH, Lawrence JB, Villnave C. Optimization of in situ

hybridization using isotopic and nonisotopic methods. BioTech 1986;4:230. 40. Nakanishi S, Inoue A, Kita T, et al. Nucleotide sequence of cloned cDNA for bovine corticotropin-B-lipotropin precursor. Nature 1979;278:423. 41. Gubler U, Seeburg P, Hoffman BJ, et al. Molecular cloning establishes proenkephalin as precursor of enkephalin-containing peptides. Nature 1982;295:206. 42. Itoh KO, Obata K, Yanaihara N, Okamoto H. Human preprovasoactive intestinal polypeptide contains a novel PHI-27-like peptide, PHM-27. Nature 1983;304:547. 43. Rosenfeld MG, Mermod J-J, Amara SG, et al. Production of a novel neuropeptide encoded by the calcitonin gene via tissue-specific RNA processing. Nature 1983;304:129. 44. Nawa H, Kotani H, Nakanaishi S. Tissue specific generation of two preprotachykinin mRNAs from one gene by alternative RNA splicing. Nature 1984;312:729. 45. Song I, Brown DR, Wiltshire RN, et al. The human gastrin/cholecystokinin type B receptor gene: alternative splice donor site in exon 4 generates two variant mRNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:9085. 46. Moore EE, Kuestner RE, Stroop SD, et al. Functionally different isoforms of the human calcitonin receptor result from alternative splicing of the gene transcript. Mol Endocrinol 1995;9:959. 47. Walter P, Gilmore R, Blobel G. Protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 1984;38:5. 48. Huttner W. Tyrosine sulfation and the secretory pathway. Annu Rev Physiol 1988;50:363. 49. Steiner DF, Smeekens SP, Ohagi S, Chan SJ. The new enzymology of precursor processing endoproteases. J Biol Chem 1992;267: 23435. 50. Smeekens SP, Avruch AS, LaMendola J, et al. Identification of a cDNA encoding a second putative prohormone convertase related to PC2 in AtT20 cells and islets of Langerhans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:340. 51. Seidah NG, Marcinkiewicz M, Benjannet S, et al. Cloning and primary sequence of a mouse candidate prohormone convertase PC1 homologous to PC2, furin, and Kex2: distinct chromosomal localization and messenger RNA distribution in brain and pituitary compared to PC2. Mol Endocrinol 1991;5:111. 52. Bradbury A, Finnie M, Smyth D. Mechanism of C-terminal amide formation by pituitary enzymes. Nature 1982;298:686. 53. Dickinson CJ, Yamada T. Gastrin-amidating enzyme in the porcine pituitary and antrum. Characterization of molecular forms and substrate specificity. J Biol Chem 1991;266:334. 54. Tatemoto K, Mutt V. Chemical determination of polypeptide hormones. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1978;75:4115. 55. Varro A, Dockray GJ. Post-translational processing of progastrin: inhibition of cleavage, phosphorylation and sulphation by brefeldin A. Biochem J 1993;295:813. 56. Morley JS. Structure­function relationships in gastrin-like peptides. Proc R Soc Lond [Biol] 1968;170:97. 57. Gregory H, Jones DS, Morley JS. Polypeptides. VII. Variations of the phenylalanyl position in the C-terminal tetrapeptide amide sequence of the gastrins. J Chem Soc (C) 1968;5:531. 58. Yoo O, Powell C, Agarwal K. Molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence of full-length cDNA coding for porcine gastrin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982;79:1049. 59. Ito R, Sato K, Helmer T, et al. Structural analysis of the gene encoding human gastrin: the large intron contains an Alu sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1984;81:4662. 60. Wiborg O, Berglund E, Boel E, et al. The structure of a human gastrin gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1984;81:1067. 61. Varro A, Nemeth J, Bridson J, et al. Processing of the gastrin precursor. Modulation of phosphorylated, sulfated, and amidated products. J Biol Chem 1990;265:21476. 62. Dockray GJ, Varro A, Desmond H, et al. Post-translational processing of the porcine gastrin precursor by phosphorylation of the COOH-terminal fragment. J Biol Chem 1987;262:8643.

81

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

63. Bundgaard JR, Vuust J, Rehfeld JF. Tyrosine O-sulfation promotes proteolytic processing of progastrin. EMBO J 1995;14:3073.
64. Ondetti MA, Rubin B, Engel SL, et al. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin. Recent developments. Am J Dig Dis 1970;15:149.
65. Nikiforovich GV, Hruby VJ. Models for the A- and B-receptorbound conformations of CCK-8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993;194:9.
66. Merrifield RB. Solid-phase peptide synthesis. Adv Enzymol 1969; 32:221.
67. Rehfeld JF. Radioimmunoassay in diagnosis, localization and treatment of endocrine tumours in gut and pancreas. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1979;53:33.
68. Dockray GJ. Physiology of enteric neuropeptides. In: Johnson L (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1987:41.
69. Owyang C, Miller LJ, DiMagno EP, et al. Gastrointestinal hormone profile in renal insufficiency. Mayo Clinic Proc 1979;54:769.
70. Lamers CB, VonTongeren JH. Comparative study of the value of calcium, secretin, and meal stimulated increase in gastrin to the diagnosis of Zollinger­Ellison syndrome. Gut 1977;18:128.
71. Grossman MI. How does a candidate peptide become a hormone. Adv Exp Med Biol 1978;106:23.
72. Brown KD. The epidermal growth factor/transforming growth factor-alpha family and their receptors. Eur J Gastroent Hepatol 1995;7:914.
73. Schmid C. Insulin-like growth factors. Cell Biol Internat 1995; 19:445.
74. Slavin J. Fibroblast growth factors: at the heart of angiogenesis. Cell Biol Internat 1995;19:431.
75. Koesling D, Boehme E, Schultz G. Guanyl cyclases, a growing family of signal-transducing enzymes. FASEB J 1991;5:2785.
76. Lodish HF, Hilton DJ, Klingmüller U, et al. The erythropoietin receptor: biogenesis, dimerization, and intracellular signal transduction. Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 1995;60:93.
77. Watowich SS, Wu H, Socolovsky M, et al. Cytokine receptor signal transduction and the control of hematopoietic cell development. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1996;12:91.
78. Luetje CW, Patrick J, Seguela P. Nicotine receptors in the mammalian brain. FASEB J 1990;4:2753.
79. Dohlman HG, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. A family of receptors coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins. Biochemistry 1987;26:2657.
80. Strosberg AD. Structure, function, and regulation of adrenergic receptors. Protein Sci 1993;2:1198.
81. Ji TH, Grossmann M, Ji I. G protein-coupled receptors. I. Diversity of receptor­ligand interactions. J Biol Chem 1998;273:17299.
82. Gilman AG. G proteins: transducers of receptor-generated signals. Annu Rev Biochem 1987;56:615.
83. Hepler JR, Gilman AG. G proteins. Trends Biochem Sci 1992; 17:383.
84. Conklin BR, Bourne HR. Structural elements of Ga subunits that interact with Gbg, receptors, and effectors. Cell 1993;73:631.
85. Birnbaumer L. G proteins in signal transduction. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1990;30:675.
86. Neer EJ, Clapham DE. Roles of G protein subunits in transmembrane signalling. Nature 1988;333:129.
87. Ford CE, Skiba NP, Bae H, et al. Molecular basis for interactions of G protein betagamma subunits with effectors. Science 1998; 280:1271.
88. O'Donnell M, Garippa RJ, O'Neill NC, et al. Structure­activity studies of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. J Biol Chem 1991;266: 6389.
89. Feighner SD, Tan CP, McKee KK, et al. Receptor for motilin identified in the human gastrointestinal system. Science 1999;284: 2184.
90. Spengler D, Waeber C, Pantaloni C, et al. Differential signal transduction by five splice variants of the PACAP receptor. Nature 1993;365:170.

91. Helenius A. How N-linked oligosaccharides affect glycoprotein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum. Mol Biol Cell 1994;5:253.
92. Kaushal S, Ridge KD, Khorana HG. Structure and function in rhodopsin: the role of asparagine-linked glycosylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:4024.
93. Moffett S, Mouillac B, Bonin H, Bouvier M. Altered phosphorylation and desensitization patterns of a human 2-adrenergic receptor lacking the palmitoylated Cys341. EMBO J 1993;12:349.
94. Ozcelebi F, Rao RV, Holicky E, et al. Phosphorylation of cholecystokinin receptors expressed on Chinese hamster ovary cells: similarities and differences relative to native pancreatic acinar cells. J Biol Chem 1996;271:3750.
95. Rosenzweig SA, Miller LJ, Jamieson JD. Identification and localization of cholecystokinin-binding sites on rat pancreatic plasma membranes and acinar cells: a biochemical and autoradiographic study. J Cell Biol 1983;96:1288.
96. Miller LJ. Biochemical characterization of receptors for the cholecystokinin family of hormones. In: Thompson JC (ed.). Gastrointestinal Endocrinology: Receptors and Post-Receptor Mechanisms. New York: Academic Press, 1990:81.
97. Johnsen AH, Rehfeld JF. Identification of cholecystokinin/gastrin peptides in frog and turtle. Evidence that cholecystokinin is phylogenetically older than gastrin. Eur J Biochem 1992;207:419.
98. Vigna SR. Cholecystokinin and its receptors in vertebrates and invertebrates. Peptides 1985;6:283.
99. Oliver AS, Vigna SR. CCK-A- and CCK-B-like receptors in the gallbladder and stomach of the alligator (Alligator mississippiensis). Gen Comp Endocrinol 1997;105:91.
100. Delvalle J, Sugano K, Yamada T. Glycine-extended processing intermediates of gastrin and cholecystokinin in human plasma. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1159.
101. Luttichau HR, van SW, Nielsen FC, Rehfeld JF. Developmental expression of the gastrin and cholecystokinin genes in rat colon. Gastroenterology 1993;104:1092.
102. Brand SJ, Fuller PJ. Differential gastrin gene expression in rat gastrointestnal tract and pancreas during neonatal development. J Biol Chem 1988;263:5341.
103. van Solinge WW, Nielsen FC, Friis-Hansen L, et al. Expression but incomplete maturation of progastrin in colorectal carcinomas. Gastroenterology 1993;104:1099.
104. Rehfeld JF, Bardum L, Hilsted L. Gastrin in bronchogenic carcinoma cells: constant expression but variable processing of progastrin. Cancer Res 1988;48:7179.
105. Zollinger RM, Ellison EH. Primary peptic ulcerations of the jejunum associated with islet cell tumors of the pancreas. Ann Surg 1955;142:709.
106. Walsh JH. Gastrointestinal hormones. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1987:181.
107. Jensen RT, Wank SA, Rowley WH, et al. Interaction of CCK with pancreatic acinar cells. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1989;10:418.
108. Wank SA. Cholecystokinin receptors. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 1995;269:G628.
109. Chang RS, Chen TB, Bock MG, et al. Characterization of the binding of [3H]L-365,260: a new potent and selective brain cholecystokinin (CCK-B) and gastrin receptor antagonist radioligand. Mol Pharmacol 1989;35:803.
110. Iversen LL, Dourish CT, Iversen SD. Cholecystokinin receptors: synthetic antagonists with selectivity for receptor subtypes and possible clinical applications. Biochem Soc Trans 1991;19:913.
111. Soll A. The interaction of histamine with gastrin and carbamylcholine on oxygen uptake by isolated mammal parietal cells. J Clin Invest 1978;61:381.
112. Soll AH, Amirian DA, Thomas LP, et al. Gastrin receptors on isolated canine parietal cells. J Clin Invest 1984;73:1434.
113. Willems G, Vansteenkiste Y, Limbosch JM. Stimulating effect of gastrin on cell proliferation kinetics in canine fundic mucosa. Gastroenterology 1972;62:583.

82

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

114. Ryberg B, Tielemans Y, Axelson JEA. Gastrin stimulates the self replication rate of the enterochromaffin-like cells in the rat stomach. Effects of omeprazole, ranitidine, and gastrin-17 in intact and antrectomized rats. Gastroenterology 1990;90:935.
115. Nagata A, Ito M, Iwata N, et al. G protein-coupled cholecystokininB/gastrin receptors are responsible for physiological cell growth of the stomach mucosa in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:11825.
116. Dickinson CJ. Relationship of gastrin processing to colon cancer. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1384.
117. Wang TC, Koh TJ, Varro A, et al. Processing and proliferative effects of human progastrin in transgenic mice. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1918.
118. Dockray GJ. Gastrin, growth, and colon neoplasia. Gut 2000; 47:747.
119. Eysselein VE, Reeve JR Jr, Shively JE, et al. Partial structure of a large canine cholecystokinin (CCK58): amino acid sequence. Peptides 1982;3:687.
120. Cuber JC, Bernard C, Gibard T, Chayvialle JA. Pharmacokinetics and organ catabolism of cholecystokinin octapeptide in pigs. Regul Pept 1989;26:203.
121. Gores GJ, Miller LJ, LaRusso NF. Hepatic processing of cholecystokinin peptides. II. Cellular metabolism, transport, and biliary excretion. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G350.
122. Buchan AM, Polak JM, Solcia E, et al. Electron immunohistochemical evidence for the human intestinal I cell as the source of CCK. Gut 1978;19:403.
123. Liddle R, Goldfine I, Williams J. Bioassay of plasma cholecystokinin in rats: effects of food, trypsin inhibitor, and alcohol. Gastroenterology 1984;7:542.
124. Rehfeld JF. How to measure cholecystokinin in tissue, plasma and cerebrospinal fluid. Regul Pept 1998;78:31.
125. Liddle RA, Goldfine ID, Rosen MS, et al. Cholecystokinin bioactivity in human plasma. Molecular forms, responses to feeding, and relationship to gallbladder contraction. J Clin Invest 1985;75:1144.
126. Folsch UR, Cantor P, Wilms HM, et al. Role of cholecystokinin in the negative feedback control of pancreatic enzyme secretion in conscious rats. Gastroenterology 1987;92:449.
127. Miyasaka K, Guan DF, Liddle RA, Green GM. Feedback regulation by trypsin: evidence for intraluminal CCK-releasing peptide. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G175.
128. Lu L, Louie D, Owyang C. A cholecystokinin releasing peptide mediates feedback regulation of pancreatic secretion. Am J Physiol 1989;256:G430.
129. Koop I, Koop H, Gerhardt C, et al. Do bile acids exert a negative feedback control of cholecystokinin release. Scand J Gastroenterol 1989;24:315.
130. Herzig KH, Schon I, Tatemoto K, et al. Diazepam binding inhibitor is a potent cholecystokinin-releasing peptide in the intestine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:7927.
131. Spannagel AW, Green GM, Guan DF, et al. Purification and characterization of a luminal cholecystokinin-releasing factor from rat intestinal secretion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:4415.
132. Kopin AS, Lee YM, McBride EW, et al. Expression cloning and characterization of the canine parietal cell gastrin receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:3605.
133. Dawson ES, Henne RM, Miller LJ, Lybrand TP. Molecular models for cholecystokinin-A receptor. Pharmacol Toxicol 2002;91:290.
134. Evans BE, Bock MG, Rittle KE, et al. Design of potent, orally effective, nonpeptidal antagonists of the peptide hormone cholecystokinin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986;83:4918.
135. Liddle RA. Cholecystokinin. In: Walsh JH, Dockray GJ (eds). Gut Peptides: Biochemistry and Physiology. New York: Raven Press, 1994:175.
136. Stanley S, Wynne K, Bloom S, et al. Gastrointestinal satiety signals. III. Glucagon-like peptide 1, oxyntomodulin, peptide YY, and pancreatic polypeptide. Am J Physiol 2004;286:G693.
137. Berglund MM, Hipskind PA, Gehlert DR, et al. Recent developments in our understanding of the physiological role of PP-fold peptide receptor subtypes. Exper Biol Med 2003;228:217.

138. Glover JD, Barlow DJ, Pitts JE, et al. Conformational studies on the pancreatic polypeptide hormone family. Eur J Biochem 1985; 142:379.
139. Blundell TJ, Pitts JE, Tickle IJ, et al. X-ray analysis (1.4 A resolution) of avian pancreatic polypeptide: small globular protein hormone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981;78:4175.
140. Pheng LH, Regoli D. Receptors for NPY in peripheral tissues bioassays. Life Sci 2000;67:847.
141. Fuhlendorff J, Gehter U, Aakerlund L, et al. [Leu31, Pro34]Neuropeptide Y: a specific Y1 receptor agonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990;87:182.
142. Tatemoto K, Nakano I, Makk G, et al. Isolation and primary structure of human peptide YY. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988;157:713.
143. Taylor IL. Distribution and release of peptide YY in dog meal measured by specific radioimmunoassay. Gastroenterology 1985; 77:721.
144. Adrian TE, Ferri GL, Bacarese-Hamilton AJ, et al. Human distribution and release of putative new gut hormone, PYY. Gastroenterology 1985;98:1070.
145. Pappas TN, Debas HT, Chang AM, Taylor IL. Peptide YY release by fatty acids is sufficient to inhibit gastric emptying in dogs. Gastroenterology 1986;91:1386.
146. Pappas TN, Debas HT, Taylor IL. Peptide YY: metabolism and effect on pancreatic secretion in dogs. Gastroenterology 1985;89:1387.
147. Tatemoto K. Neuropeptide Y: complete amino acid sequence of the brain peptide. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982;79:5485.
148. Tatemoto K, Siimesmaa S, Jürnvall H, et al. Isolation and characterization of neuropeptide Y from porcine intestine. FEBS Lett 1985;179:181.
149. Furness JB, Costa M, Emson PC, et al. Distribution, pathways and reactions to drug treatment of nerves with neuropeptide Y- and pancreatic polypeptide-like immunoreactivity in the guinea-pig digestive tract. Cell Tiss Res 1983;234:71.
150. Koch TR, Roddy DR, Carney JA, et al. Distribution, quantitation, and origin of immunoreactive neuropeptide Y in the human gastrointestinal tract. Regul Pept 1988;21:309.
151. Crowley WR, Shah GV, Carroll BL, et al. Neuropeptide-Y enhances luteinizing hormone (LH)-releasing hormone-induced LH release and elevations in cytosolic Ca2+ in rat anterior pituitary cells: evidence for involvement of extracellular Ca2+ influx through voltagesensitive channels. Endocrinology 1990;127:1487.
152. Lundberg JM, Torssell L, Sollevi A, et al. Neuropeptide Y and sympathetic vascular control in man. Regul Pept 1985;13:41.
153. Berglund MM, Hipskind PA, Gehlert DR, et al. Recent developments in our understanding of the physiological role of PP-fold peptide receptor subtypes. Exper Biol Med 2003;228:217.
154. Palma C, Palma C. Tachykinins and their receptors in human malignancies. Cur Drug Targets 2006;7:1043.
155. Improta G, Broccardo M, Improta G, Broccardo M. Tachykinins: role in human gastrointestinal tract physiology and pathology. Cur Drug Targets 2006;7:1021.
156. Satake H, Kawada T, Satake H, Kawada T. Overview of the primary structure, tissue-distribution, and functions of tachykinins and their receptors. Cur Drug Targets 2006;7:963.
157. Esteban F, Munoz M, Gonzalez-Moles MA, et al. A role for substance P in cancer promotion and progression: a mechanism to counteract intracellular death signals following oncogene activation or DNA damage. Canc Metast Rev 2006;25:137.
158. Chang MM, Leeman SE, Niall HD. Amino-acid sequence of substance P. Nature 1971;232:86.
159. Esparmer V. Discovery, isolation and characterization of bombesinlike peptides. Ann NY Acad Sci 1988;547:3.
160. Lebacq-Verheyden AM, Trepel J, Sausville EA, Battey JF. Bombesin and gastrin-releasing peptide: neuropeptides, secretagogues, and growth factors. In: Sporn MB, Roberts AB (eds). Peptide Growth Factors and their Receptors. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1991: 71.

83

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

161. Jian X, Sainz E, Clark WA, et al. The bombesin receptor subtypes have distinct G protein specificities. J Biol Chem 1999;274:11573.
162. Katsuno T, Pradhan TK, Ryan RR, et al. Pharmacology and cell biology of the bombesin receptor subtype 4 (BB4-R). Biochemistry 1999;38:7307.
163. Goodman RH, Jacobs JW, Chin WW, et al. Nucleotide sequence of a cloned structural gene coding for a precursor of pancreatic somatostatin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980;77:5869.
164. van der Lely AJ, Kopchick JJ, van der Lely AJ, Kopchick JJ. Growth hormone receptor antagonists. Neuroendocrinology 2006;83:264.
165. Sgouros SN, Bergele C, Viazis N, et al. Somatostatin and its analogues in peptic ulcer bleeding: facts and pathophysiological aspects. Digest Liver Dis 2006;38:143.
166. de Herder WW, Kwekkeboom DJ, Valkema R, et al. Neuroendocrine tumors and somatostatin: imaging techniques. J Endocrinol Invest 2005;28:132.
167. Trent DF, Weir GC. Heterogeneity of somatostatin-like peptides in rat brain, pancreas, and gastrointestinal tract. Endocrinology 1981;108:2033.
168. Vinik AI, Gaginella TS, O'Dorisio TM, et al. The distribution and characterization of somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in epithelial cells, submucosa, and muscle of the rat stomach and intestine. Endocrinology 1981;109:1921.
169. Yamada Y, Post SR, Wang K, et al. Cloning and functional characterization of a family of human and mouse somatostatin receptors expressed in brain, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:251.
170. Reisine T. Somatostatin receptors. Am J Physiol 1995;269:G813. 171. Benali N, Ferjoux G, Puente E, et al. Somatostatin receptors.
Digestion 2000;62(Suppl1):27. 172. Ruskone A, Rene E, Chayvialle JA, et al. Effect of somatostatin on
diarrhea and on small intestinal water and electrolyte transport in a patient with pancreatic cholera. Dig Dis Sci 1982;27:459. 173. Peeters TL. Erythromycin and other macrolides as prokinetic agents. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1886. 174. Peeters TL, Depoortere I. Motilin receptor: a model for development of prokinetics. Dig Dis Sci 1994;39:76S. 175. Matsuura B, Dong M, Coulie B, et al. Demonstration of a specific site of covalent labeling of the human motilin receptor using a biologically active photolabile motilin analog. J Pharm Exper Therap 2005;313:1101. 176. Matsuura B, Dong M, Naik S, et al. Differential contributions of motilin receptor extracellular domains for peptide and nonpeptidyl agonist binding and activity. J Biol Chem 2006;281:12390. 177. Kojima M, Hosoda H, Date Y, et al. Ghrelin is a growth-hormonereleasing acylated peptide from stomach. Nature 1999;402:656. 178. Poitras P, Miller P, Dickner M, et al. Heterogeneity of motilin receptors in the gastrointestinal tract of the rabbit. Peptides 1996;17:701. 179. Hollenberg MD, Saifeddine M, Al-Ani B. Proteinase-activated receptor-2 in rat aorta: structural requirements for agonist activity of receptor-activating peptides. Mol Pharmacol 1996;49:229. 180. Hollenberg MD. Protease-mediated signalling: new paradigms for cell regulation and drug development. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1996;17:3. 181. Schmidt VA, Vitale E, Bahou WF. Genomic cloning and characterization of the human thrombin receptor gene. Structural similarity to the proteinase activated receptor-2 gene. J Biol Chem 1996;271:9307. 182. Nystedt S, Emilsson K, Larsson AK, et al. Molecular cloning and functional expression of the gene encoding the human proteinaseactivated receptor 2. Eur J Biochem 1995;232:84. 183. DeFea K, Schmidlin F, Dery O, et al. Mechanisms of initiation and termination of signalling by neuropeptide receptors: a comparison with the proteinase-activated receptors. Biochem Soc Trans 2000;28:419. 184. Tettamanti G, Malagoli D, Benelli R, et al. Growth factors and chemokines: a comparative functional approach between invertebrates and vertebrates. Cur Med Chem 2006;13:2737.

185. Giles R, Loberg RD, Giles R, Loberg RD. Can we target the chemokine network for cancer therapeutics? Cur Canc Drug Targets 2006;6:659.
186. Viola A, Contento RL, Molon B, et al. T cells and their partners: the chemokine dating agency. Trends Immunol 2006;27:421.
187. Murphy PM, Baggiolini M, Charo IF, et al. International union of pharmacology. XXII. Nomenclature for chemokine receptors. Pharmacol Rev 2000;52:145.
188. Ishihara T, Nakamura S, Kaziro Y, et al. Molecular cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding the secretin receptor. EMBO J 1991;10:1635.
189. Ishihara T, Shigemoto R, Mori K, et al. Functional expression and tissue distribution of a novel receptor for vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. Neuron 1992;8:811.
190. Usdin TB, Mezey É, Button DC, et al. Gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor, a member of the secretin-vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor family, is widely distributed in peripheral organs and the brain. Endocrinology 1993;133:2861.
191. Juppner H, Abou-Samra A, Freeman M, et al. A G protein-linked receptor for parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormonerelated peptide. Science 1991;254:1024.
192. Ulrich CD, Holtmann M, Miller LJ. Secretin and vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors: members of a unique family of G proteincoupled receptors. Gastroenterology 1998;114:382.
193. Dong M, Miller LJ, Dong M, Miller LJ. Molecular pharmacology of the secretin receptor. Recept Chan 2002;8:189.
194. Carlquist M, Jornvall H, Forssmann WG, et al. Human secretin is not identical to the porcine/bovine hormone. IRCS Med Sci 1985;13:217.
195. Lisenbee CS, Dong M, Miller LJ. Paired cysteine mutagenesis to establish the pattern of disulfide bonds in the functional intact secretin receptor. J Biol Chem 2005;280:12330.
196. Dohlman HG, Caron MG, Deblasi A, et al. Role of extracellular disulfide-bonded cysteines in the ligand binding function of the beta 2-adrenergic receptor. Biochemistry 1990;29:2335.
197. Dong M, Pinon DI, Asmann YW, et al. Possible endogenous agonist mechanism for the activation of secretin family G protein-coupled receptors. Mol Pharmacol 2006;70:206.
198. Holtmann MH, Roettger BF, Pinon DI, Miller LJ. Role of receptor phosphorylation in desensitization and internalization of the secretin receptor. J Biol Chem 1996;271:23566.
199. Mutt V, Said SI. Structure of the porcine vasoactive intestinal octacosa peptide. Eur J Biochem 1974;42:581.
200. Bloom SR. Vasoactive intestinal peptide, the major mediator of WDHA (pancreatic cholera) syndrome: value of measurement in diagnosis and treatment. Am J Dig Dis 1978;23:373.
201. Usdin TB, Bonner TI, Mezey É. Two receptors for vasoactive intestinal polypeptide with similar specificity and complementary distributions. Endocrinology 1994;135:2662.
202. Pisegna JR, Wank SA. Molecular cloning and functional expression of the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide type I receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:6345.
203. Vilardaga J-P, De Neef P, Di Paolo E, et al. Properties of chimeric secretin and VIP receptor proteins indicate the importance of the N-terminal domain for ligand discrimination. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995;211:885.
204. Miyata A, Arimura A, Dahl RR. Isolation of a novel 38-residue hypothalamic polypeptide which stimulates adenylate cyclase in pituitary cells. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 1989;164:567.
205. Jürnvall H, Carlquist M, Kwauk S, et al. Amino acid sequence and heterogeneity of gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP). FEBS Lett 1981;123:205.
206. Moody AJ, Thim L, Valverde I. The isolation and sequencing of human gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP). FEBS Lett 1984; 172:142.
207. Kimmel J, Hayden LJ, Pollock HG. Isolation and characterization of a new pancreatic polypeptide hormone. J Biol Chem 1975; 250:9369.

84

Gastrointestinal hormones and receptors CHAPTER 4

208. Lutz MP, Sutor SL, Abraham RT, Miller LJ. A role for cholecystokinin-stimulated protein tyrosine phosphorylation in regulated secretion by the pancreatic acinar cell. J Biol Chem 1993;268: 11119.
209. Macara IG, Lounsbury KM, Richards SA, et al. The Ras superfamily of GTPases. FASEB J 1996;10:625.
210. Darnell JE, Kerr IM, Stark GR. Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signalling proteins. Science 1994;264:1415.
211. Kato T, Nishio K, Kato T, Nishio K. Clinical aspects of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors: benefit and risk. Respirology 2006;11:693.
212. Michelsen KS, Arditi M, Michelsen KS, Arditi M. Toll-like receptors and innate immunity in gut homeostasis and pathology. Cur Opin Hematol 2007;14:48.
213. Chey WD, Chey WY. Evaluation of secretion and absorptive functions of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Yamada T et al. (eds).

Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003. 214. DiMagno EP, Go VL. The clinical application of exocrine pancreatic function tests. Dis Month 1976;22:3. 215. Miller RE, Chernish SM, Rosenak BD, Rodda BE. Hypotonic duodenography with glucagon. Radiology 1973;108:35. 216. Santangelo WC, O'Dorisio TM, Kim JG, et al. Pancreatic cholera syndrome: effect of a synthetic somatostatin analogue on intestinal water and ion transport. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:363. 217. Christopoulos A. Allosteric binding sites on cell-surface receptors: novel targets for drug discovery. Nature Rev Drug Discov 2002; 1:198. 218. Solcia E, Capella C, Buffa R, et al. Endocrine cells of the digestive system. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:112. 219. Beinborn M. Class B GPCRs: a hidden agonist within? Mol Pharmacol 2006;70:1.

85

A COMPONENTS
5 The brain­gut axis
Graham J. Dockray

Developmental biology of the brain­gut axis, 86 Methods for studying the brain­gut axis, 88 Brain­gut connections, 89 Signaling from gut to brain, 91 Efferent functions of peptidergic visceral afferent neurons, 94

Central nervous system control of the gut, 94 Vagovagal reflex mechanisms, 95 Gastrointestinal signals influencing satiety and appetite, 96 Overview, 99

The gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system (CNS) engage each other in two-way communication. The CNS is informed of the state of the gastrointestinal tract by afferent neurons, and is able to control or modulate digestive function through efferent neurons that are part of the autonomic nervous system (Fig. 5.1a). Afferent neurons signal information to the CNS about the chemical environment of the gut lumen, tension in the gut wall, and the condition of tissues (e.g., inflammation) (Fig. 5.1b). Efferent neurons determine gastrointestinal responses during the cephalic phase of digestion. They also mediate gastrointestinal responses after reflex stimulation of afferent pathways, activation of somatosensory inputs, and stimulation by higher centers, including, for example, changes in emotional state.
The major pathways for communication between the brain and gut are the vagal, splanchnic, and sacral nerve trunks; all three contain both afferent and efferent nerve fibers. It has been recognized since the early 20th century that afferent signals associated with the physiological regulation of digestion are typically conveyed by the vagal pathway and painful sensations are conveyed by the splanchnic pathway [1]. Mechanisms that modulate afferent signals have been identified at various levels, including at the peripheral end of afferent fibers and within the CNS, and are a feature in a number of gastrointestinal diseases [2].
Vagal efferent neurons provide the major parasympathetic route regulating gut function during digestion. Splanchnic efferent neurons constitute the sympathetic outflow to the gut and are activated in stress and adaptation to potentially noxious challenges. The neurons of the enteric ganglia are a major target for both types of efferent pathway (Fig. 5.1c).
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

The motor neurons in these ganglia supply smooth muscle, glandular cells, and blood vessels. The enteric ganglia also function as centers for integration; they communicate with each other and they receive inputs from intrinsic afferent neurons and from endocrine cells. Ganglion cells act, then, both to modulate and to mediate efferent signals from the CNS. Not surprisingly, the relative importance of information exchange between the alimentary tract and the CNS varies between different functions and between different regions of the gut.
Developmental biology of the brain­gut axis
The pathway taken by the vagus nerve marks the route by which cells of the neural crest migrate to the gut during development. The molecular mechanisms that determine this migration are of interest because they provide a basis for understanding the developmental biology not only of the brain­gut axis but also of the entire intrinsic nervous system of the gastrointestinal tract. Thus, cells of the vagal neural crest migrate the length of the gut to supply most of the intrinsic innervation, although a small number of cells from the truncal and sacral neural crests also contribute to the colonization of the stomach and distal colon respectively. Neural crest cells give rise to multiple cell lineages, including neurons, neuroglia, and melanocytes, but not to epithelial enteroendocrine cells as previously thought [3]. The consequences of impaired migration or maturation of neural crest cells are illustrated by Hirschsprung disease, in which a failure of neuronal precursors to colonize the distal part of the colon leads to an aganglionic segment associated with tonic smooth muscle contraction and a dilated proximal segment. Mutations in several genes that regulate neural crest cell survival, migration, and maturation have been identified in

86

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

CNS

Vagal CNS
pathway

Vagal pathway

Splanchnic pathway

Gut (a)

Lumenal chemicals Muscle tension
Enteroendocrine cells Mast cells Cytokines

Figure 5.1 Relationships between the brain and the gut. (a) The gastrointestinal tract from the mouth to the midcolon is supplied with efferent and afferent nerve fibers running in the vagal and splanchnic trunks. (b) Afferent neurons discharge in response to lumenal chemicals, mechanical deformation of their terminal fields, humoral factors, cytokines, and other inflammatory mediators; endocrine cells, mast cells, and cells of the immune system may be influenced by lumenal chemicals. (c) Efferent neurons in both splanchnic and vagal nerve trunks terminate on myenteric nerve cell bodies from which intrinsic motor neurons influence secretion and motility; sympathetic efferents may also directly supply blood vessels. The response of the enteric motor neurons is also regulated by humoral factors and by other enteric neurons. CNS, central nervous system.

CNS

Vagal pathway

Splanchnic pathway

Enteric motor neurons

Prevertebral ganglia Humoral factors
Intrinsic afferent and interneurons

Secretion Motility
(c) Blood flow

Splanchnic pathway
Prevertebral ganglia
(b)

those with Hirschsprung disease and in mutant mice with an aganglionic colon.
The c-ret gene, which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, is expressed relatively early by neural crest cells [4] and is thought to be required for the proliferation and survival of enteric neural precursor cells. Loss-of-function mutations of the c-ret gene occur in some cases of Hirschsprung disease [5,6]. Interestingly, other mutations of this gene are associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type II. In mice, deletion of the genes encoding either c-Ret or glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF; which stimulates signaling through c-Ret) leads to a failure in the development of the kidney and of neurons throughout the intestine [7­10]. A second system known to be required for the maturation of neural crest derivatives involves endothelin 3 (ET3) and its G

protein-linked receptor, the endothelin B (ETB) receptor. In some patients with Hirschsprung disease, a missense mutation in the gene encoding the ETB receptor is associated with impaired calcium signaling on stimulation. Similarly, targeted disruption of the ETB receptor or mutation of the ET3 gene in mice leads to impaired development of the enteric nervous system and an aganglionic distal colon [11]. It is thought that the ET3/ETB system functions after the cRet/GDNF system [12,13] and acts to delay neuronal differentiation so that loss of function leads to a failure in the migration of neuronal precursors as a result of premature differentiation. These are not the only control systems determining the maturation of different populations of intrinsic gut neurons. Others include the homeobox gene Phox2b, which is required for expression of c-Ret and of a second

87

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

transcription factor, Mash-1, which regulates the expression of a catecholaminergic phenotype in neural crest-derived cells [14,15].
Methods for studying the brain­gut axis
Present knowledge of the organization and function of the brain­gut axis was acquired using a variety of experimental techniques. These methods can be loosely grouped into four categories: 1 Methods directed at the study of organ function. Methods that measure changes in secretion or motility in the gut after sham feeding, electrical stimulation of nerve trunks, or loss of function after nerve section (e.g., vagotomy) have often provided the first evidence for functional pathways linking the brain and the gut. Similar experiments can often be performed in humans and animals (e.g., barostat measurements of gastric motility). Taken in isolation, however, the results of such studies seldom allow the precise definition of brain­gut interactions because the relative importance of endocrine mediators and nervous reflexes that are extrinsic or intrinsic to the gut is difficult to evaluate in the intact organism. This type of approach can be coupled with the use of drugs to block or activate particular neurotransmitters or types of neurons, but, again, interpretation of the data may be impeded by the fact that the same neurochemical mechanisms operate at multiple sites in the gut and the CNS. 2 Morphological methods that define the cellular basis of the brain­gut axis. The nerve pathways linking the brain and the gut can be defined with precision by using tracers that are taken up by nerve cells and transported along axons, for example, fluorescent compounds such as True Blue, and pseudorabies virus, which is transported across synapses and so reveals chains of neurons in a pathway. In addition, the expression of immediate-early gene proteins (e.g., c-Fos) has been widely used to identify neuronal responses to stimulation, although this technique does not reveal neurons that are inhibited by a particular stimulus. These methods can be coupled with surgical or chemical lesioning of neurons, and with immunocytochemistry for neurochemical characterization of a labeled neuron. Together, such methods provide quantitative information on the organization and neurochemistry of both afferent and efferent pathways, and on CNS pathways. This type of approach is, however, better suited to studies of experimental animals than of humans. 3 Single-unit electrophysiological recording. The physiological properties of single afferent and efferent nerve fibers, or of CNS neurons, can be studied by electrophysiological recording of their discharge in response to gastrointestinal stimulation. The data obtained allow rigorous analysis of the patterns of signaling and can provide a formal framework for the description of reflex pathways identified in whole-organism studies or by morphological methods. Again, however,

these methods are more readily applied to animal than human studies. 4 Methods appropriate for the study of the human brain­gut axis. A number of methods that have proved to be of particular value in human studies are listed. Each has disadvantages, but the combined use of two or more offers obvious advantages.
i Evoked potentials. Before the advent of modern imaging techniques, the activation of human CNS neurons after stimulation (e.g., balloon distention, electrical stimulation) was studied by observing the evoked potentials detected by scalp electrodes [16]. This method is useful for measuring cortical neuronal responses (cortical-evoked potentials) that are relatively superficial in the brain, but it is not useful for studies of the activity of deeper neurons. The temporal resolution is good (i.e., milliseconds) but the spatial resolution is only 1­2 cm. ii Magnetoencephalography (MEG). This technique is based on the use of magnetic sensors near the scalp that detect changes in the magnetic field as a consequence of neuronal activity in the underlying part of the brain. The spatial resolution can be 2­5 mm, and images can be obtained in milliseconds. Like cortical-evoked potentials, however, MEG can be difficult to use for recording from subcortical regions. iii Positron emission tomography (PET). This technique provides a view of neuronal activity as reflected by changes in blood flow. However, the time lag between changes in neuronal function and blood flow to the relevant region may mean that it is difficult to detect rapid responses. PET allows the identification of brain regions with a resolution of 2­8 mm, but the temporal resolution is relatively poor (i.e., 40 s). Repeated studies on individuals are difficult because of the risk associated with isotopic exposure, and the cost is relatively high. iv Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). This imaging technique also detects changes in neuronal activity as reflected by blood flow. The spatial resolution is 2­8 mm. Temporal clustering analysis of fMRI data has shown that it is possible to resolve feeding-related changes in hypothalamic function [17]. fMRI is cheaper than PET, and repeated measurements are harmless. v Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Unlike the other techniques mentioned, this approach does not depend on the detection of neuronal responses; rather, it facilitates selective activation of specific CNS regions. This is not a new technique but it was only introduced to gastroenterology in the mid 1990s. It can be used repeatedly in humans, and it is useful for the activation of cortical motor regions when coupled with the recording of gut function (e.g., electromyography) [18]. vi Reporting visceral sensations. Subjects report sensations after stimulation (mechanical, chemical, electrical) of the gut by using visual analogue scales or by selecting adjectival

88

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

descriptors of sensation. This approach is widely used and often valuable when combined with other techniques (e.g., fMRI) [19].
Brain­gut connections
Afferent neurons The vagus nerve consists predominantly of afferent nerve fibers. In the rat, between 75% and 90% of vagal fibers are thought to be afferent [20]. Almost all of these fibers are unmyelinated or only lightly myelinated and consequently their conduction velocities are relatively low (0.5­5 m/s). The cell bodies of vagal afferent nerve fibers are located in the nodose ganglia, and their central terminals are found in the nucleus of solitary tract (NST). The cell bodies of splanchnic and sacral afferent fibers are found in the dorsal root ganglia, and their central terminals are in the spinal cord [21].
Different populations of afferent fibers respond to stimuli arising in the mucosa, muscle layers, and serosa. The stimulus in the lumen may be mechanical, thermal, or chemical. In addition, afferent neurons express receptors for various hormones, neurotransmitters, and immunomodulators (see Fig. 5.1b). It is convenient to use the term afferent to describe the direction in which information is passed relative to the CNS. However, many visceral afferent neurons (particularly splanchnic ones) synthesize neuropeptides that are transported to terminals both in the CNS and in the periphery, where they are released on nerve stimulation, giving rise to motor (or efferent) functions through an axon reflex [22].
Some intrinsic gastrointestinal neurons project to the prevertebral ganglia (see Fig. 5.1c). These neurons are therefore distinct from vagal, splanchnic, and sacral afferents, but they function as the afferent arm in some reflexes operating through the sympathetic ganglia. Electrophysiological recording of the discharge of nerve fibers running in the mesenteric nerve bundles detects both extrinsic afferent and intrinsic afferent nerve fibers, and care is required to distinguish between them.
Organization The vagal afferent supply of the upper gastrointestinal tract is conveyed by the gastric branches of the vagus nerve. More distal regions are innervated by vagal fibers that pass through the celiac­superior mesenteric ganglia and travel with the mesenteric nerve bundles running along blood vessels. There is a loose viscerotopic representation of vagal afferent terminals within the NST [23]. Tracing experiments suggest that, within the bowel wall, vagal afferent nerve fibers run in the myenteric plexus, where they form characteristic intraganglionic laminar endings that function as slowly adapting tension receptors [24]. The innervation of the mucosa is variable. In the intestine, some villi appear to lack an afferent innervation, whereas others exhibit vagal afferent fibers in

the lamina propria; afferent fibers do not appear to penetrate the epithelium [25,26].
Splanchnic afferent nerve fibers enter the spinal cord through the dorsal roots and pass to the gut along blood vessels. They traverse the prevertebral ganglia, where they may supply collateral fibers innervating the ganglion cells, suggesting direct modulatory actions on sympathetic postganglionic discharge (see Fig. 5.1b). In the spinal cord there are fewer terminals of splanchnic afferent neurons than of somatic afferent neurons. Splanchnic afferents terminate mainly in lamina I of the dorsal horn, although some project to lamina V [27]. The spinal cord neurons that respond to visceral afferent stimulation may also have inputs from somatic afferent nerve fibers. The peripheral terminals of splanchnic afferent nerve fibers can be identified within the gastrointestinal tract with the use of peptide markers such as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), which is found in fibers in the myenteric plexus, in smooth muscle, around submucosal blood vessels, and in the mucosa [28].
Neurochemistry: transmitters The major transmitter of visceral afferent neurons is thought to be glutamate. In addition, afferent neurons produce many different neuropeptide transmitters that exhibit characteristic distributions in different neuronal populations. About 80% of the spinal afferent neurons serving the rat stomach contain CGRP immunoreactivity, and about 50% contain substance P immunoreactivity [28]. In contrast, fewer than 10% of the vagal afferent neurons projecting to the gut contain these peptides; however, vagal afferent neurons expressing cholecystokinin type 1 (CCK1) receptors (see Neurochemistry: receptors), which are known to project to the stomach, express the satiety peptide CART (cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript) [29]. The proportion of the spinal afferent neurons associated with substance P or CGRP immunoreactivity is considerably higher in the gastrointestinal tract than in skin or joints. Almost no primary afferent neurons containing somatostatin project to the stomach, although dorsal root ganglia neurons containing somatostatin project to the skin and joints. Low doses of the sensory neurotoxin capsaicin selectively stimulate C-type fibers, whereas high doses selectively destroy C-type fibers, particularly in neonatal animals [30]. Capsaicin-induced lesioning of afferent neurons produces a decrease in the expression of CGRP and substance P and a loss of immunoreactive nerve fibers in the gut [28,31]. Surgical section of afferent nerve trunks also leads to the decreased expression of CGRP and substance P in primary afferent neurons.
Neurochemistry: receptors Vagal afferent neurons express a variety of receptors for neurotransmitters and hormones [32,33]. One of the best studied is the CCK1 (also called CCK-A) receptor [34,35]. CCK1 receptor cDNA has been cloned from rat and human

89

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

nodose ganglia, and the mRNA has been localized by in situ hybridization to nodose ganglion cell bodies [35]. After ligation of the vagal nerve trunk, CCK1 receptors accumulate on the central side of the ligature, indicating transport toward the gut [34,35]. Vagal afferent neurons expressing CCK1 receptors also express the functional or long form of the leptin receptor, Ob-R [36], cannabinoid CB-1 receptors [37], orexin Ox-R1 receptors [38], galanin receptors [39], melaninconcentrating hormone (MCH)-1 receptors [40], and neuropeptide Y (NPY) Y-2 receptors [41,42]. In addition, vagal afferent neurons express metabotropic glutamate [43], GABA-B [44], and 5-HT3 receptors [45]. Spinal afferent neurons express a different set of receptors; those involved in sensitization in response to inflammation are likely to be particularly important and include the bradykinin B2 receptor, purinergic P2X receptors, adenosine A1 and A2 receptors, and protease-activated receptors PAR1 and PAR2 [32].
Efferent neurons Organization The cell bodies of parasympathetic preganglionic nerve fibers that run in the vagus nerve are found in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. There is a viscerotopic representation of neurons within the dorsal motor nucleus, and columns of cells corresponding approximately to the branches of the vagal nerve can be identified [46]. The peripheral terminals of vagal efferent fibers have been mapped with the use of tracers such as DiI and PHA-L [25,47]. Different tracers elicit quantitatively different results, but several conclusions emerge from the available data. Vagal efferent fibers can be shown to supply the gastrointestinal tract as far as the descending colon, but there is a proximal­distal gradient in the relative abundance of these fibers. In the stomach, where the vagal innervation is most dense, virtually all gastric myenteric ganglia are contacted by vagal efferent nerve fibers, but there is little or no supply to the submucosa or mucosa [25,47] (see Fig. 5.1c). A single vagal efferent fiber may contact many myenteric ganglia. The contacts between preganglionic fibers and ganglion cells exhibit considerable variation; some are clear synaptic-like associations, whereas others are less well defined.
The nerve cell bodies of postganglionic sympathetic neurons to the gut are in the prevertebral ganglia, and the preganglionic cell bodies are in the intermediolateral column of the spinal cord. Most of the upper gut receives its innervation from the celiac­superior mesenteric ganglia, and the lower gut from the inferior mesenteric ganglion. Enteric ganglion cells are a major target, but so too are submucosal blood vessels (see Fig. 5.1c).
Neurochemistry The predominant phenotype of vagal efferent neurons is cholinergic, although the cell bodies of up to 30% of the neurons of the dorsal motor nucleus projecting to the stomach

also appear to express tyrosine hydroxylase and may have a dopaminergic phenotype [48]. A population of the motor neurons of the nucleus ambiguus that project to the esophagus contains CGRP immunoreactivity [49]. It has been recognized for several generations that the main synaptic contact between vagal efferent fibers and cells of the myenteric plexus is cholinergic nicotinic; combined anterograde tracing and immunohistochemistry suggest that gastric myenteric ganglion cells with a vagal input contain 5-HT and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) immunoreactivity [47].
The adrenergic phenotype of sympathetic neurons to the gut is well recognized. Many of these neurons also express characteristic neuropeptides depending on their gastrointestinal targets. Thus, neurons of the celiac ganglia that project to submucosal blood vessels in the gut often contain NPY, and those that go to the submucosal plexus contain somatostatin [50].
Central nervous system regions and the digestive tract Ascending central nervous system pathways stimulated from the gut Important early studies of the CNS regions responding to gut stimulation were based on recordings of cortical-evoked potentials [51]. Subsequently, many groups have made recordings of the activity of identified CNS neurons responding to gastrointestinal stimuli or humoral mediators [52,53]. Insight into the organization of CNS regions associated with digestive function has been obtained more recently by means of tracing techniques, the induction of immediate-early gene expression (e.g., c-fos), and, in the case of the human brain, the application of PET and fMRI [16].
Major CNS projections from the vagal complex identified by anterograde labeling include those to the paraventricular nucleus, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the central nucleus of the amygdala, as well as those to the parabrachial nuclei and the subthalamus [25]. Many of the same regions are identified by the induction of c-Fos protein in response to nutrients and to the peripheral administration of regulatory peptides [54,55].
Noxious stimulation of spinal afferent neurons increases c-Fos expression in spinal cord neurons [56,57]. Noxious stimulation of the gastric mucosa with HCl and formalin does not increase the spinal cord expression of c-Fos detected by in situ hybridization, but serosal application of formalin produces a significant increase [58]. Because such mucosal stimulation increases blood flow, and this response is recognized to be mediated by splanchnic afferent neurons, it seems possible that noxious stimulation of the gastric mucosa may evoke an afferent fiber response of sufficient strength to trigger a local axon reflex but inadequate to recruit spinal nociceptive circuits.
In healthy human subjects, PET and fMRI studies have identified responses in the anterior cingulate cortex in response to

90

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

painful rectal distention. Interestingly, patients with inflammatory bowel disease exhibit differential responses in this region after similar stimulation [59,60]. The anterior cingulate cortex is probably important more generally in visceral pain. Thus, nonnoxious stimulation of the human esophagus activates the central sulcus, the insular cortex, and the frontoparietal operculum [61]; noxious stimulation activates the same regions, and also the anterior cingulate cortex and an expanded region of the insular cortex (Fig. 5.2). The CNS regions that respond to visceral stimuli exhibit plasticity;

for example, there are prolonged changes in the cortical responses to short-term stimulation of the esophagus [62]. The cellular mechanisms accounting for plasticity and differential responses in disease are still largely unknown.
Central nervous system projections to the vagal complex The electrical stimulation of different CNS regions provided convincing early evidence of the role of the CNS in controlling digestive function [63]. Subsequently, retrograde tracing from the vagal complex has revealed the major monosynaptic connections. Thus, the vagal complex receives inputs from the obscure and pallidal raphe nuclei, the paraventricular nucleus, the dorsomedial and lateral areas of the hypothalamus, the central nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the insular and medial prefrontal cortexes. In humans, TMS has been used to examine the cortical control of esophageal function. The relevant area of the cerebral cortex is asymmetric; the greatest esophageal responses were evoked from the right hemisphere in 8 of 10 subjects and from the left hemisphere in the other two subjects [64]. This asymmetry may explain why the dysphagia that develops after stroke is variable in degree and duration [18].

Figure 5.2 Positron emission tomography data after esophageal stimulation in humans. Scans of cortical areas activated during definite sensation­no sensation (a), pain­no sensation (b), and pain­definite sensation (c). (a) Left and right scans show bilateral activation of the insular and primary somatosensory cortex. (b) There is greater activation of the insular and primary somatosensory cortex, and some activation of the anterior cingulate gyrus. (c) The left scan shows activation of the right anterior insular cortex, and the right shows activation of the anterior cingulate cortex. Adapted from Aziz et al. [61], with permission from Elsevier.

Signaling from gut to brain
Electrophysiological recordings of the discharge of single vagal or splanchnic afferent fibers in anesthetized animals have provided much of the foundation for modern views of visceral afferent nerve function [65,66]. Individual afferent fibers respond to mechanical deformation of their terminal regions, to the presence of chemical stimulants in the gut lumen, and to humoral agents administered into the circulation. Because visceral afferent nerve fibers may be mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, or both, classifications of afferent nerve response have been based on the distribution of terminal fields rather than on the modality of the receptor [67,68].
Mucosal, muscle, and serosal afferents The responses of vagal afferent nerve fibers to mucosal stimulation, typically in the stomach and proximal small intestine, have been reported by many groups. Less is known about splanchnic afferent responses to mucosal stimulation [69]. All of the major macronutrients (i.e., protein, fat, carbohydrate) have been reported to stimulate mucosal afferent nerve fiber discharge. There are also fibers that respond to a variety of nonnutrient chemicals, including acid, alkali, and hypertonic solutions [68,69]. Many mucosal afferent fibers are multimodal and respond to mechanical as well as chemical stimulation. Light mechanical stimulation, such as brushing or stroking of the mucosa, typically evokes a rapidly adapting response from these fibers.

91

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

The afferent fibers supplying the muscle layers of the gut typically respond to both passive stretch and active contraction, hence the name in-series tension receptor. They are characteristically slowly adapting and, if innervating the stomach and proximal small intestine, they have a single receptive field.
The serosal afferent innervation appears to be predominantly spinal in origin. These afferent fibers respond to deformation of the serosa and mesentery, particularly around the bifurcation of blood vessels, thereby conveying information about visceral tension and movement. The receptive fields of these afferent fibers are often punctate.
Mechanoreceptors: transduction Sensitivity to mechanical stimulation is a common physiological response and accounts for mechanisms involved in hearing, balance, touch, the regulation of cell volume, and muscle cell responses to stretch. A variety of different cellular mechanisms are now recognized to account for these responses. Many cells have stretch-sensitive ion channels that are gated by changes in membrane tension. The accompanying alterations in membrane potential lead to the propagation of action potentials. Although there is little direct evidence, it is plausible that this type of mechanism is responsible for the sensitivity of muscle and serosal afferent fibers.
Afferent fiber populations differ in sensitivity. For example, pelvic afferent fibers responding to distention in the physiological pressure range (< 5 mmHg) are known as lowthreshold fibers; discharge of these fibers is proportional to distending pressures up to about 30 mmHg, which is in the range likely to be perceived as noxious. A separate population of fibers (i.e., high threshold), however, discharge only in response to high pressures (> 30 mmHg), suggesting a primary function in noxious signaling [68].
Chemoreceptors Transduction and the role of enteroendocrine cells The term chemoreceptor is used to describe the capacity of afferent nerve fibers to respond to defined chemical agents. Nonlumenal (neurohumoral) as well as physical or chemical factors within the lumen may influence afferent nerve fiber discharge. In the late 1950s, Bulbring and Lin [70] proposed that enterochromaffin cells released 5-HT in response to mechanical deformation of the lumenal surface, and that 5HT then stimulated subepithelial nerve fibers to trigger the peristaltic reflex. Many other humoral stimulants of afferent fibers have since been recognized, including bradykinin and hormones such as CCK. The molecular sensing mechanisms involved in taste perception by the tongue provide a model for understanding what may happen within the gastrointestinal tract with respect to the lumenal sensing of chemicals. Thus, compounds associated with the taste of salt or acid act by gating of ion channels [71]. Compounds associated with sweet or bitter tastes are known to act in the tongue

through G protein-coupled receptors [71]. -Gustducin, the GTP-binding subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein, is a putative mediator in these cells. At the cellular and molecular levels, the transduction mechanisms may be similar in the tongue and in the gut, even though taste perception is restricted to the buccal cavity. Consistent with this idea, -gustducin immunoreactivity and G protein-coupled receptors associated with bitter taste and with the sensing of extracellular calcium and aromatic amino acids (e.g., L-tryptophan and L-phenylalanine) have been shown to be expressed by enteroendocrine cells [72,73].
Some lumenal stimuli (e.g., short-chain fatty acids) may penetrate the mucosa to act directly on afferent nerve fibers [74]. However, many other lumenal stimuli appear to activate enteroendocrine cells as previously described. The secretory products of these cells then act on afferent nerve fibers, thereby signaling from the gut to the brain (Fig. 5.3). Putative messengers that mediate enteroendocrine cell actions in this way include CCK, 5-HT, peptide YY (PYY3­36), and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). Thus, CCK is thought to mediate the effects of lumenal proteins and long-chain fatty acids in the upper small intestine, and 5-HT may mediate the effects of intestinal carbohydrate stimulation [75]. After the release of putative endocrine cell mediators, there are two general ways that they may signal to the CNS. First, they may penetrate the CNS from the circulation in regions where the blood­brain barrier is absent or leaky. Second, as already noted, primary afferent nerve fibers possess receptors for some of the products of gut endocrine cells (e.g., CCK and 5-HT), which are therefore putative mediators of endocrine­neural signaling pathways. For CCK there may be both stimulation of vagal afferent fibers that also function as gastric in-series tension receptors (i.e., as a hormone after delivery in the systemic circulation) [76] and direct action on intestinal mucosal afferent fibers in the subepithelial regions surrounding the CCK-secreting cells (i.e., in a paracrine manner) [77].
Mast cells and the extrinsic innervation of the gut There is a close relationship between mast cells and substance P-immunoreactive nerve fibers [78]. Mast cell products (i.e., histamine and 5-HT) stimulate the discharge of intestinal afferent fibers [79], and there is evidence that motor responses to mast cell discharge in vivo are mediated by 5-HT3 receptors and vagal afferent nerve fibers [80]. In ovalbumin-sensitized rats, antigen challenge increased c-Fos expression in the NST, the lateral parabrachial nucleus, and the paraventricular nucleus. These responses were inhibited by systemic administration of the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron and by perivagal capsaicin, suggesting a mechanism involving peripheral 5-HT3 receptors and vagal afferent neurons in signaling to the CNS during intestinal anaphylaxis [81]. In addition to the stimulation of afferent fibers by mast cell products, mast cell secretion is stimulated by the

92

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

Figure 5.3 Interactions between lumenal factors, mast cells, endocrine cells, and primary afferent nerve fibers. Primary afferent nerve fibers may express receptors for endocrine and mast cell secretory products, and may also respond directly to lumenal chemicals that penetrate the mucosa. The discharge of afferent fibers to the smooth muscle may be secondary to passive stretch (distention caused by a meal) or to the contraction of smooth muscle. Peptides released by endocrine cells are thought to act directly on afferent nerve fibers and after transport in the circulation. The receptors expressed by afferent neurons are synthesized in the cell body and may be transported to peripheral terminals. CNS, central nervous system; b.v., blood vessel.

Mast cell

Enteroendocrine cell
Neurotransmitters Hormones
Paracrine factors Growth factors
Cytokines Antigens

Nutrients Mechanical
pH

Apical

CNS
Primary afferent neuron

Basolateral b.v.
Peptides histamine, 5-HT

Receptors

activation of vagal efferent fibers (see Fig. 5.3). For example, the administration of a thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) analogue that strongly stimulates vagal efferent neurons elicited the release of mast cell markers into the rat intestinal lumen [82].
Inflammatory modulation of afferent function Inflammation of the gut wall is a strong stimulant of afferent nerve discharge (see Fig. 5.3) [83,84]. Many splanchnic afferent fibers appear normally to be silent; for example, up to 90% of splanchnic afferents to the distal colon are reported to be insensitive to stimulation in the physiological range. Inflammation induced experimentally by the administration of mustard oil, acetic acid, or formaldehyde, however, leads to an increased sensitivity to stimulation. Seemingly silent afferent fibers may play little or no role in the normal physiology of the gastrointestinal tract, but they are important components of the signaling pathway activated by damage or inflammation and may therefore play a role in gastrointestinal disease states. Activation is likely, in part, to be attributable to the release of cytokines such as interleukin1, which increase the sensitivity of afferent fibers to stimulation (see Fig. 5.3).
Pain and visceral hypersensitivity The noxious stimulation of splanchnic afferent nerve fibers is associated with painful sensations. However, the sensation of pain may also be evoked by normal or innocuous stimuli. Note the well-recognized observation that patients with irritable bowel syndrome often report painful sensations in response to distention of the colon at pressures that are not

perceived as painful by healthy subjects. The term allodynia is used to describe noxious sensations evoked by innocuous stimuli, and the term hyperalgesia describes exaggerated responses to noxious stimuli. The mechanisms that account for visceral hypersensitivity have generated considerable interest [19]. These mechanisms are a feature of both inflammatory and noninflammatory conditions (e.g., functional bowel disorders). Changes at any of several different levels in the brain­gut axis may be involved. Thus, in addition to the exaggerated responses of afferent neurons and the recruitment of otherwise "silent" afferent fibers (see previous section), there is also central modulation of afferent stimuli [2]. Perfusion of the lower esophagus with acid increases the sensitivity of the upper esophagus to electrical stimulation, providing direct evidence of central sensitization. Patients with noncardiac chest pain exhibit a marked decrease in their visceral pain threshold [85]. The effects of central sensitization are often relatively long lasting; for example, irritation of the colon in young rats leads to hypersensitivity in later life despite an absence of apparent pathology in the gut [86].
The term wind-up is sometimes used to describe the increased synaptic transmission at afferent nerve terminals in the spinal cord; this event is thought to involve enhanced transmission by the neurotransmitter glutamate acting at NMDA receptors. In addition, the inhibitory influences on spinal cord cells from nervous pathways that descend in the spinal cord may be altered. Finally, hyperalgesic states are associated with changes in neuronal activation at supraspinal levels, including, for example, the expansion of cortical regions associated with the response to a defined stimulus [62,84].

93

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Efferent functions of peptidergic visceral afferent neurons
After the stimulation of visceral afferent nerve fibers, the peptides produced by these neurons are released at both central and peripheral terminals. Peptides released peripherally modulate blood flow, motility, secretion, the discharge of enteric ganglion cells, and a number of functions associated with epithelial protection [22,87]. There is now good evidence that noxious agents in the lumen activate splanchnic afferent fibers, which in turn regulate protective or damagelimiting mechanisms within the mucosa, as well as signaling to the CNS (Fig. 5.4). Capsaicin, which is the active ingredient of hot peppers, has been used extensively in studies of primary afferent nerve function [88]. This compound acts on a nonselective cation channel, the vanilloid receptor (VR1), to increase intracellular calcium concentrations [89]. Because the VR-1 ion channel is located almost exclusively in primary afferent nerve fibers, capsaicin is a valuable selective stimulant of these neurons. At low doses, capsaicin is excitatory, and at high doses it produces long-lasting or permanent loss of function.
Elucidation of the role of peptides released at the peripheral terminals of visceral afferent fibers is complicated for

H+ and other noxious

Lumen

lumenal factors

CGRP  SOM <decreased H+>

Axon reflex

CGRP  NO <vasodilation>
Sympathetic postganglionic
fibers
Prevertebral ganglia

Dorsal root ganglia
Spinal cord
Figure 5.4 Axon reflexes in response to noxious chemical stimuli. These activate primary afferent neurons that also synthesize neuropeptides (e.g., CGRP), which are transported to peripheral terminal fields and released by axon reflexes on stimulation. Responses include increased blood flow, probably secondary to stimulation of nitric oxide synthase, and stimulation of somatostatin-producing D cells, which leads to inhibition of acid secretion. CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; SOM, somatostatin; NO, nitric oxide.

those neuropeptides produced in both afferent and intrinsic neurons (e.g., the tachykinins). However, CGRP- in the rat stomach has proved to be a valuable model for studies of the relevant mechanisms. CGRP- is absent from gastric intrinsic neurons and endocrine cells; it is scarce in gastric vagal afferent neurons but abundant in splanchnic afferent nerve fibers. An intact splanchnic afferent innervation mitigates damage of the gastric mucosa inflicted by noxious agents (e.g., ethanol), suggesting that afferent nerve fibers have a protective role [90]. There is good evidence that CGRP- is a protective mediator in this system. Thus, capsaicin increases the release of CGRP in the perfused rat stomach and, on acute administration, it reduces the lesions produced by ethanol; immunoneutralization of CGRP, or administration of the CGRP antagonist CGRP8­37, abolishes capsaicininduced protection [87]. The release of CGRP is associated with increased mucosal blood flow mediated by nitric oxide; this hyperemic response is a key part of the protective mechanism (see Fig. 5.4). Multiple other actions of CGRP are likely to be protective including stimulation of somatostatin secretion and increased somatostatin synthesis at the level of mRNA abundance [91], which tend to decrease secretagogue-evoked acid secretion.
Central nervous system control of the gut
The CNS influences all major gastrointestinal functions, including secretion, motility, blood flow, and defense against noxious challenge. Specific gastrointestinal responses occur after administration to defined CNS regions of a wide range of neurotransmitters, including glutamate, -aminobutyric acid, acetylcholine, biogenic amines, corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), opioids, CGRP, CCK, somatostatin, VIP, and neurotensin. Both stimulation and inhibition of gastrointestinal motor and secretory responses may be evoked by the same substance in different CNS regions. It is unlikely that all of the effects described after the CNS application of neuroactive substances are physiologically relevant. CNS peptide systems regulating gastrointestinal function that have attracted substantial interest include those activated by TRH, bombesin/gastrin-releasing peptide, and CRF.
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone The stimulation of colonic motility and gastric acid secretion in response to the intracisternal administration of TRH were among the first gastrointestinal effects of a CNS peptide to be reported [92]. It is now clear that TRH is a reliable stimulant of a wide range of gastrointestinal responses, including gastric acid and pepsinogen secretion, gastric histamine secretion, gastric mucosal blood flow, gastric motility, and mast cell secretion [93,94]. In high doses, TRH produces gastric lesions. For the most part, these effects are mediated by the

94

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

stimulation of vagal efferent neurons and so are blocked by vagotomy and atropine. They can be mimicked by stable TRH analogues, such as RX77368. There is a rich TRH innervation of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus that arises mainly from the obscure and pallidal raphe nuclei [95]. These neurons are also serotonergic. It is likely that the coexisting transmitters, 5-HT and TRH, interact after release. Stimulation of the raphe nuclei, similar to the administration of TRH into the dorsal motor nucleus, increases gastric acid secretion and motility by a vagal cholinergic mechanism [96,97]. Intracerebroventricular administration of TRH antibodies reduces acid secretion in the pylorus-ligated rat, and immunoneutralization also inhibits the response to raphe nuclei stimulation, providing clear evidence that TRH is an endogenous regulator of the vagal efferent outflow to the upper gastrointestinal tract and may participate in vagovagal reflexes [98].
Bombesin/gastrin-releasing peptide Central administration of peptides of the bombesin/gastrinreleasing peptide group can produce effects opposite to those evoked by peripheral administration. In particular, bombesin and gastrin-releasing peptide administered intracisternally inhibit acid secretion [99], but they generally stimulate it on peripheral administration (reflecting vagal noncholinergic stimulation of the G cell). Retrograde tracing and immunocytochemistry indicate that bombesin-immunoreactive nerve fibers in the dorsal vagal complex originate from cell bodies in the medial parvocellular subdivision of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus [100], which provides support for the notion that bombesin-related peptides mediate descending inhibitory effects from the paraventricular nucleus to vagal efferent neurons.
Corticotropin-releasing factor Peptides of the CRF family have emerged as important CNS regulators of gastrointestinal function. The main members of the family are CRF itself and the structurally related urocortins 1, 2, and 3. The CRF-1 receptor is a target for CRF and urocortin 1, and the CRF-2 receptor is a target mainly for urocortins 2 and 3. The identification of a number of selective receptor antagonists supports a role for these peptides in stress-related responses of the gastrointestinal tract, including decreased gastric motility, increased colonic transit, and inhibition of food intake [101,102].
Vagovagal reflex mechanisms
The physiological control of digestion depends on cross-talk between the gastrointestinal tract and the brain; the relevant interactions are well illustrated by vagovagal reflexes. Control of pancreatic and gastric secretion, gallbladder con-

traction, and the motility of the stomach and intestine may all include a component that involves a vagovagal reflex. The afferent arm of these reflexes was thought for many years to be triggered by direct mechanical or chemical stimulation of the vagal afferent fibers. Thus, distention of the stomach activates vagovagal reflexes that result in relaxation of the gastric corpus and the stimulation of acid secretion [103]. Gastric relaxation is important early in digestion to accommodate the delivery of food, so that gastric volume increases without an increase in pressure (Fig. 5.5). Electrical stimulation of the vagal nerve trunk generally produces gastric contraction, but relaxation is induced by the same stimulus in the presence of the cholinergic muscarinic antagonist atropine. Therefore, a vagal excitatory muscarinic pathway maintains gastric tone and a vagal inhibitory nonmuscarinic pathway leads to relaxation of the body of the stomach (and a decrease in intragastric pressure). Nitric oxide, possibly in combination with VIP, is now recognized as a mediator of this response [104,105].
It is now clear that local paracrine or hormonal factors also stimulate the afferent arm of vagovagal reflexes. One of the best-studied examples involves CCK, which activates vagovagal reflexes regulating gastric motility and pancreatic secretion. These actions can be considered as different aspects of the same role, namely the regulation of protein and fat digestion in the small intestine. On the one hand CCK stimulates the delivery of pancreatic enzymes and bile salts to promote digestion in the intestine [106­108], while at the same time it delays further delivery of nutrients to the small intestine by inhibiting gastric emptying and food intake [109,110]. Taken together, these actions allow matching of the capacity for digestion (enzymes and bile salts) with nutrients already in the small intestine. Neurochemical, electrophysiological, and integrative physiological studies indicate that CCK acts at CCK1 receptors on vagal afferent fibers which constitute the afferent arm of the vagovagal reflex by which CCK relaxes the gastric corpus, decreasing intragastric pressure and inhibiting the gastric emptying of liquids (see Fig. 5.5) [33]. These responses are reduced after capsaicin is topically administered to the vagal nerve trunk or systemically administered to newborn rats [111,112]. Lumenal nutrients in the intestine induce CCK release, which, like exogenous CCK, results in relaxation of the gastric corpus and inhibition of gastric emptying by a mechanism sensitive to capsaicin and CCK1 receptor antagonists [113,114]. In parallel with the reflex relaxation of the stomach, CCK also appears to activate vagal reflexes leading to the stimulation of pancreatic secretion. It seems that pancreatic acinar cells are controlled both directly by the effects of CCK delivered in the circulation and indirectly by acetylcholine released from postganglionic parasympathetic neurons as a consequence of CCK-stimulated vagovagal reflexes [106,107,115].

95

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Satiety
Ghrelin, orexin-A CCK, leptin, GLP-1, PYY3­36 gastric distention

+-

ACh ACh

VIP NO <gastric relaxation>

ACh <contraction>

Figure 5.5 Vagovagal reflex control of gastric motility. Gastric mechanoreceptors and cholecystokinin (CCK) act on vagal afferents to trigger a vagovagal reflex that produces inhibition of tone in the gastric corpus. This is likely to be secondary both to inhibition of tonically active vagal cholinergic excitatory pathways (shaded) and to stimulation of vagal inhibitory pathways with vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and nitric oxide (NO) as the final mediators. The reflex is important in receptive relaxation of the stomach early in digestion and in inhibition of gastric emptying (by decreasing the pressure difference between corpus and duodenum) later in digestion. In addition, vagal afferent neurons may be stimulated by glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY3­36 (PYY3­36), and the effects of CCK are potentiated by leptin; ghrelin and orexin-A inhibit the effects of CCK on vagal afferent nerve discharge. Ach, acetylcholine.

Gastrointestinal signals influencing satiety and appetite
The mechanisms regulating food intake are attracting intense interest [116­120]. An understanding of these systems is central to any approach to the treatment of obesity, which is now widely recognized as a major threat to health. Many different factors are thought to contribute to the obesity epidemic, including genetic factors and changes in lifestyle and diet. Food intake is determined both by mechanisms initiated within the CNS and by a wide range of peripheral factors, including leptin from adipocytes, insulin from the islets of Langerhans, and a variety of gastrointestinal signals [118,119] (Fig. 5.6). Among these signals is the sensing of the absence or presence of ingested nutrients by enteroendocrine cells, and their subsequent release of either appetitestimulating (orexigenic) or appetite-inhibiting (satiety or anorexic) factors [33,119,121,122]. Signals from the gastrointestinal tract that influence energy intake and expenditure include neurohumoral factors acting either directly on CNS neurons in regions where the blood­brain barrier is leaky or indirectly by stimulating afferent neurons, of which

the vagal afferent pathway has been most intensively studied. Together, these mechanisms serve to maintain body weight within narrow limits over long periods in the face of changing metabolic demands. Progress in elucidating the cellular and molecular mechanisms relevant to the control of food intake has been impressive [116] and is in part attributable to studies of genetically modified animals, which have revealed the role of specific transmitters and receptors [123].
The stomach and inhibition of food intake Distention of the stomach leads to the inhibition of feeding through mechanisms that are not dependent on nutrient content and which are mediated by vagal afferent nerve fibers that function as gastric mechanoreceptors [124,125]. The functional relevance of this system is illustrated by the efficacy of bariatric surgery as a treatment for obesity [126]. A number of different procedures aim to limit the volume of the stomach, including gastric banding (which may be variable) either with or without bypass of the small intestine. In patients with morbid obesity, about 60% of the excess body mass is lost after bariatric surgery and, importantly, the weight loss is maintained for up to 8 years. A metaanalysis by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence in

96

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

Cerebral influences Temperature Exercise Glucose Cytokines
Leptin

CNS Hypothalamus

NST

Food intake

Insulin

Vagus nerve

Adipose tissue

Gastrointestinal tract

Figure 5.6 Mechanisms controlling food intake. Signals from the gastrointestinal tract that inhibit food intake in the short term (i.e., over the period of a single meal) include gastric distention (which appears not to be nutrient related) and the release of cholecystokinin (CCK) from the small intestine (which is related to the fat and protein content of the meal), and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY3­36 (PYY3­36) from the ileum and colon. These mechanisms stimulate vagal pathways terminating

Islets of Langerhans
in the nucleus of solitary tract (NST) and projecting to the hypothalamus. Feeding inhibits the release of ghrelin from the stomach; ghrelin acts on the hypothalamus to decrease fat utilization. Over the long term, leptin released from adipocytes regulates food intake. Among other activities, leptin inhibits hypothalamic neuropeptide Y-producing neurons that stimulate food intake.

the United Kingdom concluded that gastric surgery for the treatment of obesity is efficacious and cost-effective [127].
It was thought for many years that fat stores might somehow signal to the CNS to influence food intake (i.e., the lipostatic theory of food intake). The molecular basis for this mechanism has emerged from the characterization of ob/ob mice as obese, hyperphagic, less mobile, hypometabolic, diabetic, and infertile. Zhang and colleagues [128] used positional cloning to show that these mice have a mutation in a gene encoding a putative hormone signaling from adipose tissue to the CNS, now known as leptin. Subsequently, mutations in the leptin gene were also reported in two obese human subjects [129]. The receptor for leptin is mutated in a different mouse strain (db/db) that also manifests hyperphagia, hypometabolism, and diabetes [130]. In addition to adipocyte secretion, leptin is also produced in gastric chief cells [131] and, moreover, functional leptin receptors are expressed by vagal afferent neurons [36,132]. Therefore, as well as acting as an adipocyte-derived satiety signal, leptin may also act as a gastric satiety peptide through local stimulation of vagal afferent nerve fibers projecting to the stomach.
Postpyloric satiety signals The intestinal hormone CCK was one of the first hormones to be identified as able to modify food intake [133]. The small intestinal mucosal I cells that secrete CCK function as nutrient sensors responding to ingested fat and protein in the lumen. Fatty acids with a chain of 12 carbon atoms or longer are effective releasers of CCK in humans and in cell lines, whereas fatty acids of 10 or fewer carbon atoms are ineffect-

ive [134,135]. A substantial body of evidence indicates that vagal afferent neurons expressing CCK1 receptors mediate CCK-induced inhibition of gastric emptying and augmentation of sensations of satiety. The action of peripherally administered CCK on food intake is inhibited by abdominal vagotomy, lesioning of the NST, sectioning of vagal afferent rootlets, chemical lesioning of afferent fibers with capsaicin, and CCK1 receptor antagonists that are excluded from the CNS [136­139]. Other satiety signals modulate the effects of CCK on these neurons; for example, potentiating interactions between CCK and leptin stimulate gastric vagal afferent nerve discharge and inhibit food intake [140,141], as does the interaction between gastric distention and CCK [142,143]. There also may be interactions between CCK and orexigenic factors such as ghrelin and orexin-A at the level of vagal afferent neurons [38,144]. The multiple interactions that occur at the level of vagal afferent neurons to control food intake and autonomic reflexes support the idea of a previously unsuspected degree of integration of signals at this level. In this context, it is therefore worth considering the reports that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene encoding the CCK1 receptor are associated with obesity [145], and that rats in which the CCK1 receptor locus is deleted (i.e., Otsuka Long Evans Tokushima Fatty strain) are obese [146].
In addition to CCK acting as a satiety signal from the jejunum and duodenum, there are at least two putative satiety hormones from the ileum and colon, notably PYY3­36 and GLP-1. The former is a member of the same peptide family as NPY. Cleavage of PYY by dipeptidyl peptidase IV yields the 3­36 C-terminal fragment, which is a Y-2 receptor agonist.

97

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Administration of PYY3­36 has been reported to inhibit food intake in rodents and humans [147­149]; there is evidence both for CNS effects of PYY3­36 and for an effect mediated by the vagus nerve [42,150]. Some laboratories have been unable to replicate the observation that this peptide administered peripherally inhibits food intake in rodents [151]; the reasons remain unclear but it seems possible that the effects of PYY3­36 on food intake are not readily shown in stressed animals.
Cleavage of preproglucagon in intestinal L cells produces the satiety peptide GLP-1 together with a second glucagonlike peptide, GLP-2, and a C-terminally extended form of glucagon, oxyntomodulin [120]. Further cleavage generates GLP-17­36amide, which is the active form of the peptide that inhibits food intake. A metaanalysis of seven studies in humans concluded that infusion of GLP-17­36amide inhibits food intake by 11% with no significant difference between lean and obese subjects [152]. In the circulation, GLP17­36amide is inactivated by dipeptidyl peptidase IV; therefore, inhibition of this enzyme is being considered as a means to increase circulating levels of GLP-17­36amide. A stable analogue, exendin-4, is also available for the treatment of type II diabetes mellitus. In rats, the inhibitory effect of the peripheral administration of GLP-17­36amide on food intake appears to require an intact vagus [150].
Gastrointestinal appetite signals In addition to signals from the gut that inhibit food intake, it now appears that the gastrointestinal tract produces several stimulants of food intake. The peptide ghrelin was discovered as the ligand of an orphan receptor that mediates the action of synthetic secretagogues on growth hormone release [153]. Ghrelin is mainly produced in the stomach in A-like (or X) cells of the gastric corpus [154]. Plasma concentrations are increased in fasting; they exhibit a rise before each meal, fall after feeding, and correlate inversely with body weight [155­157]. The mechanisms responsible for the rise in plasma concentrations are not well characterized; in contrast, the decrease in plasma concentrations can be produced by glucose and high-protein meals, whereas fat has a lesser effect. The contact of nutrients with the stomach and duodenum is not required for the postprandial fall in plasma ghrelin concentrations. After bariatric surgery by the Rouxen-Y gastric bypass, circulating ghrelin concentrations are suppressed; in contrast, plasma ghrelin concentrations are maintained after variable gastric banding or biliopancreatic diversion, indicating that the functional integrity of the gastric corpus is required to maintain ghrelin secretion [158].
Peripheral administration of ghrelin stimulates food intake and, in experimental animals, this effect requires an intact vagal nerve [159,160]. The vagal afferent neurons that express ghrelin (GHS-1) receptors also express CCK1 receptors [160], as well as receptors for another orexigenic peptide, orexin-A (i.e., Ox-R1 receptors) [38]. Both ghrelin and

orexin-A inhibit vagal afferent nerve discharge, indicating a functional role for these receptors [38,144]. Interestingly, research suggests that a second biologically active peptide, obestatin, also derived from the ghrelin precursor, inhibits food intake and acts through a previously identified G protein-coupled receptor with an unidentified ligand (GPR39) [161].
It is well established that increased appetite (known as the munchies) is linked to cannabinoid (CB)-1 receptor activation; for example, by the active ingredient of cannabis, 9tetrahydrocannabinol. These effects generally are thought to be mediated by receptors on hypothalamic neurons [162]. However, an endogenous ligand of CB-1 receptors, the lipid amide anandamide, is increased in the intestine of fasted rats and, on peripheral administration, stimulates food intake by a mechanism requiring an intact vagal nerve [163]. In both rat and human, CCK1-expressing vagal neurons also express the CB-1 receptor [37]. Importantly, however, the expression of CB-1 receptors in rat nodose ganglion neurons is critically dependent on the recent nutritional history of the animal. In rats fed ad libitum, expression of CB-1 receptors in vagal neurons projecting to the stomach and duodenum is virtually undetectable; expression is dramatically increased after 12­18 h fasting and this is reversed by refeeding and by administration of exogenous CCK. A CCK1 receptor antagonist prevented the down-regulation of CB-1 receptor expression indicating that endogenous CCK suppresses CB-1 receptor expression [37]. These observations suggest a novel dimension to signaling through vagal afferent neurons and, in particular, indicate a specific mechanism by which previous nutritional intake, or its absence, may modulate vagal afferent nerve discharge through induction of a receptor associated with stimulation of food intake.
Central nervous system mechanisms The vagal afferent neurons involved in the control of feeding behavior act on brainstem neurons projecting to the hypothalamus. Many of the central mechanisms that control energy intake also regulate energy expenditure; the hypothalamus is a key CNS region controlling these functions and integrating the peripheral and other central inputs to them. Within the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus two broad classes of neuron have been identified. One class expresses genes encoding the peptide transmitters CART and proopiomelancortin (POMC); POMC is cleaved to yield melanocyte-stimulating hormone (-MSH), which, in turn, acts at melanocortin (MC)-4 receptors [119]. Both CART and POMC inhibit food intake; their release is induced by peripheral satiety signals such as leptin and CCK and inhibited by appetite-stimulating factors such as ghrelin. A second class of neuron expresses the genes encoding NPY, which is a powerful stimulant of food intake when administered into the ventromedial and paraventricular hypothalamic nuclei [164], and agouti-related protein (AGRP), which is an

98

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

endogenous antagonist of MC-4 receptors and therefore also a stimulant of appetite [165]. These neurons are inhibited by leptin and peripheral satiety signals and excited by ghrelin, orexin-A, and other appetite-stimulating signals. The elucidation of both the neuroendocrine factors influencing these neurons and the neurotransmitter circuits activated by them provide potentially fruitful avenues in the search for novel treatments of obesity.
Overview
The gastrointestinal tract and brain involve each other in two-way communication. These interactions provide a basis for the gastrointestinal control of CNS responses (e.g., control of food intake) and, conversely, the CNS control of gastrointestinal function (e.g., during the cephalic phase of digestion). More importantly, they provide the capacity for integrating information about the state of the gut contents and inputs from other parts of the body. A direct consequence of these integrative functions is modulation of the signaling between brain and gut during normal digestion. However, the modulation of signaling pathways is also likely to be important clinically, and it may account for the hypersensitivity that is a feature of disease states involving inflammation in the gut, as well as those that do not. The results of a variety of experimental approaches have shown that it is possible to explain in molecular and cellular terms the development of the brain­gut axis and its organization, neurochemistry, and physiology. Impressive progress is also being made in the combined application of CNS imaging techniques and functional studies of the human digestive tract. These approaches should make it possible to define how dysfunction of brain­gut signaling contributes to gastrointestinal disease.
References
1. Hertz AF. The sensibility of the alimentary tract. London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1911.
2. Mayer EA, Raybould HE. Role of visceral afferent mechanisms in functional bowel disorders. Gastroenterology 1990;99:1688.
3. Langley K. The neuroendocrine concept today. Ann NY Acad Sci 1994;733:1.
4. Pachnis V, Mankoo B, Costantini F. Expression of the c-ret proto-oncogene during mouse embryogenesis. Development 1993; 119:1005.
5. Edery P, Lyonnet S, Mulligan LM, et al. Mutations of the RET protooncogene in Hirschsprung's disease. Nature 1994;367:378.
6. Carlomagno F, De Vita G, Berlingieri MT, et al. Molecular heterogeneity of RET loss of function in Hirschsprung's disease. EMBO J 1996;15:2717.
7. Schuchardt A, D'Agati V, Larsson-Blomberg L, et al. Defects in the kidney and enteric nervous system of mice lacking the tyrosine kinase receptor Ret. Nature 1994;367:380.
8. Sanchez MP, Silos-Santiago I, Frisen J, et al. Renal agenesis and the absence of enteric neurons in mice lacking GDNF. Nature 1996;382:70.

9. Pichel JG, Shen L, Sheng HZ, et al. Defects in enteric innervation and kidney development in mice lacking GDNF. Nature 1996; 382:73.
10. Moore MW, Klein RD, Farinas I, et al. Renal and neuronal abnormalities in mice lacking GDNF. Nature 1996;382:76.
11. Baynash AG, Hosoda K, Giaid A, et al. Interaction of endothelin-3 with endothelin-B receptor is essential for development of epidermal melanocytes and enteric neurons. Cell 1994;79:1277.
12. Hosoda K, Hammer RE, Richardson JA, et al. Targeted and natural (piebald-lethal) mutations of endothelin-B receptor gene produce megacolon associated with spotted coat color in mice. Cell 1994;79:1267.
13. Puffenberger EG, Hosoda K, Washington SS, et al. A missense mutation of the endothelin-B receptor gene in multigenic Hirschsprung's disease. Cell 1994;79:1257.
14. Blaugrund E, Pham TD, Tennyson VM, et al. Distinct subpopulations of enteric neuronal progenitors defined by time of development, sympathoadrenal lineage markers and Mash-1-dependence. Development 1996;122:309.
15. Pattyn A, Morin X, Cremer H, et al. The homeobox gene Phox2b is essential for the development of autonomic neural crest derivatives. Nature 1999;399:366.
16. Aziz Q, Thompson DG. Brain­gut axis in health and disease. Gastroenterology 1998;114:559.
17. Liu Y, Gao JH, Liu HL, Fox PT. The temporal response of the brain after eating revealed by functional MRI. Nature 2000;405:1058.
18. Hamdy S, Aziz Q, Rothwell JC, et al. The cortical topography of human swallowing musculature in health and disease. Nat Med 1996;2:1217.
19. Camilleri M, Coulie B, Tack JF. Visceral hypersensitivity: facts, speculations, and challenges. Gut 2001;48:125.
20. Andrews PL. Vagal afferent innervation of the gastrointestinal tract. Prog Brain Res 1986;67:65.
21. Janig W, Morrison JF. Functional properties of spinal visceral afferents supplying abdominal and pelvic organs, with special emphasis on visceral nociception. Prog Brain Res 1986;67:87.
22. Holzer P. Peptidergic sensory neurons in the control of vascular functions: mechanisms and significance in the cutaneous and splanchnic vascular beds. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 1992; 121:49.
23. Altschuler SM, Bao XM, Bieger D, et al. Viscerotopic representation of the upper alimentary tract in the rat: sensory ganglia and nuclei of the solitary and spinal trigeminal tracts. J Comp Neurol 1989; 283:248.
24. Zagorodnyuk VP, Chen BN, Brookes SJ. Intraganglionic laminar endings are mechano-transduction sites of vagal tension receptors in the guinea-pig stomach. J Physiol 2001;534:255.
25. Berthoud HR, Jedrzejewska A, Powley TL. Simultaneous labeling of vagal innervation of the gut and afferent projections from the visceral forebrain with dil injected into the dorsal vagal complex in the rat. J Comp Neurol 1990;301:65.
26. Berthoud HR, Kressel M, Raybould HE, Neuhuber WL. Vagal sensors in the rat duodenal mucosa: distribution and structure as revealed by in vivo DiI-tracing. Anat Embryol (Berl) 1995;191: 203.
27. Sharkey KA, Sobrino JA, Cervero F. Evidence for a visceral afferent origin of substance P-like immunoreactivity in lamina V of the rat thoracic spinal cord. Neuroscience 1987;22:1077.
28. Green T, Dockray GJ. Characterization of the peptidergic afferent innervation of the stomach in the rat, mouse and guinea-pig. Neuroscience 1988;25:181.
29. Broberger C, Holmberg K, Kuhar MJ, Hokfelt T. Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript in the rat vagus nerve: a putative mediator of cholecystokinin-induced satiety. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:13506.
30. Holzer P. Local effector functions of capsaicin-sensitive sensory nerve endings: involvement of tachykinins, calcitonin gene-related peptide and other neuropeptides. Neuroscience 1988;24:739.

99

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

31. Sharkey KA, Williams RG, Dockray GJ. Sensory substance P innervation of the stomach and pancreas. Demonstration of capsaicin-sensitive sensory neurons in the rat by combined immunohistochemistry and retrograde tracing. Gastroenterology 1984;87:914.
32. Kirkup AJ, Brunsden AM, Grundy D. Receptors and transmission in the brain­gut axis: potential for novel therapies. I. Receptors on visceral afferents. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G787.
33. Dockray GJ. Gut endocrine secretions and their relevance to satiety. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2004;4:557.
34. Moran TH, Smith GP, Hostetler AM, McHugh PR. Transport of cholecystokinin (CCK) binding sites in subdiaphragmatic vagal branches. Brain Res 1987;415:149.
35. Moriarty P, Dimaline R, Thompson DG, Dockray GJ. Characterization of cholecystokininA and cholecystokininB receptors expressed by vagal afferent neurons. Neuroscience 1997;79:905.
36. Burdyga G, Spiller D, Morris R, et al. Expression of the leptin receptor in rat and human nodose ganglion neurons. Neuroscience 2002;109:339.
37. Burdyga G, Lal S, Varro A, et al. Expression of cannabinoid CB1 receptors by vagal afferent neurons is inhibited by cholecystokinin. J Neurosci 2004;24:2708.
38. Burdyga G, Lal S, Spiller D, et al. Localization of orexin-1 receptors to vagal afferent neurons in the rat and humans. Gastroenterology 2003;124:129.
39. Page AJ, Slattery JA, O'Donnell TA, et al. Modulation of gastrooesophageal vagal afferents by galanin in mouse and ferret. J Physiol 2005;563:809.
40. Burdyga G, Varro A, Dimaline R, et al. Feeding-dependent depression of melanin-concentrating hormone and melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 expression in vagal afferent neurones. Neuroscience 2006:137:1405.
41. Ghilardi JR, Allen CJ, Vigna SR, et al. Cholecystokinin and neuropeptide Y receptors on single rabbit vagal afferent ganglion neurons: site of prejunctional modulation of visceral sensory neurons. Brain Res 1994;633:33.
42. Koda S, Date Y, Murakami N, et al. The role of the vagal nerve in peripheral PYY3-36-induced feeding reduction in rats. Endocrinology 2005;146:2369.
43. Page AJ, Young RL, Martin CM, et al. Metabotropic glutamate receptors inhibit mechanosensitivity in vagal sensory neurons. Gastroenterology 2005;128:402.
44. Smid SD, Young RL, Cooper NJ, Blackshaw LA. GABA(B)R expressed on vagal afferent neurons inhibit gastric mechanosensitivity in ferret proximal stomach. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;281:G1494.
45. Leslie RA, Reynolds DJ, Andrews PL, et al. Evidence for presynaptic 5-hydroxytryptamine3 recognition sites on vagal afferent terminals in the brainstem of the ferret. Neuroscience 1990;38:667.
46. Fox EA, Powley TL. Longitudinal columnar organization within the dorsal motor nucleus represents separate branches of the abdominal vagus. Brain Res 1985;341:269.
47. Kirchgessner AL, Gershon MD. Identification of vagal efferent fibers and putative target neurons in the enteric nervous system of the rat. J Comp Neurol 1989;285:38.
48. Tayo EK, Williams RG. Catecholaminergic parasympathetic efferents within the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus in the rat: a quantitative analysis. Neurosci Lett 1988;90:1.
49. Rodrigo J, Polak JM, Fernandez L, et al. Calcitonin gene-related peptide immunoreactive sensory and motor nerves of the rat, cat, and monkey esophagus. Gastroenterology 1985;88:444.
50. Costa M, Furness JB, Llewellyn-Smith IJ. Histochemistry of the enteric nervous system. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1987:1.
51. Newman PP. Visceral afferent functions of the nervous system. London: Edward Arnold, 1974.

52. Raybould HE, Gayton RJ, Dockray GJ. Mechanisms of action of peripherally administered cholecystokinin octapeptide on brain stem neurons in the rat. J Neurosci 1988;8:3018.
53. Yuan CS, Barber WD. Hypothalamic unitary responses to gastric vagal input from the proximal stomach. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G74.
54. Bonaz B, De Giorgio R, Tache Y. Peripheral bombesin induces c-fos protein in the rat brain. Brain Res 1993;600:353.
55. Monnikes H, Lauer G, Bauer C, et al. Pathways of Fos expression in locus ceruleus, dorsal vagal complex, and PVN in response to intestinal lipid. Am J Physiol 1997;273:R2059.
56. Menetrey D, Gannon A, Levine JD, Basbaum AI. Expression of c-fos protein in interneurons and projection neurons of the rat spinal cord in response to noxious somatic, articular, and visceral stimulation. J Comp Neurol 1989;285:177.
57. Traub RJ, Pechman P, Iadarola MJ, Gebhart GF. Fos-like proteins in the lumbosacral spinal cord following noxious and non-noxious colorectal distention in the rat. Pain 1992;49:393.
58. Schuligoi R, Herzeg G, Wachter C, et al. Differential expression of cfos messenger RNA in the rat spinal cord after mucosal and serosal irritation of the stomach. Neuroscience 1996;72:535.
59. Silverman DH, Munakata JA, Ennes H, et al. Regional cerebral activity in normal and pathological perception of visceral pain. Gastroenterology 1997;112:64.
60. Mertz H, Morgan V, Tanner G, et al. Regional cerebral activation in irritable bowel syndrome and control subjects with painful and nonpainful rectal distention. Gastroenterology 2000;118:842.
61. Aziz Q, Andersson JL, Valind S, et al. Identification of human brain loci processing esophageal sensation using positron emission tomography. Gastroenterology 1997;113:50.
62. Hamdy S, Rothwell JC, Aziz Q, et al. Long-term reorganization of human motor cortex driven by short-term sensory stimulation. Nat Neurosci 1998;1:64.
63. Brooks FP. Central neural control of acid secretion. In: Code CF (ed.). Handbook of Physiology ­ Alimentary Canal. Baltimore, MD: Waverley Press, 1967:805.
64. Aziz Q, Rothwell JC, Hamdy S, et al. The topographic representation of esophageal motor function on the human cerebral cortex. Gastroenterology 1996;111:855.
65. Iggo A. Tension receptors in the stomach and the urinary bladder. J Physiol 1955;128:593.
66. Paintal AS. Vagal sensory receptors and their reflex effects. Physiol Rev 1973;53:159.
67. Grundy D, Scratcherd T. Sensory afferents from the gastrointestinal tract. In: Schultz SG (ed.). Handbook of Physiology ­ The Gastrointestinal System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989:593.
68. Sengupta JN, Gebhart GF. Gastrointestinal afferent fibers and sensation. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1994:483.
69. Mei N. Intestinal chemosensitivity. Physiol Rev 1985;65:211. 70. Bulbring E, Lin RCY. The effect of intraluminal application of 5-
hydroxytryptamine and 5-hydroxytryptophan on peristalsis; the local production of 5-HT and its release in relation to intraluminal pressure and propulsive activity. J Physiol 1958;140:381. 71. Lindemann B. Receptors and transduction in taste. Nature 2001; 413:219. 72. Buchan AM, Squires PE, Ring M, Meloche RM. Mechanism of action of the calcium-sensing receptor in human antral gastrin cells. Gastroenterology 2001;120:1128. 73. Buchan AM. Nutrient tasting and signaling mechanisms in the gut. III. Endocrine cell recognition of luminal nutrients. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G1103. 74. Lal S, Kirkup AJ, Brunsden AM, et al. Vagal afferent responses to fatty acids of different chain length in the rat. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;281:G907. 75. Zhu JX, Zhu XY, Owyang C, Li Y. Intestinal serotonin acts as a paracrine substance to mediate vagal signal transmission evoked by luminal factors in the rat. J Physiol 2001;530:431.

100

The brain­gut axis CHAPTER 5

76. Schwartz GJ, McHugh PR, Moran TH. Integration of vagal afferent responses to gastric loads and cholecystokinin in rats. Am J Physiol 1991;261:R64.
77. Blackshaw LA, Grundy D. Effects of cholecystokinin (CCK-8) on two classes of gastroduodenal vagal afferent fibre. J Auton Nerv Syst 1990;31:191.
78. Stead RH, Tomioka M, Quinonez G, et al. Intestinal mucosal mast cells in normal and nematode-infected rat intestines are in intimate contact with peptidergic nerves. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987; 84:2975.
79. Akoev GN, Filippova LV, Sherman NO. Mast cell mediators excite the afferents of cat small intestine. Neuroscience 1996;71:1163.
80. Castex N, Fioramonti J, Fargeas MJ, et al. Role of 5-HT3 receptors and afferent fibers in the effects of mast cell degranulation on colonic motility in rats. Gastroenterology 1994;107:976.
81. Castex N, Fioramonti J, Fargeas MJ, Bueno L. c-fos expression in specific rat brain nuclei after intestinal anaphylaxis: involvement of 5-HT3 receptors and vagal afferent fibers. Brain Res 1995;688:149.
82. Santos J, Saperas E, Mourelle M, et al. Regulation of intestinal mast cells and luminal protein release by cerebral thyrotropin-releasing hormone in rats. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1465.
83. Collins SM. The immunomodulation of enteric neuromuscular function: implications for motility and inflammatory disorders. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1683.
84. Mayer EA, Gebhart GF. Basic and clinical aspects of visceral hyperalgesia. Gastroenterology 1994;107:271.
85. Sarkar S, Aziz Q, Woolf CJ, et al. Contribution of central sensitisation to the development of non-cardiac chest pain. Lancet 2000;356:1154.
86. Al Chaer ED, Kawasaki M, Pasricha PJ. A new model of chronic visceral hypersensitivity in adult rats induced by colon irritation during postnatal development. Gastroenterology 2000;119:1276.
87. Holzer P. Neural emergency system in the stomach. Gastroenterology 1998;114:823.
88. Holzer P. Neural injury, repair, and adaptation in the GI tract. II. The elusive action of capsaicin on the vagus nerve. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G8.
89. Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, et al. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature 1997;389:816.
90. Holzer P, Sametz W. Gastric mucosal protection against ulcerogenic factors in the rat mediated by capsaicin-sensitive afferent neurons. Gastroenterology 1986;91:975.
91. Sandvik AK, Dimaline R, Forster ER, et al. Differential control of somatostatin messenger RNA in rat gastric corpus and antrum. Role of acid, food, and capsaicin-sensitive afferent neurons. J Clin Invest 1993;91:244.
92. Tache Y, Vale W, Brown M. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone ­ CNS action to stimulate gastric acid secretion. Nature 1980;287:149.
93. Tache Y, Garrick T, Raybould H. Central nervous system action of peptides to influence gastrointestinal motor function. Gastroenterology 1990;98:517.
94. Tache Y, Stephens RL Jr, Ishikawa T. Central nervous system action of TRH to influence gastrointestinal function and ulceration. Ann NY Acad Sci 1989;553:269.
95. Hornby PJ, Rossiter CD, White RL, et al. Medullary raphe: a new site for vagally mediated stimulation of gastric motility in cats. Am J Physiol 1990;258:G637.
96. White RL Jr, Rossiter CD, Hornby PJ, et al. Excitation of neurons in the medullary raphe increases gastric acid and pepsin production in cats. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G91.
97. Yang H, Ohning G, Tache Y. TRH in dorsal vagal complex mediates acid response to excitation of raphe pallidus neurons in rats. Am J Physiol 1993;265:G880.
98. Ohning GV, Wong HC, Lloyd KC, Walsh JH. Gastrin mediates the gastric mucosal proliferative response to feeding. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G470.

99. Tache Y, Vale W, Rivier J, Brown M. Brain regulation of gastric secretion: influence of neuropeptides. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980;77:5515.
100. Costello JF, Brown MR, Gray TS. Bombesin immunoreactive neurons in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus innervate the dorsal vagal complex in the rat. Brain Res 1991;542:77.
101. Tache Y, Martinez V, Million M, Wang L. Stress and the gastrointestinal tract. III. Stress-related alterations of gut motor function: role of brain corticotropin-releasing factor receptors. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G173.
102. Zorrilla EP, Tache Y, Koob GF. Nibbling at CRF receptor control of feeding and gastrocolonic motility. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2003;24:421.
103. Abrahamsson H. Studies on the inhibitory nervous control of gastric motility. Acta Physiol Scand Suppl 1973;390:1.
104. Desai KM, Sessa WC, Vane JR. Involvement of nitric oxide in the reflex relaxation of the stomach to accommodate food or fluid. Nature 1991;351:477.
105. D'Amato M, Curro D, Montuschi P. Evidence for dual components in the non-adrenergic non-cholinergic relaxation in the rat gastric fundus: role of endogenous nitric oxide and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. J Auton Nerv Syst 1992;37:175.
106. Li Y, Owyang C. Endogenous cholecystokinin stimulates pancreatic enzyme secretion via vagal afferent pathway in rats. Gastroenterology 1994;107:525.
107. Niebergall-Roth E, Singer MV. Central and peripheral neural control of pancreatic exocrine secretion. J Physiol Pharmacol 2001; 52:523.
108. Mawe GM. The role of cholecystokinin in ganglionic transmission in the guinea-pig gall-bladder. J Physiol 1991;439:89.
109. Feinle C, D'Amato M, Read NW. Cholecystokinin-A receptors modulate gastric sensory and motor responses to gastric distension and duodenal lipid. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1379.
110. Lal S, McLaughlin J, Barlow J, et al. Cholecystokinin pathways modulate sensations induced by gastric distension in man. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G72.
111. Raybould HE, Tache Y. Cholecystokinin inhibits gastric motility and emptying via a capsaicin-sensitive vagal pathway in rats. Am J Physiol 1988;255:G242.
112. Forster ER, Green T, Elliot M, et al. Gastric emptying in rats: role of afferent neurons and cholecystokinin. Am J Physiol 1990;258:G552.
113. Raybould HE, Roberts ME, Dockray GJ. Reflex decreases in intragastric pressure in response to cholecystokinin in rats. Am J Physiol 1987;253:G165.
114. Forster ER, Dockray GJ. The role of cholecystokinin in inhibition of gastric emptying by peptone in the rat. Exp Physiol 1992;77:693.
115. Li Y, Owyang C. Pancreatic secretion evoked by cholecystokinin and non-cholecystokinin-dependent duodenal stimuli via vagal afferent fibres in the rat. J Physiol 1996;494:773.
116. Schwartz MW, Woods SC, Porte D Jr, et al. Central nervous system control of food intake. Nature 2000;404:661.
117. Cummings DE, Schwartz MW. Genetics and pathophysiology of human obesity. Annu Rev Med 2003;54:453.
118. Woods SC. Gastrointestinal satiety signals. I. An overview of gastrointestinal signals that influence food intake. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G7.
119. Badman MK, Flier JS. The gut and energy balance: visceral allies in the obesity wars. Science 2005;307:1909.
120. Murphy KG, Bloom SR. Gut hormones in the control of appetite. Exp Physiol 2004;89:507.
121. Druce MR, Small CJ, Bloom SR. Gut peptides regulating satiety. Endocrinology 2004;145:2660.
122. Inui A, Asakawa A, Bowers CY, et al. Ghrelin, appetite, and gastric motility: the emerging role of the stomach as an endocrine organ. FASEB J 2004;18:439.
123. Inui A. Transgenic approach to the study of body weight regulation. Pharmacol Rev 2000;52:35.

101

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

124. Gonzalez MF, Deutsch JA. Vagotomy abolishes cues of satiety produced by gastric distension. Science 1981;212:1283.
125. Phillips RJ, Powley TL. Gastric volume rather than nutrient content inhibits food intake. Am J Physiol 1996;271:R766.
126. Blackburn GL. Solutions in weight control: lessons from gastric surgery. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:248S.
127. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Full guidance on the use of surgery to aid weight reduction for people with morbid obesity. Technical Appraisal No 46. London: NICE, 2002.
128. Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, et al. Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human homologue. Nature 1994;372:425.
129. Montague CT, Farooqi IS, Whitehead JP, et al. Congenital leptin deficiency is associated with severe early-onset obesity in humans. Nature 1997;387:903.
130. Lee GH, Proenca R, Montez JM, et al. Abnormal splicing of the leptin receptor in diabetic mice. Nature 1996;379:632.
131. Bado A, Levasseur S, Attoub S, et al. The stomach is a source of leptin. Nature 1998;394:790.
132. Buyse M, Ovesjo ML, Goiot H, et al. Expression and regulation of leptin receptor proteins in afferent and efferent neurons of the vagus nerve. Eur J Neurosci 2001;14:64.
133. Gibbs J, Young RC, Smith GP. Cholecystokinin elicits satiety in rats with open gastric fistulas. Nature 1973;245:323.
134. McLaughlin J, Grazia LM, Jones MN, et al. Fatty acid chain length determines cholecystokinin secretion and effect on human gastric motility. Gastroenterology 1999;116:46.
135. McLaughlin JT, Lomax RB, Hall L, et al. Fatty acids stimulate cholecystokinin secretion via an acyl chain length-specific, Ca2+-dependent mechanism in the enteroendocrine cell line STC-1. J Physiol 1998;513:11.
136. Smith GP, Jerome C, Cushin BJ, et al. Abdominal vagotomy blocks the satiety effect of cholecystokinin in the rat. Science 1981;213:1036.
137. Ritter RC, Ladenheim EE. Capsaicin pretreatment attenuates suppression of food intake by cholecystokinin. Am J Physiol 1985;248:R501.
138. Smith GP, Jerome C, Norgren R. Afferent axons in abdominal vagus mediate satiety effect of cholecystokinin in rats. Am J Physiol 1985; 249:R638.
139. Edwards GL, Ladenheim EE, Ritter RC. Dorsomedial hindbrain participation in cholecystokinin-induced satiety. Am J Physiol 1986;251:R971.
140. Wang YH, Tache Y, Sheibel AB, et al. Two types of leptin-responsive gastric vagal afferent terminals: an in vitro single-unit study in rats. Am J Physiol 1997;273:R833.
141. Barrachina MD, Martinez V, Wang L, et al. Synergistic interaction between leptin and cholecystokinin to reduce short-term food intake in lean mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:10455.
142. Schwartz GJ, McHugh PR, Moran TH. Gastric loads and cholecystokinin synergistically stimulate rat gastric vagal afferents. Am J Physiol 1993;265:R872.
143. Kissileff HR, Carretta JC, Geliebter A, Pi-Sunyer FX. Cholecystokinin and stomach distension combine to reduce food intake in humans. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2003;285: R992.
144. Date Y, Toshinai K, Koda S, et al. Peripheral interaction of ghrelin with cholecystokinin on feeding regulation. Endocrinology 2005; 146:3518.
145. Funakoshi A, Miyasaka K, Matsumoto H, et al. Gene structure of human cholecystokinin (CCK) type-A receptor: body fat content is

related to CCK type-A receptor gene promoter polymorphism. FEBS Lett 2000;466:264. 146. Moran TH, Kinzig KP. Gastrointestinal satiety signals. II. Cholecystokinin. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286: G183. 147. Batterham RL, Cowley MA, Small CJ, et al. Gut hormone PYY(3­ 36) physiologically inhibits food intake. Nature 2002;418:650. 148. Batterham RL, Cohen MA, Ellis SM, et al. Inhibition of food intake in obese subjects by peptide YY3­36. N Engl J Med 2003;349:941. 149. Degen L, Oesch S, Casanova M, et al. Effect of peptide YY3­36 on food intake in humans. Gastroenterology 2005;129:1430. 150. Abbott CR, Monteiro M, Small CJ, et al. The inhibitory effects of peripheral administration of peptide YY(3­36) and glucagon-like peptide-1 on food intake are attenuated by ablation of the vagalbrainstem-hypothalamic pathway. Brain Res 2005;1044:127. 151. Tschop M, Castaneda TR, Joost HG, et al. Physiology: does gut hormone PYY3­36 decrease food intake in rodents? Nature 2004;430:1. 152. Verdich C, Flint A, Gutzwiller JP, et al. A meta-analysis of the effect of glucagon-like peptide-1 (7­36) amide on ad libitum energy intake in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:4382. 153. Kojima M, Hosoda H, Date Y, et al. Ghrelin is a growth-hormonereleasing acylated peptide from stomach. Nature 1999;402:656. 154. Date Y, Kojima M, Hosoda H, et al. Ghrelin, a novel growth hormone-releasing acylated peptide, is synthesized in a distinct endocrine cell type in the gastrointestinal tracts of rats and humans. Endocrinology 2000;141:4255. 155. Ariyasu H, Takaya K, Tagami T, et al. Stomach is a major source of circulating ghrelin, and feeding state determines plasma ghrelinlike immunoreactivity levels in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:4753. 156. Cummings DE, Weigle DS, Frayo RS, et al. Plasma ghrelin levels after diet-induced weight loss or gastric bypass surgery. N Engl J Med 2002;346:1623. 157. Tschop M, Wawarta R, Riepl RL, et al. Post-prandial decrease of circulating human ghrelin levels. J Endocrinol Invest 2001;24:RC19. 158. Fruhbeck G, Diez-Caballero A, Gil MJ, et al. The decrease in plasma ghrelin concentrations following bariatric surgery depends on the functional integrity of the fundus. Obes Surg 2004;14:606. 159. Tschop M, Smiley DL, Heiman ML. Ghrelin induces adiposity in rodents. Nature 2000;407:908. 160. Date Y, Murakami N, Toshinai K, et al. The role of the gastric afferent vagal nerve in ghrelin-induced feeding and growth hormone secretion in rats. Gastroenterology 2002;123:1120. 161. Zhang JV, Ren PG, Avsian-Kretchmer O, et al. Obestatin, a peptide encoded by the ghrelin gene, opposes ghrelin's effects on food intake. Science 2005;310:996. 162. Di M, V, Matias I. Endocannabinoid control of food intake and energy balance. Nat Neurosci 2005;8:585. 163. Gomez R, Navarro M, Ferrer B, et al. A peripheral mechanism for CB1 cannabinoid receptor-dependent modulation of feeding. J Neurosci 2002;22:9612. 164. Stanley BG, Leibowitz SF. Neuropeptide Y injected in the paraventricular hypothalamus: a powerful stimulant of feeding behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985;82:3940. 165. Ellacott KL, Cone RD. The central melanocortin system and the integration of short- and long-term regulators of energy homeostasis. Recent Prog Horm Res 2004;59:395.

102

6

A COMPONENTS
Smooth muscle of the gut
Gabriel M. Makhlouf, Karnam S. Murthy

Structure of smooth muscle, 103 Interaction of contractile proteins, 105 Signal transduction in visceral smooth muscle, 106 Electrical properties of smooth muscle, 113 Rhythmic electrical activity of smooth muscle, 115

Neural regulation of smooth muscle by the myenteric plexus, 120 Hormonal regulation of smooth muscle function, 125 Humoral regulation of smooth muscle function, 125 Inflammation and smooth muscle, 126 Summary, 127

The main function of smooth muscle of the gut is to mix and propel intralumenal contents, enabling efficient digestion of food, progressive absorption of nutrients, and eventual evacuation of residues. This function is regulated by the intrinsic electrical and mechanical properties of smooth muscle, such as the ability to maintain tone or undergo phasic contraction, and by alterations in these properties in response to hormonal and neural signals, particularly signals emanating from the enteric nervous system. A distinctive feature of physiological regulation in the gut is that stimuli of hormonal release and neural activation arise within the lumen from the mechanical and chemical properties of food and digestive secretions.
Structure of smooth muscle

high ratio of surface area­volume (1.5 m2:1 m3). Their plasma membranes consist of two specialized structures known as caveolae and dense bands [1­3].
The caveolae, 70 nm wide and 120 nm deep, are basketshaped invaginations of the membrane that are arranged in clusters (Fig. 6.1). There are about 150 000 caveolae per cell; they occupy about one-third of the outer surface of the cell but constitute a much larger fraction of the surface of the plasma membrane. The bases of caveolae are surrounded by an abundant endoplasmic reticulum, the site of Ca2+ storage and release in smooth muscle. The arrangement suggests that caveolae may be functional equivalents of the transverse tubules in striated muscle. Caveolin-1, caveolin-1, and caveolin-3 are the main structural proteins in smooth muscle

Muscle layers Smooth muscle of the gut consists of a thin, outer, longitudinal layer and a thick, densely innervated, circular layer; the layers derive their names from the orientation of the long axis of muscle cells in them. The layers are separated by laminar septa into bundles about 1 mm long that probably act as contractile units. The muscle cells are embedded in a connective tissue matrix, a product of their synthetic and secretory activity consisting mainly of elastic and collagen fibrils. The layers include glial cells, fibroblasts, and a distinctive population of muscle-like cells, the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICCs).
Muscle cells: membranes and organelles Single smooth muscle cells are about 400 m long and 5 m wide when fully relaxed. They are spindle-shaped and have a
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

er er er

e

c db
Figure 6.1 Surface organization of three adjacent muscle cells from the circular muscle layer of guinea pig ileum. Clusters of basket-shaped caveolae (c) surrounded by endoplasmic reticulum (er) are separated from each other by dense bands (db) (original magnification × 67 000). From Gabella [1].

103

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

caveolae [4,5]. They bind a variety of signaling molecules and are thought to act as scaffolds to facilitate signaling. In smooth muscle, caveolins also bind transiently to agonistactivated  and  subunits of G proteins, prevent their reassociation, and induce desensitization of responses mediated by these G proteins [6].
Clusters of caveolae are separated from each other by electron-dense structures, 1­2 m long and 0.2­0.4 m wide, called dense bands (plaques), which occupy about one-half of the surface of the cell (Fig. 6.2). At these sites, thin actin filaments are attached to transmembrane integrins via a series of proteins consisting mainly of -actinin and various
A B C
D E
F
Figure 6.2 Organization of the contractile and cytoskeletal apparatus in smooth muscle cells. Thin actin filaments (C) emerge from the poles of cytoplasmic dense bodies (E) and interdigitate with thick myosin filaments (B). Dense bodies in the plasma membrane (D) are connected to dense bodies in the cytoplasm (E) by intermediate filaments (A). When juxtaposed, dense bodies from adjacent cells can form close intermediate junctions (F). Adapted from Murphy [8].

kinases and signaling proteins [7]. Intermediate 10-nm-thick filaments, consisting mainly of desmin in visceral smooth muscle, link dense bands in the membrane to dense bodies in the cytoplasm and transmit the force generated by the contractile apparatus within the cell to the entire surface of the cell [8]. Intermediate junctions consisting of the juxtaposed dense bands of adjacent cells, together with collagen fibrils, transmit force from one cell to the next and couple the contractile apparatus of adjacent cells to the rest of the syncytium (Fig. 6.2).
In some regions, patches of the plasma membrane of adjacent cells are closely apposed and the space between them is bridged by intercellular channels. These patches, known as gap junctions or nexuses, are the most likely sites of electrical coupling between muscle cells; they permit movement of intracellular regulatory molecules, such as cyclic AMP (cAMP), inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), or Ca2+, and help to propagate the signal from cell to cell [1­3,9].
Dense bodies and contractile filaments occupy about 80% of the interior of the cell; the remainder is occupied by various organelles, including the nucleus, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, and rough and smooth endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum. The last, located immediately beneath and parallel to the plasma membrane, occupies 2% of the cell volume and is the site of Ca2+ uptake and release [10­13]. It consists of several functional compartments, only one of which is sensitive to IP3, a membranederived messenger responsible for the release of intracellular Ca2+ in circular smooth muscle (Fig. 6.1) [14]. The mitochondria, considered a low-affinity, high-capacity storage site, can take up large amounts of Ca2+ but only after cell injury, when cytosolic Ca2+ increases to more than maximal physiological levels (> 1­5 M) [15].
Contractile apparatus: thin and thick filaments Three types of filaments can be differentiated in smooth muscle cells: thin actin filaments (5­7 nm), thick myosin filaments (15 nm), and intermediate desmin filaments (10 nm). Intermediate filaments link dense bodies in the cytoplasm to dense bands on the plasma membrane. Although the arrangement of thin, thick, and intermediate filaments and their attachments to cytoplasmic dense bodies lack the order found in striated muscle, assemblies reminiscent of primitive sarcomeres can be seen.
Thin filaments consist of actin, a ubiquitous 42-kDa globular protein (G actin) that polymerizes to form 2-stranded helical filaments (F actin) of indeterminate length [16]. Inserted into the grooves of the actin helix is another protein, tropomyosin. Thin filaments have a distinct polarity, and they appear to be inserted into or emerge from the poles of dense bodies and are arranged in bundles that run parallel to the long axis of the cells, with their free ends surrounding and interdigitating with thick myosin filaments (Fig. 6.2) [1­3,17]. The insertion of thin filaments in dense bodies is

104

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

Globular heads with light chains
Proteolytic cleavage at hinge regions
Insoluble tail (buried in thick filament)

Cross-bridge

Figure 6.3 Component proteins of the myosin molecule. A cross-bridge projects laterally from the main segment of the myosin core (i.e., tail). Each cross-bridge consists of a pair of myosin heads, each surrounded by a 17-kDa and a 20-kDa myosin light chain and a laterally projecting segment of the myosin core between the two hinge regions. The cores of many myosin molecules form thick filaments with several projecting cross-bridges. Adapted from Murphy [8].

One pair of heavy chains
Two pairs of light chains

analogous to that found in Z discs of striated muscle cells; in effect, dense bodies may be viewed as dispersed fragments of Z discs held together and anchored to dense bands of the cell membrane by intermediate filaments.
Thick filaments are aggregates of myosin molecules, a complex 480-kDa protein formed by the association of six different proteins [16­18]. These proteins are not covalently linked and can be dissociated from each other into one pair of myosin heavy chains and two pairs of myosin light chains (MLCs) (Fig. 6.3). The heavy chains are coiled around each other to form a rigid, insoluble, helical core or tail. Each strand of the core terminates in a globular head surrounded by two MLCs: a 20-kDa regulatory chain and a 17-kDa essential chain. Each globular head contains a binding site for actin and an actin-activated Mg2+-ATPase.
A hinge located at the junction of the globular head and the core enables the head to rotate about the core. Another hinge in the core enables the globular heads to project laterally. The globular heads and the segments of the core between the two hinges are called cross-bridges because they constitute a link or bridge between thick myosin and thin actin filaments.
Only three to five thick filaments are surrounded by and interdigitate with a much larger number of actin filaments. The ratio of thin to thick filaments is reflected in the relative

content of actin and myosin. Visceral smooth muscle contains the same amount of actin as striated muscle (22 vs 28 mg/g of cell) but a lower amount of myosin (20 vs 62 mg/g of cell) [16]. Despite the low content of myosin, smooth muscle generates as much force as striated muscle (up to 6 kg/cm2 of cross-sectional area) [7,19].
Interaction of contractile proteins
The interaction of myosin and actin with hydrolysis of ATP is the fundamental reaction whereby chemical energy is converted into mechanical energy in smooth muscle, generating force and inducing shortening as a result of the sliding of overlapping, interdigitating thin and thick filaments [16,20]. The interaction occurs in a cycle, the cross-bridge cycle, the essential feature of which is a shift in the affinity of myosin for actin (Fig. 6.4). ATP, bound weakly to myosin, is hydrolyzed to ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi). The products of hydrolysis remain bound to the myosin head, and the energy released is stored in the myosin molecule, which has a high affinity for actin in this state. On release of ADP and Pi, ATP binds again to myosin, which then reverts to a state of low affinity for actin. Cross-bridge cycling ceases after the stimulus is withdrawn; the dephosphorylated myosin

105

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Thin filament A1 A2 A3
P ATP

A1 A2 A3

Myosin

Mg2+-ATPase P ATP

A1 A2 A3 P ADP.Pi

Thick filament

A1 A2 A3 P ADP.Pi

Pi

A1 A2 A3 P ATP

ADP ATP

A1 A2 A3 P ADP

Figure 6.4 Interaction of myosin and actin filaments: the cross-bridge
cycle. At the start of the cycle, the myosin head with ATP bound to it
(myosin·ATP) is detached or is weakly attached to an actin molecule (A2) in the thin filament. Hydrolysis of ATP by the myosin­Mg2+-ATPase
yields an intermediate with the products of hydrolysis still bound to it
(myosin·ADP·Pi); the intermediate is detached or weakly bound to the actin molecule. Release of Pi in the next step causes a transition from weak to strong binding of myosin and actin (actin·myosin·ADP) and a change from

90º to 45º in the angle of the myosin head. The strain imposed on the crossbridge by the change of angle is relieved when the actin molecule slides past the cross-bridge. ADP is released slowly and the myosin head rebinds ATP (myosin·ATP) and reverts to a 90º angle facing the next actin molecule (A1) for the start of another cycle. Dephosphorylation of the myosin light chain surrounding a bound myosin head yields a strongly attached, slowly cycling, latch cross-bridge. The interaction of only one myosin head in the crossbridge is illustrated. Pi, inorganic phosphate. Adapted from Hartshorne [16].

cross-bridges are arrested in a detached state, which is char-
acteristic of relaxed muscle.
Phosphorylation of myosin light chain
An essential step in smooth muscle contraction is phosphory-
lation of the 20-kDa regulatory myosin light chain (MLC20) by a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent or -independent MLC
kinase [16,20­22]. When smooth muscle is stimulated, cytosolic free Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i) increases as a result of the influx of Ca2+ into the cytosol through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and/or the release of Ca2+ into the cytosol from intracellular Ca2+ stores. Ca2+ sequentially binds to the four binding sites on the regulatory protein calmodulin; Ca2+-activated calmodulin binds to MLC kinase to form an active Ca2+/
calmodulin­MLC kinase complex [23]. Phosphorylation of
MLC20 induces a conformational change in the myosin head that greatly enhances the ability of actin to activate myosin­ Mg2+-ATPase and stimulate the hydrolysis of ATP bound to
the myosin head. The initial increase in [Ca2+]i is transient and is rapidly
dissipated by reuptake into Ca2+ stores or extrusion from the cell. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent MLC kinase activity decreases coincidentally with the decrease in [Ca2+]i, and its decrease is accelerated via phosphorylation by Ca2+/
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and p21-activated
kinase (PAK) (Fig. 6.5) [22,23]. MLC20 phosphorylation and contraction, however, are sustained by a Ca2+-independent

MLC kinase and a regulated decrease in MLC phosphatase activity [22,24­27]. The signaling pathways that mediate the initial and sustained phases of contraction are discussed in greater detail in the next section.
Unlike the biphasic pattern of agonist-stimulated tonic contraction just described, rhythmic contraction increases and decreases rapidly in phase with the influx and efflux of Ca2+ driven by rhythmic changes in membrane potential and the opening and closure of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. A close correlation prevails during phasic activity among Ca2+ levels, MLC kinase activity, MLC20 phosphorylation, crossbridge cycling rate, and contraction. Consequently, more energy is required to sustain phasic contraction. Energy is saved, however, because rhythmic contractile activity usually is maintained in abeyance by a dominant inhibitory neural input.
Signal transduction in visceral smooth muscle
Source of activator calcium The concentration of Ca2+ in the cytosol ([Ca2+]i) is the essential determinant of the initial, transient phase of tonic smooth muscle contraction. Two agonist-driven mechanisms lead to an increase in [Ca2+]i. In the first, interaction of a contractile agonist with its receptor on the plasma membrane

106

Kinase activity (%)

Contraction % Decrease in cell length

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

250
200 PKC
150
100
50 MLCK
0 0 2 4 6 8 10 20
30
20 Control
10 + KT­5926
+ Calphostin C
0 0 2 4 6 8 10 20 Min
Figure 6.5 (Upper panel) Time course of activation of protein kinase C (PKC) and myosin light chain kinase (MLCK). MLCK activity occurs mainly during the initial phase of contraction. PKC activity is derived from phosphoinositide hydrolysis by PLC-b during the initial phase and from phosphatidylcholine hydrolysis by phospholipase D during the sustained phase. (Lower panel) Initial contraction is mediated by Ca2+/calmodulindependent activation of MLCK and is inhibited by the MLCK inhibitor KT5926; sustained contraction is mediated by PKC and is inhibited by the PKC inhibitor calphostin C. See details of the pathways in the text and in Figure 6.6.
generates a messenger that causes the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores (Fig. 6.5). In the second, interaction of the contractile agonist with its receptor generates a messenger that induces depolarization of the plasma membrane, which

opens voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and causes Ca2+ influx followed by Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release from intracellular stores. The first mechanism occurs in circular muscle, the second in longitudinal muscle.
During rhythmic contraction, spontaneous depolarization of the plasma membrane by slow waves or spike potentials can open voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in muscle from both layers. By increasing the frequency or amplitude of these depolarizing events, agonists can cause a further increase in Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. In addition, agonists stimulate Ca2+ release causing a further increase in [Ca2+]i.
Components of the transduction pathway The transduction of an external signal, such as a neurotransmitter or a hormone, into an internal signal involves the sequential activation of three membrane proteins: a receptor and a guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein (G protein) that couples the receptor to a specific effector enzyme. The effector enzyme acts on membrane-bound or cytoplasmic precursors to generate one or more regulatory signals or second messengers (Figs 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8).
Receptors consist of external, membrane-spanning, and cytoplasmic domains with features that determine which specific ligand they bind or agonist they recognize and which G protein or membrane enzyme they activate [28,29].
G proteins are a large family of closely related proteins that act as signal transducers [30]. Among these are G proteins that stimulate (Gs) or inhibit (Gi and Go) adenylate cyclase activity and G proteins that stimulate phospholipase C (PLC) activity (Gq). G proteins are heterotrimeric with subunits designated , , and  in order of decreasing mass. The  subunit (G), which serves to differentiate G proteins, contains a single, high-affinity binding site for GTP and possesses GTPase activity; the latter is crucial for terminating the action of G proteins. In the basal state, guanosine diphosphate (GDP) is tightly bound to the  subunit. The binding of a ligand to its receptor enables the ligand­receptor complex to interact with the G protein and stimulate the dissociation of GDP; this opens up a site that is rapidly filled with abundant cytoplasmic GTP. The binding of GTP to the ligand­receptor­G-protein complex causes the following: · a decrease in the affinity of the ligand for the receptor and of the receptor for the G protein, thus freeing the receptor for a new cycle of ligand and G-protein binding · a decrease in the affinity of the  subunit for the  subunit, resulting in the dissociation of a G­GTP complex and a  dimer that activate different effector enzymes.
G proteins act as transducers that conduct and amplify the external signal and as adapters that allow the same receptor to be coupled to different effector enzymes. Both  and  subunits activate or inhibit effector enzymes. The involvement of  or  subunits depends on the specific receptor activated.

107

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Receptor

Ga13
RhoA
Phospholipase D Phosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidic acid

Rho kinase

­ MLC-Pase
­

MLC-p MLC

Agonist

Cl­

R
bg a GDP

bg
a GTP

PC PLA2

AA

Ca2+

ADPR cyclase

Ca2+

b-NAD+ cADPR

Diacylglycerol

Protein kinase C

CPI-17

Figure 6.6 Signal transduction pathway mediating sustained contraction of smooth muscle. The pathway involves activation of the a subunit of G13, RhoA and its associated kinase, and phospholipase D. Hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by phospholipase D generates phosphatidic acid, which is dephosphorylated to diacylglycerol with resulting activation of protein kinase C. Protein kinase C potently activates CPI-17, an endogenous inhibitor of myosin light chain (MLC) phosphatase activity, thereby maintaining MLC phosphorylation (MLC-p). A parallel pathway links Rho kinase to the inhibition of MLC phosphatase.

Agonist

R bg a GDP

bg
a GTP

PIP2 PLC-b3 PLC-b1
IP3

DAG

Ca2+.CaM/MLCK

Ca2+

ER

Figure 6.7 Signal transduction pathway for Ca2+ mobilization in smooth
muscle cells of the circular muscle layer during the initial phase of
contraction. The sequence involves binding of an agonist to a specific
receptor, activation of a transducing G protein and binding of guanosine
triphosphate (GTP) to its mobile a subunit, and dissociation of the bg
subunits. For receptors that couple to Gq (e.g., CCK1, muscarinic M3, 5-HT2), Gaq activates phospholipase C-b1 (PLC-b1); for receptors that couple to Gi (e.g., muscarinic M2, adenosine A1, opioid m, k, and d), Gbgi activates PLC-b3. In circular muscle cells, the immediate substrate hydrolyzed by PLC-b1 or PLC-b3 is phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2), yielding inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) as second messengers. IP3 diffuses through the cytosol to interact with IP3 receptors­Ca2+ channels on the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing release of Ca2+ into the cytosol. Ca2+ binds to calmodulin
(CaM) and the complex activates myosin light chain kinase (MLCK).
(See [35] and [48].)

Ca2+.CaM/MLCK

Ca2+

ER

Figure 6.8 Signal transduction pathway for Ca2+ mobilization in smooth
muscle cells of the longitudinal muscle layer during the initial phase of
contraction. The sequence involves activation of phospholipase A2 (PLA2) by Gbg and hydrolysis of membrane-bound phosphatidylcholine (PC) to
yield arachidonic acid (AA) and lysophosphatidylcholine. Arachidonic acid activates chloride (Cl-) channels causing Cl- efflux from the cell, resulting in depolarization of the plasma membrane, opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, and Ca2+ influx into the cell. The resultant increase in cytosolic Ca2+ stimulates Ca2+ release (i.e., Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release) from endoplasmic Ca2+ stores through ryanodine-sensitive receptor­Ca2+ channels. In addition, Ca2+ activates a membrane-bound ADP-ribosyl
cyclase (ADPR cyclase) that synthesizes cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR) from b-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (b-NAD+). cADPR acts as a Ca2+-mobilizing messenger, stimulating Ca2+ release by directly activating ryanodine receptor­Ca2+ channels and by potentiating Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release. (See [50­53].)

The hydrolysis of GTP by the intrinsic GTPase activity of the G­GTP complex terminates the activity of the complex; the inactive G­GDP complex binds to and inactivates  by fostering the reassociation of the , , and  subunits. The slow hydrolysis of GTP by G is accelerated by two classes of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs): one class includes effector enzymes such as PLC-; the other consists of a family of G GAPs, known as regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) [31]. All members (~ 25) of the RGS family contain a conserved GTPase-activating RGS domain that binds exclusively to G­GTP. In some RGS proteins, additional structures outside the RGS domain determine receptor and G-protein selectivity. At least seven RGS proteins are expressed in smooth muscle of the gut, including RGS4 and RGS12, associated with Gq and Gi respectively.
Effector enzymes and second messengers Several effector enzymes capable of yielding different messengers are involved in the regulation of smooth muscle contraction. They include PLC- isoforms, which are activated by the  subunit of Gq or the  subunits of Gi and Go

108

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

(Fig. 6.7); cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2), which is activated by Gi (Fig. 6.8); and phospholipase D (PLD), which is activated during the sustained phase of contraction by the
 subunit of G13 and RhoA (see Fig. 6.6). All can hydrolyze membrane-bound phospholipids. In most cell types, the
effector enzyme activated by agonists capable of mobilizing intracellular Ca2+ is one of several isoforms of PLC-
(i.e., PLC-1, PLC-2, PLC-3, and PLC-4); the isozymes
hydrolyze inositol phospholipids located on the inner
leaflet of the plasma membrane [14,32­36]. These phospho-
lipids are products of the sequential phosphorylation of
phosphatidylinositol (PI) to phosphatidylinositol monophos-
phate (PIP) and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). The last is the immediate substrate hydrolyzed by PLC-.
The hydrolysis of PIP2 generates two messengers: a water-soluble inositol phosphate, IP3, which diffuses into the cytosol to activate IP3 receptor­Ca2+ channels located in a compartment of the endoplasmic reticulum, and diacylglycerol, which activates various Ca2+-dependent (e.g., , , ) and Ca2+-independent (e.g., ) isoforms of protein kinase
C (PKC) and initiates their translocation from the cytosol
to the plasma membrane (Fig. 6.7) [34]. IP3 can be inactivated by sequential phosphorylation to IP4, IP5, or IP6, or dephosphorylation to IP2, IP, and inositol. The metabolic products of the two messengers eventually merge to recon-
stitute PI. Partial depletion of Ca2+ stores by IP3 triggers Ca2+ influx
into the cell ­ a process known as capacitative Ca2+ influx ­ and leads to Ca2+ release from adjacent Ca2+ stores (i.e., Ca2+induced Ca2+ release). The process is manifested by localized changes in Ca2+ concentration (Ca2+ oscillations) that sweep
through the cell at intervals of 5­60 s, and it is most effective in the presence of IP3 [14,37]. IP3 and Ca2+ are thought to flow rapidly (about 10 m/s) through gap junctions to
neighboring cells, propagating the intracellular signal and
providing a means for a sustained or oscillatory response of
the tissue as a whole. The IP3 receptor­Ca2+ channel is homologous to the ryan-
odine receptor­Ca2+ channel of skeletal and cardiac muscle
[38­40]. Both receptor types consist of four subunits surrounding a Ca2+ channel; each subunit contains a large N-
terminal cytoplasmic domain that includes binding sites for IP3 and Ca2+ and the site for regulatory phosphorylation (i.e., inactivation) by cGMP-dependent protein kinases (PKG).
The cytoplasmic domain appears to bridge the space between
the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma membranes and is postulated to participate in mediating capacitative Ca2+ influx
[41]. The involvement of IP3 in Ca2+ mobilization is confined to
circular smooth muscle. In longitudinal smooth muscle, Ca2+
mobilization involves cPLA2, which hydrolyzes the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylcholine to yield arachidonic
acid and lysophosphatidylcholine.

IP3-dependent calcium mobilization in cells of the circular muscle layer
The transduction pathway initiated by the hydrolysis of PIP2 is fully expressed in cells from the circular muscle layer of the
stomach, intestine, gallbladder, and various sphincters. The
various steps in this pathway have been examined in detail
in dispersed muscle cells devoid of neural elements. The
cellular homogeneity of the suspension makes it possible to
characterize receptors and intracellular messengers, such as IP3, diacylglycerol, cytosolic Ca2+, and cyclic nucleotides, and to determine their coupling to the mechanical response (i.e., con-
traction or relaxation [12,13,41­48]).
The exposure of cells derived from the circular muscle
layer to a contractile agonist induces rapid contraction (i.e.,
cell shortening) accompanied by a transient increase in IP3, Ca2+ release, and [Ca2+]i (Fig. 6.9a) [12,13,45,46]. These events are closely correlated, and their magnitudes depend
on agonist concentration (Fig. 6.9b). The initial increase in IP3 and Ca2+ is followed by the slow reuptake of Ca2+ into the cell (capacitative Ca2+ influx). The withdrawal of Ca2+ from the medium or the addition of Ca2+ channel blockers has no effect on the initial increase in [Ca2+]i but it blocks Ca2+ influx. The pattern of response in muscle cells from the circu-
lar muscle layer implies that contractile agonists elicit an ini-
tial contraction by means of G-protein-dependent activation
of PLC-, hydrolysis of membrane-bound PIP2, and generation of IP3; the last diffuses through the cytosol to interact with sarcoplasmic IP3 receptor­Ca2+ channels to induce Ca2+ release and a transient increase in [Ca2+]i. Depletion of Ca2+ stores triggers capacitative Ca2+ influx.
The coupling of receptors to G proteins and effector
enzymes in smooth muscle is summarized in a review by
Makhlouf and Murthy [49]. Most receptors mediating con-
traction in circular muscle are coupled via Gq to PLC-1 and PIP2 hydrolysis; some are coupled via Gi/o to PLC-3. Acetylcholine acting through muscarinic M3 receptors, cholecystokinin (CCK) through CCK1 receptors, the tachykinins (substance P and neurokinin A) through NK1 and NK2 receptors, endothelin through ETA and ETB receptors, neuropeptide Y (NPY) through Y2 receptors, and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) through Y4 receptors are preferentially coupled via Gq to PLC-1. Somatostatin acting through SST3 receptors, opioid peptides through , , and  receptors, and
adenosine through A1 receptors are preferentially coupled via the  subunits of Gi1, Gi2, and Gi3, respectively, to PLC3. Adenosine and uridine triphosphate (ATP and UTP) act-
ing through P2Y2 receptors, and sphingosine-1-phosphate through S1P2 receptors are coupled via Gq to PLC-1 as well as via Gi to PLC-3. Some Gi-coupled receptors, such as Y1 receptors, S1P1 receptors, and endocannabinoid CB1 receptors, do not activate PLC-: CB1 and Y1 receptors are coupled to an aberrant G protein consisting of Gi2, G5, and RGS6; the last contains a G-like domain that substitutes for G

109

D[Ca++]i (nM)

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

100 [Ca2+]i Ca2+ efflux
Contraction 80

60

40

20

0 0 15 30 60
(a)
100

120 Seconds

180

120 100 80 60 40 20 0 240

80

Response (% of maximum)

60

40
Contraction 20 Ca++ efflux
[Ca++]i
0 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
(b) CCK-OP (-log M)
Figure 6.9 Time course (a) and stoichiometry (b) of contraction, cytosolic Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i), and Ca2+ release from endoplasmic stores in smooth muscle cells isolated from guinea pig stomach in response to cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK-OP). Similar results are obtained for muscle cells from human stomach and intestine using other agonists. From Bitar et al. [45], with permission from AAAS.
and renders the G5­RGS6 complex incapable of activating PLC-. Muscarinic M2 receptors, activated concurrently with M3 receptors by acetylcholine, are coupled via Gi3 to PLC3 and Ca2+ mobilization, but are incapable by themselves of inducing contraction; this is because M2 receptors are coupled to another pathway that leads to inactivation of Ca2+-dependent MLC kinase. The ligands for these receptors are variously derived from excitatory enteric neurons (acetylcholine, tachykinins), from the circulation (PP), from muscle cells (S1P, endocannabinoids), or other cell types (histamine).

% Contraction or % Ca++ efflux

IP3-independent calcium mobilization in cells of the longitudinal muscle layer
All of the receptors listed in the previous section are ex-
pressed in longitudinal smooth muscle except for somato-
statin, opioid, and Y1 receptors [49]. The receptors initiate contraction by mobilizing Ca2+ via a distinct mechanism that
is evident in all mammalian species examined so far, includ-
ing human, dog, rabbit, guinea pig, rat, and mouse.
The pattern of inositol phospholipid metabolism in longi-
tudinal muscle differs markedly from that in circular muscle.
Only a small amount of IP3 is generated in longitudinal muscle, less than 10% of that generated in circular muscle. The
preferred substrate is PIP, which yields the inactive IP2 and diacylglycerol [35,47­51]. IP3 does not bind to the endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic membranes of longitudinal muscle cells or cause Ca2+ release at maximal concentrations (1 M); partial Ca2+ release is elicited at supramaximal concentra-
tions (10­50 M). Contraction and the increase in [Ca2+]i induced by agonists
in muscle cells from the longitudinal muscle layer are IP3independent and are abolished in Ca2+-free medium or in the presence of Ca2+ channel blockers, implying that an initial step involving Ca2+ influx is a prerequisite for Ca2+ mobilization in these cells [38,41­ 43]. The initial influx of Ca2+ acts as a trigger for Ca2+ release from intracellular stores (i.e., Ca2+induced Ca2+ release) (Fig. 6.8). These stores are highly sensitive to Ca2+ alone; increments of [Ca2+]i in the physiological range (100­500 nM) trigger Ca2+ release. In contrast, Ca2+ stores in circular muscle develop high sensitivity to Ca2+ only
in the presence of IP3. Ryanodine, a specific ligand of ryanodine receptor­Ca2+ channels in skeletal and cardiac muscle,
binds with high affinity to the sarcoplasmic membranes of longitudinal muscle cells and induces Ca2+ release (EC50 2 nM) and contraction (EC50 1 nM) [50]. The characteristics of ryanodine binding and Ca2+ release in longitudinal muscle
cells are similar to those in cardiac muscle cells [38]. The messenger responsible for initiating Ca2+ mobilization
in longitudinal muscle cells is arachidonic acid, a product
of the hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by cPLA2 (Fig. 6.8). An initial agonist-induced, G protein-mediated activation
of cPLA2 occurs in longitudinal, but not circular, muscle cells [51]. Suppression of cPLA2 activity by selective inhibitors abolishes contraction and the increase in [Ca2+]i induced by agonists in longitudinal muscle cells. Arachi-
donic acid in nanomolar concentrations mimics the effect of contractile agonists and causes an increase in [Ca2+]i that is abolished by Ca2+ channel blockers. The increase in [Ca2+]i reflects arachidonic acid-dependent Ca2+ influx followed by Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release from intracellular stores. Depletion of Ca2+ stores attenuates the increase in [Ca2+]i by eliminating the component resulting from Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release; the residual increase in [Ca2+]i reflects the initial step, that is arachidonic acid-dependent Ca2+ influx. Ca2+ influx results from activation of Cl- channels by arachidonic acid,

110

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

which leads to depolarization of the plasma membrane and opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (Fig. 6.8) [52].
The ryanodine receptor­Ca2+ channels in longitudinal muscle
cells are highly sensitive to cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR), a product of the hydrolysis of -nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (-NAD+) by ADP-ribosyl cyclase, a membrane-
bound enzyme present in longitudinal, but not circular,
muscle cells (Fig. 6.8) [53]. cADPR formation is stimulated in
a concentration-dependent fashion by contractile agonists
in longitudinal, but not circular, muscle cells. It binds with high affinity to microsomes (IC50 2 nM), stimulates Ca2+ release (EC50 4 nM) by itself, and potentiates Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release.
In summary, Ca2+ mobilization in longitudinal muscle
is mediated by an IP3-independent mechanism that is initiated by Gi-dependent activation of cPLA2 and generation of arachidonic acid; the latter activates Cl- channels and
thus causes depolarization of the plasma membrane and opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. Ca2+ influx through these channels induces Ca2+ release by activating sarcoplasmic reticulum ryanodine receptor­Ca2+ channels.
Concomitant activation of membrane-bound ADP-ribosyl cyclase generates cADPR, which potentiates Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release.
Regulation of cytosolic calcium at rest and during contraction Resting and agonist-stimulated [Ca2+]i in cells from the longitudinal or circular muscle layers are remarkably similar in
various species (e.g., human, guinea pig, rabbit) [13,50­53].
Resting levels (70­100 nM) increase 2- to 3-fold during
half-maximal contraction and 6- to 8-fold during maximal
contraction. Exposure of permeabilized muscle cells to these concentrations of Ca2+ elicits degrees of contraction similar to
those elicited by agonists in intact muscle cells.
Smooth muscle cells, like other cells, possess efficient mechanisms to dispose of the Ca2+ transients that occur dur-
ing contraction. In the resting state, the cells maintain low concentrations of Ca2+ in the cytosol despite large chemical (e.g., 2 mM Ca2+ outside vs 100 nM Ca2+ inside the cell) and electrical (e.g., membrane potential of -40 to -80 mV) gradients favoring the movement of Ca2+ into the cell. The gradient for Ca2+ is maintained because of low permeability of the plasma membrane to Ca2+, the presence of efficient Ca2+
extrusion mechanisms in the plasma membrane, and a Ca2+ uptake mechanism in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The Ca2+ extrusion mechanisms in the plasma membrane include a calmodulin-dependent Ca2+,Mg2+-ATPase, which acts as a high-affinity Ca2+ pump sustained by ATP hydrolysis that responds to Ca2+ concentrations, similar to those that occur during contraction, and a low-affinity, high-capacity Na+/ Ca2+ exchanger sustained by the Na+ gradient across the
plasma membrane, which responds to more drastic changes in cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations.

The Ca2+ uptake mechanism is a high-affinity sarco ­endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase pump (SERCA2) that participates in dissipating the cytosolic Ca2+ transients during contraction. Most of the Ca2+ required to replenish sarco­ endoplasmic Ca2+ stores after agonist stimulation of smooth muscle cells in the gut enters from the outside through capacitative Ca2+ channels and to a small extent (~ 20%) through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels.
Calcium-independent sustained contraction The initial transient contraction mediated by Ca2+ is followed by a sustained contraction. The same receptors that initiate Ca2+ mobilization and MLC20 phosphorylation and contraction also engage a distinct G protein-dependent pathway that mediates sustained MLC20 phosphorylation and contraction. Thus, receptors coupled to Gq are also coupled to G13 and they trigger a cascade involving sequential activation of G13 and RhoA guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Rho-GEF), which results in activation of RhoA (Fig. 6.6) [21­27]. Activated RhoA (Rho­GTP) is translocated to the plasma membrane where it activates both Rho kinase and PLD [27,54]. Hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by PLD yields phosphatidic acid, which is dephosphorylated to diacylglycerol, resulting in sustained activation of Ca2+-dependent and -independent PKC isozymes (e.g., PKC-) (Figs 6.5 and 6.6) [25,55]. Rho kinase and PKC act cooperatively to inhibit MLC phosphatase activity.
The MLC phosphatase holoenzyme consists of three subunits including a 37-kDa catalytic subunit of type 1 phosphatase (PP1c) and a 110- to 130-kDa regulatory subunit, known as myosin phosphatase target subunit 1 or MYPT1; the latter is present in high concentrations in smooth muscle and its binding to the catalytic subunit enhances catalytic activity [21,22,24]. Phosphorylation of MYPT1 by Rho kinase fosters dissociation of the catalytic and regulatory subunits and inhibits catalytic activity. PKC, mainly PKC- and PKC-, phosphorylates CPI-17, a 17-kDa endogenous inhibitor of MLC phosphatase, greatly increasing its ability to inhibit MLC phosphatase (Fig. 6.6) [22,24,27]. Thus, a dual Rhodependent mechanism causes sustained inhibition of MLC phosphatase and enables a Ca2+-independent MLC kinase (probably zipper-interacting protein kinase; ZIP kinase) to phosphorylate MLC20.
The initial phase of contraction mediated by a Ca2+/ calmodulin-dependent MLC kinase and the sustained phase mediated by a Ca2+-independent MLC kinase, whose potency is enhanced by concurrent inhibition of MLC phosphatase, are distinct and can be blocked separately. The initial phase is blocked by inhibitors of Ca2+ mobilization (inhibitors of PLC- activity in circular muscle and cPLA2 activity in longitudinal muscle), by calmodulin antagonists, and by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent MLC kinase inhibitors. The sustained phase is blocked by RhoA, Rho kinase, and PKC inhibitors.

111

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Gi-coupled receptors activated by somatostatin, adenosine, and opioid peptides are not coupled to G13, RhoA, or downstream effectors yet they can induce an initial Ca2+-dependent and a sustained Ca2+-independent contraction via Gi. This Gi activates PLC-3, which elicits a Ca2+-dependent contraction, and cytoskeletal integrin-linked kinase (ILK) [22], which inhibits MLC phosphatase by phosphorylating CPI-17 and also acts directly as a Ca2+-independent MLC kinase.
Regional differences in smooth muscle signaling The mechanisms of Ca2+-dependent and Ca2+-independent contraction operate in smooth muscle of the stomach, small intestine, colon, and various sphincters, including the lower esophageal sphincter. Signaling for contraction in smooth muscle of the esophageal body is different and is dependent on Ca2+ influx but not on activation of MLC kinase; contraction appears to be mediated by PKC- and a Ca2+-independent MLC kinase [56]. Although guinea pig taeniae coli are a condensation of longitudinal muscle, signaling in this tissue resembles that observed in circular muscle [57].
Mechanisms of relaxation by PKA and PKG Regulation of cAMP and cGMP levels by cyclases, phosphodiesterases, and protein kinases Inhibition of initial contraction (i.e., relaxation) results from inhibition of the initial increase in [Ca2+]i. Most agents cause relaxation by stimulating the production of cAMP (e.g., adrenergic agonists), cGMP (e.g., nitric oxide [NO]), or both cAMP and cGMP (e.g., vasoactive intestinal polypeptide [VIP] and its homologue pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide [PACAP]), leading to the activation of PKA, PKG, or both [58­63]. The levels of cAMP and cGMP in gastrointestinal smooth muscle are regulated by the combined activities of cyclases (i.e., membrane-bound adenylate cyclase types V and VI and soluble guanylate cyclase) and phosphodiesterases (PDEs) [64­67]. Cyclic AMP, which is produced in amounts 10­15 times greater than cGMP, is rapidly degraded by cAMP-specific PDE3A and PDE4D5 [64,65]. Both enzymes are activated by PKA, but only PDE3A is inhibited by cGMP. cGMP is rapidly degraded by cGMPspecific PDE5, which is activated by PKG; when both cAMP and cGMP are present, PDE5 is also activated by PKA [65,66]. Each protein kinase selectively inhibits the activity of the corresponding synthetic enzyme: PKA inhibits adenylate cyclase and PKG inhibits soluble guanylate cyclase [64,66]. Thus, regulatory feedback from the protein kinases inhibits synthesis and accelerates degradation, thereby maintaining the levels of cyclic nucleotides within narrow ranges. The interplay of protein kinases, cyclases, and PDEs in the regulation of cyclic nucleotide levels in smooth muscle is depicted in Fig. 6.10.
Although cAMP preferentially activates PKA, it can, at higher concentrations (e.g., with high concentrations of

ACV/VI cAMP

PDE5 ++

+

PKA PKG

cGMP

­ sGC

­ +­
PDE3A
Figure 6.10 Interplay of adenylate and guanylate cyclases with cyclic nucleotide-dependent phosphodiesterases and protein kinases. Concurrent release of nitric oxide, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide is the physiological norm in gastrointestinal smooth muscle, leading to activation of adenylate cyclase type V/VI (ACV/VI) and soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC). This leads to concurrent generation of cyclic AMP (cAMP) and cyclic GMP (cGMP) and activation of both cAMP-dependent and cGMP-dependent protein kinases (PKA and PKG). PKA activates cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase 3 and 4 (PDE3 and PDE4) and inhibits adenylate cyclase activity, thus stimulating degradation and inhibiting further synthesis of cAMP. PKG activates cGMPspecific PDE5 and inhibits soluble guanylate cyclase activity, thus stimulating degradation and inhibiting further synthesis of cGMP. PDE5 is further activated by PKA, whereas PDE3 is inhibited by cGMP. Thus, concurrent generation of cAMP and cGMP leads to enhancement of cAMP levels (through inhibition of PDE3 by cGMP) and attenuation of cGMP levels (through activation of PDE5 by PKA). Furthermore, the affinity of cAMP for, and its ability to activate, PKG is greatly enhanced in the presence of cGMP. Because cAMP is present at 10­15 times higher levels than cGMP, it becomes the main activator of PKG. From Murthy et al. [64] (see also ref. 66).

relaxant agonists), also cross-activate PKG (Fig. 6.10) [62]. An increase in both cAMP and cGMP, such as that brought about by corelease of NO, VIP, and PACAP from the same or adjacent nerve terminals, is the physiological norm during nerve-induced relaxation in the gut. Inhibition of PDE3A by cGMP enhances cAMP levels, whereas activation of PDE5 by PKA and PKG attenuates cGMP levels. Autophosphorylation of PKG by cGMP greatly increases its affinity for the more abundant cAMP. Under these conditions, PKG is activated by both cGMP and cAMP [67,68].
Relaxation of Ca2+-dependent contraction by PKA and PKG Although both PKA and PKG decrease [Ca2+]i, they do so by different mechanisms. Common and distinctive cellular targets of PKA and PKG in smooth muscle are depicted in Fig. 6.11. · Both protein kinases can inhibit Ca2+ mobilization by inhibiting IP3 formation in circular muscle and arachidonic acid formation in longitudinal muscle. The mechanism of inhibition of IP3 formation involves phosphorylation of RGS4 by either kinase, leading to more rapid degradation of Gq­GTP and inhibition of PLC-1 activity.

112

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

ACV/ VI ­

K+ Ca2+

+­

PLC-b/PLA2 ­

+ PDE3

PKA

PKA/PKG

PKG ­ sGC

+ PDE5

­ MLCK

­ + RhoA MLCP

+­ IP3R
SR

Figure 6.11 Distinct and shared cellular targets of cyclic AMP (cAMP)- and cyclic GMP (cGMP)-dependent protein kinases (PKA and PKG). Only PKA activates cAMP-specific phosphodiesterases 3 and 4 (PDE3 and PDE4) and inhibits adenylate cyclase type V/VI (ACV/VI), thus attenuating cAMP levels. Only PKG inhibits soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) activity, stimulates Ca2+ uptake into the sarcoplasmic reticulum stores, and inhibits sarcoplasmic Ca2+ channels. Other targets are shared by both protein kinases. As shown, either one or both kinases decrease cytosolic Ca2+ levels by: (1) inhibiting the activity of phospholipase C-b (PLC-b) in circular muscle and PLA2 in longitudinal muscle, thereby diminishing the synthesis of Ca2+-mobilizing messengers; (2) inhibiting Ca2+ release from sarcoplasmic Ca2+ stores (SR) by phosphorylating inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) and ryanodine receptors/Ca2+ channels; (3) stimulating Ca2+ uptake into stores by activating the endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic Ca2+-ATPase pump; (4) inhibiting the activity of plasmalemmal Ca2+ channels; and (5) stimulating the activity of plasmalemmal K+ channels. The resultant hyperpolarization causes further inactivation of plasmalemmal Ca2+ channels and suppresses Ca2+ influx into the cell. Both PKA and PKG inhibit Ca2+/calmodulindependent myosin light chain (MLC) kinase (MLCK) activity and stimulate MLC phosphatase (MLCP) activity, thereby decreasing MLC phosphorylation during the initial and sustained phases of contraction, and both kinases inhibit RhoA activity, thereby interrupting the pathway that mediates sustained contraction. The net effects of PKA and PKG are to inhibit muscle contraction and to induce relaxation.

· Only PKG can phosphorylate SERCA2 and thus accelerate Ca2+ reuptake into the stores [66].
· Both PKA and PKG can phosphorylate the IP3 receptor in vitro or in permeabilized smooth muscle cells, but only PKG
can phosphorylate the IP3 receptor in vivo and thus inhibit IP3-induced Ca2+ release, implying that PKA does not gain access to the IP3 receptor under physiological conditions. · Finally, both kinases inhibit the activity of membrane Ca2+ channels and stimulate the activity of membrane K+ chan-
nels, leading to hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane and interruption of Ca2+ influx into the cell. This mechanism
is important in the relaxation of rhythmic contractions.

In summary, both PKA and PKG can inhibit the formation of Ca2+-mobilizing messengers, but only PKG can directly inhibit IP3-induced Ca2+ release in circular muscle by phosphorylating the IP3 receptor­Ca2+ channel. PKG probably inhibits Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release in longitudinal muscle by phosphorylating the ryanodine receptor­Ca2+ channel.
Relaxation of Ca2+-independent contraction Inhibition of sustained contraction is chiefly mediated by phosphorylation of activated RhoA at Ser188 causing its inactivation and translocation back to the cytosol [69]. The importance of this mechanism is in its location at the beginning of the signaling pathway that mediates sustained contraction. Further downstream, PKA and PKG can phosphorylate MYPT1 at Ser695, which prevents phosphorylation of MYPT1 at an adjacent site by Rho kinase [70]. In addition, both kinases are able to phospshorylate and enhance the activity of telokin, an endogenous activator of MLC phosphatase [71].
Desensitization of receptor function Signaling by G protein-coupled receptors is rapidly attenuated or terminated by mechanisms that target receptors or G proteins. Agonist-occupied receptors are phosphorylated by specific G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs, usually GRK2 in smooth muscle), whose effect may be enhanced via feedback phosphorylation of GRK2 by second messengeractivated kinases such as PKA. Binding of the phosphorylated receptor to -arrestin initiates internalization (endocytosis). -arrestin targets the phosphorylated receptors to clathrincoated pits and acts as a scaffold for various MAP kinases. The cytosolic tyrosine kinase, c-Src, which also binds to -arrestin, phosphorylates a large GTPase, dynamin, and promotes its ability to cleave clathrin-coated vesicles from the membrane. Vesicles fuse with endosomes where receptors are either degraded or recycled to the cell surface.
Two mechanisms that target G proteins participate in desensitization of response; they involve RGS proteins and caveolin-3 [6,31,72]. Spontaneous deactivation of G subunits via their intrinsic GTPase activity is accelerated by RGS proteins (see Components of the transduction pathway). The activated G proteins can also bind to caveolin-3, which hinders the reassociation of G and G subunits and impedes the subsequent response mediated by a different receptor that couples to the same G protein.
Electrical properties of smooth muscle
Resting membrane potential The resting membrane potential, defined as the steady state potential at which the net flow of current (i.e., ions) across the plasma membrane is zero, varies from about ­40 to ­80 mV

113

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

in muscle cells of the gut [73­77]. Graded differences in resting membrane potential exist between muscle cells in different regions, such as the fundus, corpus, and antrum of the stomach, and between muscle cells located at different depths in the same region, such as cells near the myenteric border and cells near the submucosal border of circular muscle in the antrum or colon.
The membrane potential is largely determined by the activity of the Na+,K+ pump (i.e., Na+,K+-ATPase), which sets up diffusion gradients for K+ (162 mM inside vs 5 mM outside) and Na+ (136 mM outside vs 14 mM inside) across the membrane. The permeability of the membrane to K+ is much greater than the permeability to Na+, and the flow of K+ ions down their electrochemical gradient creates a diffusion potential that is the major contributor to the resting membrane potential. K+ ions flow through passive K+-selective channels that remain open at rest [78].
In addition to setting up ionic gradients, the Na+,K+ pump is electrogenic, moving three Na+ ions out of the cell for every two K+ ions into the cell; the net outward flow of positive charge can contribute up to 30 mV to the resting membrane potential. Variability in the direct contribution of this pump may account for regional differences in resting membrane potential. A Cl- pump, which maintains low Cl- concentrations (55 mM) in the cell, can contribute up to 10 mV to the resting membrane potential; its effect is partly offset by the tendency of Cl- ions to diffuse out of the cell.
Gated ion-selective channels In addition to passive ion-selective channels, the plasma membrane contains ion-selective channels that can be regulated by membrane potential (i.e., voltage-gated channels) and by various humoral, hormonal, or neural agents (i.e., agonist- or ligand-gated channels). Ligands can activate channels directly and through G proteins in the membrane. Ligands can also activate, inhibit, or modulate voltage-gated channels through second messengers.
Channels in the plasma membrane usually are selective for one ion, such as K+ or Ca2+, although some allow the passage of more than one ion. The two main types of ion channels involved in the regulation of rhythmic activity of smooth muscle of the gut are selective for K+ or Ca2+. The properties of Ca2+ and K+ channels were first characterized in amphibian gastric muscle cells [79­81] and subsequently in muscle cells from various regions of the mammalian gut [82­86]. The flow of ions in single channels can be measured in small patches of plasma membrane [74,75,82,84]. The patches can be electrically isolated by suction into the tip of a micropipette, where they form a tight seal that makes it possible to record current flow in one or only a few channels in the patch. The patches can remain attached to the rest of the plasma membrane or can become fully detached such that the inner (i.e., inside-out patch) or outer (i.e., outsideout patch) surface of the membrane faces the external

medium. Each configuration has its advantages: inside-out patches are useful for examining the role of intracellular messengers; outside-out patches are useful for examining the influence of extracellular ions; and patches in the whole cell configuration are useful for examining the effect of ligands and second messengers.
The use of patches has made it possible to characterize ion channels in terms of their ion selectivity, membrane density, activation and inactivation kinetics, voltage or ligand dependence, and dependence on changes in intracellular Ca2+. The channels are electrically defined by their conductance (i.e., reciprocal of resistance), which is expressed in picosiemens (pS) as the amount of current flowing through the channel in response to an electrical gradient (i.e., current/voltage).
Voltage-gated calcium ion channels Voltage-gated Ca2+ channels have been identified in muscle cells from the stomach and intestine of several mammals [84,86]. The channels carry the inward Ca2+ current responsible for the upstroke of the fast action potential. The channels are activated rapidly by depolarization of the plasma membrane to about -40 mV but are inactivated more slowly. Inactivation occurs as a result of Ca2+ influx and membrane depolarization. The voltage range of activation (-40 to -10 mV) overlaps with that of inactivation (-60 to 0 mV); at -40 to -50 mV, some channels remain open and can carry a steady inward Ca2+ current [87,88]. The potential at which such a current may flow is close to resting membrane potential in some muscle cells and usually is attained during the plateau phase of a slow wave.
Voltage-gated potassium ion channels Several types of K+ channel have been identified in gastric and intestinal smooth muscle [83­95]. The channels differ in their conductance, ranges of voltage activation, and Ca2+ sensitivities. The most widely distributed is a high-conductance (100 pS), Ca2+-activated, voltage-sensitive K+ channel [83,85,89­91]. During resting conditions, when [Ca2+]i is low (< 10-7 M), relatively few channels are open. On stimulation, the increase in [Ca2+]i induces activation of large numbers of K+ channels, which carry an outward current that drives the membrane potential to its resting state (i.e., the K+ equilibrium potential). A stimulus that acts by inducing membrane depolarization and Ca2+ influx is thus terminated. A second voltage-sensitive K+ channel with lower conductance (50 pS) has been identified; it opens up on prolonged depolarization, as occurs during the plateau phase of slow waves [84]. Other K+ channels detected in gastrointestinal smooth muscle include delayed-rectifier, apamin-sensitive, and ATP-sensitive K+ channels. An apamin-sensitive K+ channel expressed in some human and guinea pig smooth muscles (chiefly taeniae coli) mediates the relaxant effect of PACAP in these tissues [92].

114

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

Rhythmic electrical activity of smooth muscle
Control of rhythmic electrical activity by Ca2+ and K+ ion channels Ca2+ channels and Ca2+-activated K+ channels constitute the electrical apparatus that sustains rhythmicity in smooth muscle. The Ca2+ sensitivity of K+ channels links their activity to that of Ca2+ channels and creates the dynamic framework for rhythmic electrical activity. Activation of Ca2+ channels induces an inward flow of Ca2+ ions that depolarizes the membrane and increases [Ca2+]i. Depolarization and an increase in [Ca2+]i inactivate the Ca2+ channels and activate the K+ channels by inducing an outward flow of K+ ions. Suppression of the inward flow of Ca2+ ions and enhancement of the outward flow of K+ ions restore the resting membrane potential. The speed, amplitude, and duration of these cycles of depolarization and repolarization depend on the relative proportions of Ca2+ and K+ channels, modulation by neural and humoral agents, participation of other voltagegated channels, and coupling of muscle cells to each other and to pacemaker cells.
Fast action potentials Only fast action potentials (i.e., spike potentials) occur in isolated muscle cells, spontaneously or after application of small depolarizing currents; slow waves are not seen [74,79,84,87]. Cell dispersion uncouples muscle cells from pacemaker regions responsible for slow wave activity and from other muscle cells in the syncytium. Small inward currents can cause rapid and complete depolarization of isolated muscle cells, with resulting maximal activation of Ca2+ channels and rapid influx of Ca2+. The depolarization and substantial increase in [Ca2+]i inactivate the Ca2+ channels and induce massive activation of the K+ channels. The rapid depolarization and repolarization are characteristic of fast action potentials.
Fast action potentials lasting 0.1­0.2 s can occur in intact muscle [74­77]. They occur spontaneously in regions of the gut where the resting membrane potential is more positive than a threshold of -30 mV or where it can be raised above that threshold by neural stimulation. In other regions spike potentials occur only after the membrane has been depolarized by slow waves. Whether they occur spontaneously or are superimposed on slow waves, spike potentials are accompanied by muscle contraction. However, they are not essential for contraction, which can also be generated by changes in the amplitude and duration of the plateau potential of slow waves.
Interstitial cells of Cajal: electrical pacemakers and mediators of enteric neurotransmission Interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) are a distinctive population of enteric cells that, depending on their location, are either spindle-shaped muscle-like cells or stellate cells [96,97].

Both cell types express c-kit, the protooncogene that encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase c-kit; the latter is activated by its natural ligand, stem cell factor or steel factor, and its activation is required for normal development of the cells. The availability of c-kit antibody has enabled immunohistochemical analysis of ICC distribution and morphology and functional analysis using neutralizing concentrations of antibody. Double immunohistochemical labeling for enteric neurotransmitters and c-kit has shown ICC to be closely associated with enteric nerve fibers (~ 25 nm), compared with greater distances between nerve fibers and smooth muscle cells (50­100 nm) [98]. The closeness of nerve fibers to ICC, and ICC to smooth muscle cells led Cajal to propose that ICC were functionally interposed between nerve terminals and smooth muscle cells.
Stellate ICC located near the myenteric plexus at the interface of circular and longitudinal muscle (designated IC-MY) and similar cells located at the interface of circular muscle and submucosa in the colon are pacemaker cells responsible for generating rhythmic activity [99­101]. Intramuscular, spindle-shaped ICC (designated IC-IM) located within the musculature of the esophagus, stomach, colon, and various sphincters, and morphologically similar ICC located in the deep muscular plexus of the small intestine (designated ICDMP) have been implicated in enteric neurotransmission [97,99]. These distinct classes of ICC, first identified in the mouse, are also present in other species.
Evidence for pacemaker function of ICC was first obtained in dispersed ICC from the pacemaker region of the canine colon [102]. The cells were spontaneously active, generating slow-wave depolarizations similar to those observed in situ (see section on slow waves). In the intestine of the mutant W/W v mouse, which is devoid of intestinal IC-MY but retains IC-DMP, intestinal rhythmic activity is absent [103,104] whereas enteric neurotransmission in the form of excitatory and inhibitory junction potentials is retained, providing clear evidence that IC-MY in the intestine are responsible for pacemaker activity (generation of slow waves) whereas IC-DMP are responsible for enteric neurotransmission. In the stomach of the W/Wv mouse, which is devoid of IC-IM (functionally similar to intestinal IC-DMP), enteric neurotransmission (identified by junction potentials) is greatly inhibited [97]. Detailed analysis of rhythmic electrical activity suggests that pacemaker waves initiated in IC-MY are conducted passively to IC-IM and from there to smooth muscle; when recorded in smooth muscle, slow wave activity reflects these sequential, combined processes. Viewed in this light, IC-IM facilitate the transmission of rhythmic activity initiated in pacemaker ICMY and mediate neural activity initiated by enteric nerves. The regulation of muscle tone, however, is not mediated by changes in smooth muscle membrane potential (except in depolarized muscle) but by signaling cascades initiated by enteric neurotransmitters acting directly on smooth muscle receptors.

115

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Plateau potential

Upstroke

RMP Prepotential

Duration

Figure 6.12 Profile of a typical slow wave. A slight depolarization (i.e., prepotential) of the resting membrane potential (RMP) precedes and may trigger slow waves in some regions. A rapid upstroke is followed by partial repolarization, a plateau potential of variable duration on which may be superimposed small RMP oscillations or spike potentials, and complete repolarization.

Slow waves Profile A typical slow wave consists of the following sequence: rapid depolarization (i.e., upstroke), partial repolarization, a sustained plateau lasting several seconds, and complete repolarization to the resting membrane potential (Fig. 6.12) [76,77].
The amplitudes, durations, and frequencies of slow waves vary with the location of the muscle [81]. Frequency decreases aborally in human and canine stomach (i.e., 3­5 cycles/min in the corpus to 1.5 cycles/min in the antrum) and intestine (i.e., 12 cycles/min in the duodenum, 7 cycles/min in the ileum, and 5­6 cycles/min in the proximal colon). The frequency gradient is continuous and intrinsic to each region; segments of intestine obtained sequentially along the main axis oscillate at progressively decreasing frequencies. In the canine stomach, the decreasing gradient in frequency is accompanied by an increasing gradient both in the resting membrane potential (i.e., -51 mV in the corpus to -71 mV in the antrum) and in the duration of the plateau potential (i.e., 5 s in the corpus to 20 s in the antrum).
Gradients in resting membrane potential and in the amplitude of plateau potential also occur in the transverse direction within the thickness of circular muscle [76]. The decrease in the amplitude of the plateau potential in the transverse direction reflects the decay of slow waves with increasing distance from the main pacemaker regions at the boundaries of circular muscle.
Site of origin As noted above, slow waves originate in pacemaker regions located at the myenteric and submucosal borders of circular muscle [75­77]. The ICC network in these regions initiates rhythmic electrical activity [96­110].

Propagation Slow waves originating in pacemaker regions propagate rapidly around circular muscle and throughout its thickness in the transverse and long axes of the gut. Propagation is rapid and is facilitated by the network of intramuscular ICC (IC-IM) and the abundance of gap junctions between muscle cells. Slow waves originating in the myenteric pacemaker region of circular muscle (IC-MY) also spread to the longitudinal muscle [105,106,110­114].
After spreading circumferentially, slow waves propagate in oral and aboral directions as discrete rings of excitation capable of eliciting segmental contractions. Propagation in only one direction (i.e., oral or aboral) can occur if the frequency gradient is steep and if the conduction velocity is fast enough to allow slow waves originating in one segment to set the pace of slow waves in another segment [83] or if inhibitory neural input to one segment limits propagation to that segment [112]. Inhibitory neural input reaching muscle cells directly or via intramuscular ICC (IC-IM) hyperpolarizes the resting membrane potential and prevents the occurrence of a slow wave, or it decreases the plateau potential and prevents the development of a contraction. Inhibitory neural input reflecting the corelease of NO, VIP, and related neuropeptides appears to predominate normally, masking rhythmic electrical and contractile activity [112].
Ionic mechanisms Pacemaker ICC possess distinct channels responsible for initiation of slow waves and their propagation to electrically coupled smooth muscle cells. The mechanism appears to involve a localized decrease in [Ca2+]i that causes the opening of nonselective cationic channels in ICC [101]. The decrease in [Ca2+]i is preceded by release of Ca2+ from sarcoplasmic stores

116

60 mgf

+

Figure 6.13 Relation between the amplitude and duration of the plateau potential (lower panel) and the corresponding contraction (upper panel) of longitudinal muscle of canine antrum in response to acetylcholine. From Szurszewski [106].

20 mV

­

10 s

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

7 6
5 4
3*
2 1
c

[Acetylcholine] × 10­8 7 = 5.5
6 = 4.4 5 = 3.3 4 = 2.2 3* = 1.5
2=1 1 = 0.5 c = 0.0

via IP3 type I receptors followed by Ca2+ uptake into mitochondria to create a zone of low [Ca2+]i below the plasma membrane. The involvement of IP3 receptors is based on the fact that mice lacking these receptors do not exhibit rhythmic activity. The precise trigger for Ca2+ release via IP3 receptors in the absence of agonist is unknown. Ca2+ influx via
the nonselective cationic channels appears to be involved,
because the upstroke potential is reduced in the absence of extracellular Ca2+. The plateau potential corresponds to the level at which Ca2+ channels are activated, and its amplitude
in smooth muscle reflects the combined activity of voltagegated Ca2+ and K+ channels. Ca2+-activated K+ channels appear to be the main type of K+ channel involved in repolar-
ization of the membrane.
Role in phasic contraction The amplitude and duration of the plateau potential determine the magnitude of Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and can be modulated by excitatory and
inhibitory neurotransmitters acting either directly on muscle
cells or via intramuscular ICC (IC-IM) coupled electrically to
muscle cells (Fig. 6.13). Excitatory neurotransmitters, such
as acetylcholine or tachykinins, increase the amplitude and
duration of the plateau potential and cause a concentrationdependent increase in [Ca2+]i and contraction [106,115,116]. The increase in Ca2+ is accentuated by Ca2+ release from Ca2+
stores. Spike potentials can be superimposed on plateau potentials and can further augment [Ca2+]i and contraction. In some regions, such as the distal antrum and inner lamella
of circular muscle in the small intestine, spike potentials
appear to be necessary for contraction [75,77,111,117]. In-
hibitory neurotransmitters (e.g., NO, VIP, PACAP) decrease

the amplitude and duration of the plateau potential or reduce the frequency of spike potentials and prevent the development of contraction associated with a slow wave. These neurotransmitters act predominantly by activating PKA and PKG, which inhibit Ca2+ channel activity and stimulate K+ channel activity (Fig. 6.11).
Regional patterns of contractile activity The magnitude of the resting membrane potential, the form, frequency, and site of origin of slow waves, the occurrence and frequency of spike potentials, and the extent of excitatory or inhibitory neural input can be correlated with the neuromuscular function of various regions of the gut. The pattern in humans parallels the pattern observed in dogs.
Stomach The proximal-to-distal gradient in the resting membrane potential of circular smooth muscle in the stomach is depicted in Fig. 6.14. The membrane potential in the orad segment or fundus is low, about -50 mV, and lies near or above the threshold for the opening of Ca2+ channels and contraction [75,118]. The segment normally is tonically contracted and is devoid of rhythmic electrical activity. Small changes in stimulatory (i.e., depolarizing) or inhibitory (i.e., hyperpolarizing) neural input can cause further contraction or can induce relaxation of the fundus, features that render this tonic segment suitable for receiving (i.e., receptive relaxation) and discharging (i.e., tonic contraction) a meal into the middle segment or corpus of the stomach [118].
The corpus is the site of spontaneous pacemaker activity in the stomach and has a higher resting membrane potential.

117

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Fundus Very orad corpus Orad corpus Mid-orad corpus Caudad corpus Orad antrum

Force of contractions or increase in tone (grams-f)

­18 Ach, tonic
­48 Ach, phasic 1.5 K, tonic
Control, phasic ­21
­51 1.0

­26 ­56 0.5

3 × 10­6 M 1 × 10­6 M

27 mM
3 × 10­6 M 1 × 10­6 M 3 × 10­7 M

3 × 10­7 M

24 mM

0 5.9 mM

18 mM

­30 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30

­60 ­Vm (mV) Figure 6.15 Comparative effects of acetylcholine (Ach) and extracellular

K+ on membrane potential and contraction in circular muscle from the

corpus of the canine stomach. Acetylcholine caused an increase in tonic ­23 contraction; the depolarization induced by acetylcholine does not exceed

­63 the threshold for opening of Ca2+ channels, implying that the source of Ca2+ for agonist-induced tonic contraction is intracellular. During slow wave

activity, the magnitude of phasic contraction in response to acetylcholine

correlates with the amplitude of the plateau potential. Contraction induced

by extracellular K+ results from depolarization and an influx of Ca2+ and ­49
coincides with the pattern of phasic contraction induced by acetylcholine.

­69 From Szurszewski [75].

Orad terminal antrum Caudad terminal antrum Pyloric ring

­27 ­70
­28 ­71 10 s 0

­75
10 s
Figure 6.14 Gradients in resting membrane potential and profile of slow waves in various regions of the canine stomach recorded with intracellular electrodes. From the proximal to the distal part of the stomach, the resting membrane potential becomes increasingly negative and the duration of slow waves becomes increasingly longer; potential oscillations and spike potentials are evident in the distal stomach and pylorus. From Szurszewski [75].
The corpus can undergo both tonic and phasic (i.e., rhythmic) contraction. The initial phase of tonic contraction induced by excitatory neurotransmitters is mediated by the release of intracellular Ca2+; the concomitant decrease in the resting

membrane potential is not sufficient to activate Ca2+ channels and cause Ca2+ influx (Fig. 6.15). Phasic contraction of the corpus is determined by the amplitude and duration of the plateau potential. Small changes in amplitude or duration of the plateau potential caused by excitatory neurotransmitters result in substantial changes in the magnitude of phasic contraction.
Intrinsic pacemaker rhythm is highest in the orad corpus (5 cycles/min) and decreases progressively throughout the rest of the corpus, antrum, and pylorus. Slow waves originating in the corpus propagate to and pace antral muscle. Slow waves originating in the distal antrum and pyloric sphincter have prolonged plateau potentials on which spike potentials are usually superimposed.
As a whole, the antrum has little tone and is best suited for propagation of slow waves and contractions originating in the corpus [75,116,117]. Antral slow waves propagate aborally to the pyloric sphincter, where they pace longitudinal muscle and the outer layer of circular muscle. The slow waves decay before reaching muscle cells in the inner layer of circular muscle; muscle cells in this region are electrically quiescent and may be responsible for the intrinsic tone of the sphincter. Opening of the sphincter is mediated by an inhibitory (i.e., relaxant) neural reflex triggered by distention of the distal antrum; distention occurs when the gastric contents are propelled aborally by phasic or peristaltic

118

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

contractions originating in the pacemaker region in the corpus of the stomach.
Small intestine In most mammals, including humans, there is a decreasing gradient in slow wave frequency from the duodenum to the ileum. Slow waves originate in pacemaker ICC (IC-MY) located at the myenteric border of circular muscle from where they propagate to the bulk of circular muscle and to longitudinal muscle [110]. Removal of a thin layer at the myenteric border of circular muscle abolishes slow waves in longitudinal muscle and in the bulk of circular muscle. Propagation around and in the long axis of the intestine occurs preferentially through circular muscle.
The configuration of slow waves in the small intestine is similar to that in the corpus of the stomach and consists of a rapid upstroke followed by a sustained plateau potential. Excitatory and inhibitory neural inputs influence the amplitude of the plateau potential and the frequency of spike potentials, and determines the occurrence and magnitude of phasic contraction in the intestine [111].
Colon There is a decreasing gradient in resting membrane potential across circular muscle of the canine colon from -80 mV in muscle cells at the submucosal border to -45 mV in muscle cells at the myenteric border (Fig. 6.16). Rhythmic electrical activity is mediated by two pacemaker regions, one at the myenteric border (IC-MY) and the other at the submucosal border (IC-SM). Each pacemaker region generates slow waves with distinctive forms and frequencies that spread passively and summate in the bulk of circular muscle to yield waves of mixed form [76,106,120,121].
Slow waves originating at the submucosal border have a frequency of 5­6 cycles/min, a configuration similar to that

found in the small intestine and corpus of the stomach, and a plateau potential lasting 3­15 s (Fig. 6.16) [76]. The amplitude of the plateau potential decreases as the waves spread toward the myenteric border; the decrease is matched and offset by the decrease in resting membrane potential such that the plateau potential is maintained at about -45 mV, which is close to the threshold for mechanical activity (i.e., threshold for Ca2+ influx).
Slow waves originating at the myenteric border of circular muscle have a frequency of 17 cycles/min and a sinusoidal configuration [76,106,120,121]. These oscillatory waves spread to and pace muscle cells in the longitudinal muscle layer. They also spread in circular muscle toward the submucosal border, their amplitude decreasing as a function of distance from the myenteric border. The waves summate with waves originating at the submucosal border; the encounter boosts the plateau potential of waves that originate at the submucosal border and elicits contractions at the rate of 6 per min. In longitudinal muscle, myenteric potential oscillations generate fast action potentials. The frequency of these fast transients and of longitudinal muscle contractions is regulated by neural input from the enteric nervous system. Fast action potentials are not generated in circular muscle and only rarely propagate from longitudinal to adjacent circular muscle cells.
Stimulus­contraction coupling in syncytia: tonic and phasic contraction The signal transduction pathways described in isolated circular and longitudinal muscle cells regulate tonic contraction and relaxation of intact, syncytial muscle. Small depolarizations caused by excitatory neurotransmitters are not sufficient to cause tonic contraction, except in some regions of the gut, such as the fundus of the stomach; there the resting membrane potential is close to the mechanical

Figure 6.16 Records of slow waves obtained at various depths from the submucosal border of circular muscle in canine colon. Two gradients are evident: a decline in the amplitude of the plateau potential from the submucosal (SCM) to myenteric (MCM) border is matched and offset by a decrease in the resting membrane potential. The plateau potential during slow wave activity attains or exceeds the threshold potential throughout the thickness of circular muscle. Slow waves of a different configuration originate at the myenteric border; as they propagate in circular muscle, they summate with slow waves originating in the submucosal border. From Smith et al. [119].

0%
SCM 0

17%

33%

50%

67%

8s

83%

­ 45
mV
­80 100%

50 % Distance from submucosal border

MCM 100

LM

119

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

threshold, which is the membrane potential at which Ca2+ channels are presumed to open. In circular muscle of the intestine and corpus of the stomach, tonic contraction induced by excitatory neurotransmitters occurs at membrane potentials more negative than the mechanical threshold, implying that the source of Ca2+ responsible for initial tonic contraction in these regions is intracellular (Fig. 6.15) [110]. However, when circular or longitudinal muscle is depolarized by a slow wave, relatively small changes in the plateau potential imposed by the effect of an excitatory neurotransmitter are sufficient to induce Ca2+ influx and contraction. The contraction is phasic, coinciding with and determined by the amplitude of the plateau potential; mobilization of intracellular Ca2+ by the excitatory neurotransmitter amplifies the phasic contraction.
As previously noted, inhibitory (i.e., relaxant) neurotransmitters act through PKA or PKG to decrease [Ca2+]i (Fig. 6.11). They do so by inhibiting Ca2+ release and enhancing sequestration of Ca2+ in intracellular stores [60,62], mechanisms that are well suited to the relaxation of tonic contraction, or by hyperpolarizing the plasma membrane during slow wave activity and reducing Ca2+ influx, a mechanism well suited to the relaxation of phasic contraction (Fig. 6.11). The hyperpolarization is mediated by inhibitory phosphorylation of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and stimulatory phosphorylation of voltage-gated, Ca2+-dependent K+ channels. The hyperpolarization determines the profile or occurrence of slow waves and thus determines the occurrence of phasic contractions. It has traditionally been labeled the inhibitory junction potential because it leads to inhibition of phasic electrical and contractile activity.
Neural regulation of smooth muscle by the myenteric plexus
The intrinsic electrical and mechanical properties of smooth muscle are modulated by neurotransmitters released from neurons of the enteric nervous system, especially neurons of the myenteric plexus. These neurons constitute the final neural pathway regulating smooth muscle activity. Neurons of the submucosal plexus innervate the innermost layers of circular muscle in large species, such as humans and dogs.
Two populations of sensory neurons have been identified. The first, activated by mucosal stimuli, is wholly intrinsic, and the second, activated by muscle stretch and painful stimuli, has neuronal cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia. Extrinsic neurons of the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems influence smooth muscle indirectly by acting on neurons of the myenteric plexus. Adrenergic and peptidergic neurons in prevertebral and paravertebral ganglia synapse with and inhibit the activity of cholinergic and noncholinergic neurons of the myenteric and submucosal plexuses.

Neuronal topography The neural organization of the enteric nervous system is well conserved in mammals and has been extensively studied in guinea pigs, rats, dogs, and humans (see Chapter 2) [122­126]. Neurons in the myenteric plexus synapse with neurons in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses and paravertebral ganglia and innervate cells in the circular and longitudinal muscle layers. The fibers that make up the deep plexus close to the submucosal border of circular muscle are derived from neurons of the myenteric and submucosal plexuses in large species.
Advances in immunocytochemical and imaging techniques have made it possible to map these neurons and to correlate their morphological, electrophysiological, and neurochemical properties, specifically their content of neurotransmitters. Neurons of the myenteric plexus fall into two broad categories: about 25% contain VIP or PACAP together with NO synthase (NOS), the enzyme responsible for synthesis of NO in nerve terminals; about 60% contain acetylcholine, usually together with the tachykinins, substance P and neurokinin A (NKA). There is virtually no overlap between these categories of neurons [122­128]. VIP neurons also contain a homologous peptide, designated PHM (i.e., peptide with N-terminal histidine and C-terminal methionine) in humans and PHI in animals, which is derived from the same precursor, pro-VIP. Substance P neurons contain NKA, also known as substance K, which is derived from the same precursor, -protachykinin. The two main categories of neurons correspond to major roles for acetylcholine and the tachykinins as excitatory neurotransmitters, and for VIP, its homologues, and NO as inhibitory neurotransmitters.
Excitatory neurotransmitters stimulate Ca2+ release and increase muscle tone, and depolarize the plasma membrane (i.e., trigger excitatory junction potentials or EJPs). The depolarization can result from a direct action on muscle cells or may be relayed via intramuscular ICC (IC-IM) coupled electrically to muscle cells. EJPs can induce Ca2+ influx and contraction if the depolarization attains a level at which voltage-gated Ca2+ channels are open; this is likely to happen in tonic smooth muscle when the membrane potential is close to the Ca2+ threshold, or in phasic smooth muscle during slow wave activity. Inhibitory neurotransmitters inhibit Ca2+ release and decrease (i.e., relax) muscle tone, and hyperpolarize the plasma membrane directly or via IC-IM (i.e., trigger inhibitory junction potentials or IJPs). IJPs lower the plateau potential of slow waves and inhibit Ca2+ influx and phasic contraction.
Subpopulations of neurons in the two main categories contain one or more of the following: bombesin, also known as gastrin-releasing peptide; neuropeptide Y; the opioid peptides, dynorphin, [Met]enkephalin, and their derivatives; and galanin. A few neurons contain -aminobutyric acid (GABA), serotonin (< 3%), or somatostatin (< 5%). Neurons that contain serotonin or somatostatin act mainly as

120

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

interneurons and influence smooth muscle cells indirectly by means of other neurons.
Peptide and other neurotransmitters Pharmacological profile Peptide and nonpeptide neurotransmitters are released from axonal varicosities near muscle cells. They diffuse across distances ranging from 50 to 100 nm to interact with receptors located on muscle cells and on the same (autoreceptors) or adjacent nerve terminals. The presence of receptors on muscle cells and the possibility of direct action can be determined in isolated muscle cells by measuring the binding of specific radioligands, the release of intracellular messengers (e.g., [Ca2+]i, IP3, or cyclic nucleotides), or the mechanical response of the cell (i.e., contraction or relaxation) [129,130]. Determining the presence of receptors on neurons or their terminals and the possibility of indirect, neurally mediated action of neurotransmitters on muscle cells requires the use of innervated muscle strips; the neurally mediated component of a mechanical response is identified by its sensitivity to blockade by neurotoxins [129­135].
Direct and neurally mediated response When given exogenously, peptide and nonpeptide neurotransmitters can cause contraction or relaxation of smooth muscle cells directly or indirectly by stimulating or inhibiting the release of other excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitters. Bombesin and CCK, for example, cause contraction in isolated muscle cells and innervated muscle strips; in the latter, they also elicit release of acetylcholine and substance P [132­135]. Their effect in strips is in part neurally mediated and can be partially blocked by the axonal blocker tetrodotoxin or by a combination of muscarinic and tachykinin antagonists.
Linkage between the inhibitory neurotransmitters VIP/PACAP and NO VIP, PACAP, PHI, and PHM cause relaxation of isolated muscle cells and muscle strips [54­58,62,136,137]. The effects of PHI and its human counterpart PHM are mediated by cAMP, whereas the effects of VIP and PACAP are mediated by both cAMP and cGMP [48,49,52]. The increase in cGMP is the result of stimulation of NO production in smooth muscle cells by VIP and PACAP [57,61,62]. A unique interplay exists between VIP or PACAP and NO in smooth muscle of the gut. NO produced in nerve terminals regulates VIP and PACAP release from the same or adjacent nerve terminals (Fig. 6.17). The release of VIP and PACAP from these terminals regenerates NO in target muscle cells (Fig. 6.18; see Fig. 6.17) [58,61,62,138 ­145].
The interplay between VIP or PACAP and NO is present in various regions of the gut in mammalian species (human, dog, opossum, rabbit, guinea pig, rat, and mouse). In isolated myenteric ganglia devoid of muscle cells, the nicotinic

Nerve

terminal

5

NO VIP

12

34

NO

Muscle cell

cGMP

cAMP

Figure 6.17 Interplay of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and nitric oxide (NO) in the regulation of smooth muscle relaxation. VIP and neuronal NO synthase are often located in the same enteric neurons. NO produced in nerve terminals regulates VIP release (5) and diffuses to muscle cells (1). VIP released from nerve terminals interacts with one class of natriuretic peptide receptors (NPR-C) coupled to an endothelial-type NO synthase in muscle cells, leading to the production of NO and cyclic GMP (cGMP) (3). NO produced in muscle cells diffuses to nerve terminals where it facilitates VIP release (2). VIP also interacts with VPAC2 receptors (previously known as VIP2 or PACAP3 receptors) coupled to adenylate cyclase to generate cyclic AMP (cAMP) (4). The amount of NO produced in muscle cells (60%­80%) is much larger than that produced in nerve terminals (20%­40%). The linkage between NO production and VIP release and the dual sources of NO explain why NO synthase inhibitors are potent inhibitors of NO production, VIP release, and relaxation, and why the VIP antagonist VIP10­28 is a potent inhibitor of NO production and relaxation. Oxyhemoglobin neutralizes extracellular NO and blocks only pathways 1 and 2. Identical pathways link the release of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) and NO; PACAP interacts with the same two classes of receptors as VIP.

agonist, dimethylphenylpiperazinium, stimulates NO production and VIP release; NOS inhibitors abolish both NO production and VIP release, implying a dependence of VIP release on NO production [138,139]. Exogenous NO causes VIP release from these ganglia, but exogenous VIP has no effect on NO production [138]. Studies in synaptosomal membranes confirm that NO donors stimulate VIP release, whereas VIP does not stimulate NO production [146]. In isolated muscle cells devoid of neural elements, VIP and PACAP, but not the homologous peptides PHI, PHM, or secretin, stimulate NO production [57,61,139,140].
The processes that occur in neurons and muscle cells are evident during nerve stimulation of muscle strips [57,61,139,141]. NOS inhibitors abolish NO production induced by all neural stimuli, and they also abolish VIP

121

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

VIP/PACAP

NPR-C

Ca2+ influx Ca2+

Gi1/2 CaM/eNOS
NO

VPAC2 Gs

sGC cGMP

AC cAMP

cG-kinase

cA-kinase

RELAXATION
Figure 6.18 Dual signaling cascades initiated by the interaction of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) with two classes of receptors. VIP and PACAP interact with VPAC2 receptors (previously known as VIP2 or PACAP3 receptors) coupled by G protein Gs to activation of adenylate cyclase (AC), formation of cyclic AMP (cAMP), and activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA); high agonist concentrations generate higher levels of cAMP that can also crossactivate cyclic GMP (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKG; dotted line). VIP and PACAP interact with one class of natriuretic peptide receptors (NPR-C) coupled by G proteins Gi1 and Gi2 to stimulation of Ca2+ influx into the cell and activation of a constitutive Ca2+/calmodulin (CaM)-dependent isoform of nitric oxide synthase (endothelial type NOS [eNOS]). The resultant increase in nitric oxide (NO) activates soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC), stimulates cGMP formation, and leads to activation of PKG. Both kinases act concurrently to cause relaxation and hyperpolarization of smooth muscle cells. cG-kinase, PKG; cA-kinase, PKA. Adapted from Murthy et al. [61] and Murthy and Makhlouf [147].

release induced by low stimuli and partially inhibit VIP release induced by intense stimuli, indicating that VIP and PACAP release is mediated by NO but can occur independently of it during intense nerve stimulation [139]. The VIP antagonist, VIP10­28, which blocks the postjunctional effects of VIP on muscle cells, inhibits NO production by over 60%, indicating that VIP- and PACAP-induced NO production in muscle cells is a major source of NO [139,142]. The effectiveness of NOS inhibitors in blocking muscle relaxation induced by nerve stimulation has led some investigators to conclude incorrectly that relaxation of muscle tone is exclusively mediated by NO released from nerve terminals. NOS inhibitors elicit their potent effects by acting at several locations: (1) they suppress NO production in nerve terminals and muscle cells, and (2) they suppress NO-mediated VIP and PACAP release from nerve terminals, thereby eliminating the postjunctional effects of peptide neurotransmitters.

VIP or PACAP induce relaxation by interacting with two distinct receptor types (Fig. 6.18): VPAC2 receptors, which possess equal affinity for VIP and PACAP (previously known as VIP2 or PACAP3 receptors) and which are coupled through Gs to the activation of adenylate cyclase; and type C natriuretic peptide receptors (NPR-C), which are coupled through Gi1 and Gi2 to activation of NOS in smooth muscle cells. VPAC2 receptors are also recognized by PHI and PHM but with lesser affinity, whereas NPR-C receptors are recognized by VIP and PACAP, as well as by natriuretic peptides [61,143]. The distinctive feature of NPR-C is the presence of a truncated 37-amino acid intracellular domain devoid of kinase or guanylate cyclase activity. Site-directed mutagenesis and studies using peptide fragments derived from the intracellular sequence of NPR-C have identified a 17-amino acid intracellular segment that determines the ability of NPRC to activate Gi1 and Gi2 [147­149]. The interaction of VIP and PACAP with NPR-C initiates a signaling cascade involving Ca2+ influx that leads to Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent activation of a membrane-bound constitutive NOS, identified by in situ polymerase chain reaction on single muscle cells as endothelial NOS (eNOS or NOS III) (Fig. 6.18) [144,145]. The resultant increase in intracellular NO activates soluble guanylate cyclase, and this leads to the generation of cGMP and the activation of PKG. Together, PKA and PKG are responsible for the relaxation of muscle tone [57,61,62]. As previously discussed, the two kinases also cause hyperpolarization of muscle cells, which can prevent the development of phasic contractions in innervated muscle strips. Although the amount of eNOS in muscle cells is small and immunocytochemical detection is difficult, eNOS coupling to G proteins greatly amplifies its effect. In smooth muscle cells of the gut, eNOS is susceptible to inactivation by PKC [150]. A common experimental flaw, whereby the tone of muscle strips is increased using contractile agonists that stimulate PI hydrolysis and activate PKC, leads to the suppression of NOS activity in muscle cells and precludes detection of the VIP­NOS linkage in these cells.
VIP differs from PACAP in its action in taeniae coli, and the receptors for each peptide are distinct from those in other regions of the gut. VIP interacts with a specific receptor that has been cloned and which does not recognize PACAP; the VIP-specific receptor differs from the VPAC2 receptor by a pair of adjacent phenylalanine residues in the ligand-binding extracellular domain. PACAP interacts with a specific receptor that does not recognize VIP or couple to adenylate cyclase but which couples to the activation of apamin-sensitive K+ channels [92,151]. Muscle cells in taeniae coli are the only muscle cells found so far in the gut that are devoid of NOS.
GABA, somatostatin, and opioid peptides GABA, acting through GABA-A receptors, causes relaxation in muscle strips but not in isolated muscle cells. The relaxation induced by GABA in muscle strips is accompanied by

122

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

the release of VIP and NO and can be blocked by VIP antagonists and NOS inhibitors (Figs 6.17 and 6.18).
Opioid peptides cause a transient tonic contraction followed by phasic contractions in previously quiescent muscle strips. The transient tonic contraction is a direct effect of opioid peptides on smooth muscle and is demonstrable in isolated muscle cells [152]. The phasic contractions result from inhibition of the background release of inhibitory neurotransmitters (e.g., VIP, PACAP, and NO) that normally mask phasic contractile activity [137]. Elimination of this background release with VIP antibody, VIP antagonists, or NOS inhibitors induces phasic contractions in quiescent muscle strips.
Somatostatin stimulates VIP (and probably PACAP) release and NO production indirectly through pathways that inhibit opioid peptide release. The inhibition of opioid peptide release eliminates the restraint exerted by opioid neurons on VIP and PACAP neurons, resulting in stimulation of VIP and PACAP release and NO production. The interplay of somatostatin and opioid neurons is evident in the regulation of VIP and PACAP release and NO production during the descending phase of peristalsis (Fig. 6.19).
Physiological profile The pharmacological profile of actions described in the previous sections provides a framework for understanding the regulatory role of neurotransmitters released from neurons of the myenteric plexus. Excitatory motor neurons release one or both types of the contractile neurotransmitters: acetylcholine and the tachykinins, substance P and NKA [153]. Inhibitory motor neurons release the relaxant neurotransmitters, VIP (together with PHI or PHM), PACAP, and NO. Other neurotransmitters modulate the release of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters from motor neurons, as previously noted.
Peptides expressed in neurons of the myenteric plexus may be identified as neurotransmitters if they meet the following criteria [130]: 1 Demonstration of peptide synthesis in neurons and presence of the peptide in nerve terminals close to target cells, such as muscle cells; or ICC 2 Release of the peptide by physiological stimuli, such as chemically or mechanically induced reflexes 3 Coupling of peptide release to a putative function, as evident from blockade of a physiological response by a specific antiserum or antagonist 4 Mimicry of the response by exogenous application of the peptide, provided that the substance does not evoke unrelated pharmacological effects that mask the physiological response.
Several excitatory and inhibitory peptide motor neurotransmitters, such as VIP, PACAP, substance P, and NKA, fulfill these criteria.
The example of VIP demonstrates its role as an inhibitory

SS ENK

ACh/SP/NKA Muscle
Ascending contraction

CGRP 5-HT

VIP/PACAP/NO
Muscle
Descending relaxation

EC
Figure 6.19 Regulation of the peristaltic reflex by neurons of the myenteric plexus. The reflex has ascending and descending phases: the descending relaxation and the ascending contraction in circular muscle shown here are accompanied by reciprocal descending contraction and ascending relaxation of longitudinal muscle (not shown). The reflex can be triggered by mucosal stimuli and circular muscle stretch. Mucosal stimuli (but not muscle stretch) release serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) from intestinal enterochromaffin (EC) cells that acts on 5-HT4 receptors located on the nerve terminals of intrinsic sensory calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)-containing neurons with cell bodies in the wall of the intestine. CGRP acts on modulatory interneurons coupled to (a) inhibitory motor neurons that release the relaxant neurotransmitters vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), and nitric oxide (NO), and (b) excitatory motor neurons that release the contractile neurotransmitters acetylcholine (ACh), substance P (SP), and neurokinin A (NKA). The interneurons consist of somatostatin (SS) and opioid neurons (enkephalin; ENK) connected in series. The increase in somatostatin inhibits the release of opioid peptides, thereby suppressing the inhibitory restraint of opioid neurotransmitters on release of VIP, PACAP, and NO. The reflex triggered by muscle stretch does not involve release of 5-HT; muscle stretch activates extrinsic CGRP-containing sensory neurons with cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglion. These sensory neurons couple to the same modulatory interneurons and motor neurons. The pathways mediating the reflex are identical in rats and humans.

(relaxant) motor neurotransmitter (see Figs 6.18 and 6.19). VIP and neuronal NOS (nNOS) are colocalized in neurons of the myenteric plexus that innervate circular muscle cells and ICC [122­128]. VIP (together with PACAP) and NO are released concurrently in response to neural stimulation, and their release is accompanied by a proportional increase in relaxation of muscle tone and/or inhibition of phasic contraction [136,137,139]. VIP and its homologues cause direct relaxation in smooth muscle from all regions of the gut, including the stomach, intestine, gallbladder, and sphincters [57,61,139,140,154,155]. The relaxant effect of VIP on muscle tone is partially the result of its ability to stimulate NO production in muscle cells (Fig. 6.18). NO is released from nerve terminals by activation of nNOS and from smooth muscle cells by activation of a VIP/PACAP-dependent eNOS [139]. The effect of VIP/PACAP/NO on phasic contraction probably reflects their ability to generate IJPs that inhibit slow wave activity in ICC coupled electrically to smooth muscle cells.

123

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Neutralization of VIP with specific VIP antiserum, blockade of its effect with selective VIP antagonists, inhibition of VIP release from nerve terminals, and inhibition of its relaxant effect in muscle cells by NOS inhibitors inhibit neurally induced relaxation in all regions of the gut [58,139,142,154 ­156].
Reflex activation of myenteric neurons by physiological stimuli (e.g., stretch or mucosal stimulation) causes VIP and PACAP release, NO production, relaxation of muscle tone, and inhibition of phasic contraction. VIP or PACAP antiserum and VIP or PACAP antagonists inhibit relaxation and NO production by suppressing the effects of VIP and PACAP on muscle relaxation and NO production. NOS inhibitors block NO production in nerve terminals and muscle cells and inhibit NO-dependent VIP and PACAP release, effectively blocking nerve-induced relaxation (see Figs 6.18 and 6.19) [139,141].
Peristaltic reflex The peristaltic reflex exemplifies the role of enteric neurons in regulating a physiological motor function (Fig. 6.19) [142,156­170]. The reflex can be evoked by stroking, which stimulates sensory nerve terminals in the mucosa, or by radial stretch, which stimulates sensory nerve terminals in circular muscle. The reflex consists of an orad (or ascending) and a caudad (or descending) component or phase. During the caudad phase, circular muscle relaxes while longitudinal muscle contracts; during the orad phase, circular muscle contracts while longitudinal muscle relaxes. Reciprocal contraction and relaxation of the two muscle layers maintain the dimensions of the segment (Fig. 6.19) [163]. In vitro stimulation of hollow or flat segments of intestine at the orad end to elicit only the caudad (i.e., descending) phase, or at the caudad end to elicit the orad (i.e., ascending) phase, makes it possible to identify the types of neurotransmitter released and their functional coupling to each component of the peristaltic reflex. Compartmented flat-sheet colonic preparations are particularly useful for examining the reflex in humans, which is identical to that observed in rat and guinea pig. Sensory neurotransmitters are released into the central compartment, where stimuli are applied, but not into the peripheral compartments, where orad and caudad mechanical responses are measured [164­166].
Excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons mediating the peristaltic reflex VIP, PACAP, and NO are released during and are responsible for the descending relaxation of circular muscle; VIP or PACAP antiserum, VIP or PACAP antagonists, and NOS inhibitors inhibit the descending relaxation (Fig. 6.19) [142,156,157]. Acetylcholine, substance P, and NKA are released during and are responsible for the ascending contraction of circular muscle; contraction is partially inhibited by muscarinic antagonists and is abolished by a combination

of muscarinic antagonists and tachykinin antagonists or antibodies (Fig. 6.19) [157,158]. The pattern illustrates the involvement of the main excitatory and inhibitory motor neurotransmitters of the myenteric plexus in regulating the motor limb of the peristaltic reflex.
Modulatory interneurons Interneurons of the myenteric plexus participate in the peristaltic reflex by modulating the release of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters from motor neurons [159­162]. The release of somatostatin increases during the descending phase, whereas the release of opioid peptides decreases [160,161]. In the resting state, opioid interneurons exert a continuous restraint on VIP/PACAP/NOS motor neurons. This restraint is eliminated during the descending phase when opioid peptide release is decreased, leading to an increase in VIP, PACAP, and NO release [159­162]. Opioid inhibitors applied during the descending phase enhance the release of VIP, PACAP, and NO and increase muscle relaxation; the application of opioid peptides has the reverse effect.
The decrease in opioid peptide release, which eliminates opioid restraint on VIP/PACAP/NOS motor neurons, is mediated by the increase in somatostatin during the descending phase. Neutralization of somatostatin with somatostatin antibodies increases opioid peptide release and decreases VIP, PACAP, and NO release and muscle relaxation. Exogenous somatostatin has the opposite effect, enhancing VIP, PACAP, and NO release, as well as circular muscle relaxation [159,161].
The interplay of somatostatin and opioid interneurons that regulates the activity of VIP/PACAP/NOS motor neurons also regulates the activity of VIP/PACAP/NOS interneurons. These interneurons synapse with cholinergic/tachykinin motor neurons that innervate longitudinal muscle [163]. The activation of these interneurons results in contraction of longitudinal muscle during the descending phase concurrently with relaxation of circular muscle. A switch in the activity of somatostatin interneurons during the ascending phase presumably leads to a reverse pattern of circular muscle contraction and longitudinal muscle relaxation, which is characteristic of the ascending phase of the peristaltic reflex.
Sensory neurons mediating the peristaltic reflex Two distinct populations of sensory neurons that can be differentially activated and desensitized mediate the peristaltic reflex, which is elicited by muscle stretch and mucosal stimulation [164­166]. Muscle stretch activates the intramuscular nerve terminals of extrinsic sensory neurons, which have cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglion and axonal projections to myenteric neurons. Mucosal stimulation activates intrinsic (i.e., enteric) sensory neurons with nerve endings in the mucosa. Activation is initiated by the release of 5-HT from mucosal enterochromaffin cells, which acts on 5-HT4 receptors

124

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

located on sensory nerve terminals and causes the release of the sensory neurotransmitter, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) [165­170]. The addition of lumenal 5-HT or selective 5-HT4 agonists induces CGRP release and triggers the peristaltic reflex. Selective 5-HT4 antagonists block CGRP release and the mechanical components of the reflex induced by mucosal stimulation. CGRP antagonists block the ascending and descending phases of the reflex. The release of 5-HT and CGRP and the effects of 5-HT4 agonists, 5-HT4 antagonists, and CGRP antagonists are elicited only in the compartment where stimuli are applied, clearly identifying 5-HT and CGRP as components of the sensory limb of the reflex. Exposure of the intestinal lumen to 5-HT4 agonists initiates peristaltic activity and stimulates propulsion of intralumenal contents [168­170]. Addition of opioid -receptor antagonists suppresses the inhibitory restraint exerted by opioid interneurons on excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons and greatly enhances the propulsive effect of 5-HT4 agonists [169]. The potent synergism between opioid antagonists and 5-HT4 agonists at near-threshold concentrations endows the combination with therapeutic potential.
Events corresponding to the two phases of the peristaltic reflex underlie propulsion and the opening and closure of various sphincters, including the lower esophageal, pyloric, choledochal, ileocecal, and internal anal sphincters [154,155,171]. In these regions, VIP (and likely PACAP) acting directly and by means of NO appears to be the main neurotransmitter responsible for sphincter relaxation; acetylcholine and probably tachykinins participate in sphincter contraction.
Hormonal regulation of smooth muscle function
Hormonal influences on smooth muscle activity are evident during and between meals. The example of CCK illustrates the interplay of hormonal and neural influences. After ingestion of a meal, CCK is released into the circulation from the upper small intestine; it causes both direct and cholinergically mediated contraction of muscle cells in the gallbladder and neurally mediated relaxation of muscle cells in the sphincter of Oddi. Relaxation of the sphincter is accompanied by the release of VIP and is blocked by VIP antiserum, VIP antagonists, and NOS inhibitors, implying that CCK causes relaxation by stimulating the release of VIP and NO from intramural neurons [155].
Motilin illustrates the participation of a hormone in the regulation of smooth muscle activity between meals. In humans and other mammals, cycles of electrical and contractile activity, described in greater detail in Chapter 11, recur at 1.5- to 2-h intervals between meals. The cycles consist of four distinct phases, collectively known as the interdigestive myoelectric complex or migrating motor complex (MMC). The cycles

culminate in phase III, a 5- to 10-min period of intense phasic contractile activity. Cycles typically begin in the stomach and migrate aborally throughout the small intestine; some cycles appear to begin in the small intestine. Motilin, a peptide released from endocrine cells of the upper small intestine, appears to be responsible for initiating cycles that begin in the stomach. Peaks of motilin coincide with the onset of phase III in the stomach. Neutralization of circulating motilin with motilin antiserum disrupts phase III activity, and infusion of motilin in concentrations that mimic circulating levels induces premature phase III activity [172,173]. Cycles that begin in the intestine are not controlled by motilin and may be regulated by input from enteric and extrinsic neurons. The neural and hormonal mechanisms that cause suppression of the cycles on ingestion of a meal are unknown.
Humoral regulation of smooth muscle function
In addition to neurotransmitters and circulating hormones, humoral agents produced by various nonneural cells, including smooth muscle cells, influence smooth muscle activity. These include ATP, histamine, serotonin, adenosine, sphingosine-1-phosphate, lysophosphatidic acid, and eicosanoids, such as prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes. Receptors for most of these agents have been identified on smooth muscle cells of the gut [49].
ATP, whether released as a neurotransmitter or as a metabolic product, interacts with two different P2 receptors on muscle cells [174]. The term P2 is preferable to purinergic because it recognizes that purine and pyrimidine nucleotides can act as preferential ligands of receptor subtypes. At low concentrations, ATP interacts with P2Y2 receptors coupled via Gq to PLC-1 and via Gi3 to PLC-3 and elicits IP3-dependent Ca2+ release and muscle contraction. At higher concentrations, ATP also interacts with ligand-gated P2X1 receptors, which act as cationic channels and cause depolarization of the plasma membrane and Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. At high concentrations, ATP also activates K+ channels; the notion that activation of these channels on release of ATP from inhibitory nerves is responsible for the initial phase of the IJP has some proponents.
ATP is rapidly degraded to adenosine, which also interacts with two types of receptor, A1 and A2, on smooth muscle cells of the intestine [175]. These receptors are coupled to three signaling pathways. A2 receptors are coupled via Gs to activation of adenylate cyclase, whereas A1 receptors are coupled via Gi3 to inhibition of adenylate cyclase and via Gi3 to activation of PLC-3 and IP3-dependent Ca2+ release in circular muscle and to activation of cPLA2 and Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release in longitudinal muscle [175]. The net effect of adenosine is contraction, which is augmented

125

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

after blockade of A2 receptors; blockade of A1 receptors unmasks relaxation.
Two types of receptors for serotonin (5-HT2 and 5-HT4) and histamine (H1 and H2) coexist on smooth muscle cells of the stomach and intestine. 5-HT2 and H1 receptors mediate initial contraction through an increase in [Ca2+]i, and 5-HT4 and H2 receptors mediate relaxation through an increase in cAMP [176,177]. For both 5-HT2 and H1 receptors, Ca2+ mobilization in circular muscle is mediated by means of PLC1 and IP3-dependent Ca2+ release, while in longitudinal muscle it is mediated by means of cPLA2 and Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release. The net effect of 5-HT or histamine is contraction, reflecting the dominant influence of 5-HT2 and H1 receptors. The blockade of 5-HT4 or H2 receptors augments the contraction, whereas blockade of 5-HT2 or H1 receptors unmasks relaxation.
Inflammation and smooth muscle
Smooth muscle cells: targets and source of inflammatory mediators Smooth muscle cells respond to inflammatory mediators by synthesizing and secreting various pro- and antiinflammatory mediators that, in turn, act in an autocrine and paracrine fashion to stimulate a time-dependent expression of other cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and cell-adhesion molecules [178­180]. Thus, smooth muscle cells act as both source and target of these mediators setting up a dynamic balance that maintains the inflammatory response but eventually facilitates its resolution. Different stimuli elicit different patterns of mediators in smooth muscle cells that either increase or decrease smooth muscle cell contractility. Helminth infections stimulate transient synthesis of the Th2 cytokines, interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13, which cause a sustained expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-1, cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, and protease-activated receptor (PAR)-1 in smooth muscle cells, resulting in persistent hypercontractility [181,182]. Other infections elicit a timedependent expression of IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-, accompanied by a decrease in muscle contractility [179,183]. A delayed expression of IL-11 fosters resolution of the inflammatory response [179].
Role of NF-kB in inhibition of smooth muscle contractility The decrease in smooth muscle contractility on exposure of smooth muscle to IL-1 or TNF- appears to be mediated mainly by nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) [183]. NF-B is activated via a canonical pathway in which the NF-B inhibitor, IB, is first phosphorylated by IK kinase- (IKK) and then degraded via a proteasomal pathway [184]. Elimination of the inhibitor exposes the nuclear localization signal on the p65/p50 heterodimer, enabling phosphorylation

of p65, nuclear translocation of the heterodimer, and binding to a specific DNA sequence resulting in gene transcription. For some constitutively expressed genes (e.g., the 1c subunit of the voltage-gated Ca2+ channel), transcription can be repressed on phosphorylation and binding of both p50 and p65 [185]. Various kinases (e.g., ERK1/2, p38 MAP kinase, PI 3-kinase) are also activated by the cytokines and can modulate gene transcription either directly or via transcription factors [186].
The decrease in contractility caused by IL-1 or TNF- has been attributed to inhibition of Ca2+ mobilization resulting from production of H2O2 or inhibition of voltage-gated Ca2+ channel expression [183,187,188]. Inhibition of Ca2+ channel expression suppresses phasic muscle activity, which is dependent on Ca2+ influx, but has no effect on muscle tone. Studies have identified various targets in the signaling pathways mediating initial and sustained tonic contraction whose expression or activity are affected by cytokines such as IL-1 [189].
Effect of cytokines on targets in the signaling cascade mediating contraction Expression of RGS4, the sarcoplasmic Ca2+ uptake pump SERCA2, and the NADPH oxidases, NOX-1 and NOX-4, is increased on exposure of cultured muscle cells to IL-1; the increase in expression of RGS4, NOX-1, and NOX-4 is mediated by NF-B [190]. The expression of targets upstream of RGS4, such as receptors and G proteins, is not affected. Up-regulation of RGS4 accelerates deactivation of Gq, leading to a decrease in PI hydrolysis and IP3-dependent Ca2+ release, and inhibition of initial contraction and MLC20 phosphorylation [189]. The increase in SERCA2 expression, which is not mediated by NF-B, induces Ca2+ sequestration into sarcoplasmic Ca2+ stores, an effect that could be enhanced by formation of H2O2 [187,188]. The increase in NOX-1 and NOX-4 leads to sustained formation of superoxide, which can be readily dismuted to H2O2.
The expression of various targets involved in mediating sustained contraction, including G13, RhoA, Rho kinase, and MYPT1, is not affected by IL-1. The expression of the endogenous MLC phosphatase inhibitor, CPI-17, however, is decreased, resulting in a decrease in sustained MLC20 phosphorylation and contraction [189]. The decrease in CPI-17 expression appears to be mediated by NF-B. Upregulation of RGS4 and downregulation of CPI-17 expression have been demonstrated in experimental colitis.
Effect of cytokines on targets in the signaling cascade mediating relaxation Exposure to IL-1 can also affect the expression and activity of signaling targets mediating relaxation. Induction of NOS II (iNOS) causes sustained NO production and activation of soluble guanylate cyclase and PKG. PKG initiates a feedback mechanism that leads to a decrease in soluble guanylate cyclase expression and cGMP production [191].

126

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

The increase in iNOS expression can also limit cAMP production. NO generated by iNOS causes S-nitrosylation of adenylate cyclase V/VI in smooth muscle cells and inhibits its ability to stimulate cAMP production [192]. An increase in cAMP-specific PDE4 expression enhances cAMP degradation, further limiting cAMP production.
Thus, exposure to cytokines, such as IL-1 and TNF-, has specific effects on the expression and activity of various targets in the signaling pathways mediating contraction and relaxation. Some, but not all, of these effects are mediated by NF-B, but in each instance the outcome is to limit both contraction and relaxation.
Summary
Smooth muscle of the gut exhibits variable tone on which are superimposed rhythmic contractions, driven by cycles of depolarization and repolarization (slow waves) that originate in interstitial cells of Cajal (pacemaker type) located mainly at the periphery of circular muscle. Ca2+ influx occurs when the depolarization attains a level at which voltage-gated Ca2+ channels are activated, triggering a transient contraction superimposed on muscle tone. Release of excitatory neurotransmitters (mainly acetylcholine and tachykinins) from enteric motor neurons accentuates depolarization and Ca2+ influx and initiates Ca2+ release, causing an increase in both tone and rhythmic contraction. Release of inhibitory/ relaxant neurotransmitters (mainly VIP, PACAP, and NO), enhanced by VIP/PACAP-dependent generation of NO from smooth muscle cells, induces hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane and suppresses rhythmic contractile activity (hence the term inhibitory). Evidence suggests that, during phasic activity, the effect of neurotransmitters is preferentially relayed to muscle cells by spindle-shaped ICC (IC-IM) located within the muscle mass. The ICC-mediated neural input generates excitatory and inhibitory junction potentials that regulate the phasic activity of smooth muscle cells. These potentials have little or no effect on muscle tone, except in regions where the muscle cells are depolarized.
The effects of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters on muscle tone (and, to a lesser extent, on rhythmic contractions) are mediated by G protein-coupled receptors. Muscle contraction occurs in two phases. The initial phase consists of a transient contraction mediated by phosphorylation of MLC20 via a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent MLC kinase. Ca2+ mobilization during the initial phase involves G proteindependent activation of PLC- and stimulation of IP3dependent Ca2+ release in circular muscle; Ca2+ mobilization in longitudinal muscle involves G protein-dependent activation of cPLA2 and arachidonic acid-stimulated Ca2+ influx, followed by Ca2+- and cyclic ADP ribose-induced Ca2+ release. The second phase consists of a sustained Ca2+-independent contraction during which MLC20 phosphorylation is main-

tained by a Ca2+-independent MLC kinase while MLC phosphatase is inhibited via dual PKC- and Rho kinase-dependent pathways. The pathways are triggered by sequential activation of G13 and RhoA.
Relaxation is mediated by NO- and VIP/PACAP-dependent stimulation of cAMP and cGMP and activation of both PKA and PKG. cAMP and cGMP levels are maintained within narrow limits by PKA/PKG-dependent feedback mechanisms that activate PDEs and inhibit cyclases. PKA inhibits adenylate cyclase and activates cAMP-specific PDE3A and PDE4D5, whereas PKG inhibits soluble guanylate cyclase and activates PDE5. The concurrent stimulation of cGMP greatly increases the affinity of cAMP for PKG. Thus, during physiological neural activity when both cyclic nucleotides are present, the more abundant cAMP preferentially activates PKG. Both protein kinases inhibit PLC- and cPLA2, but only PKG directly inhibits IP3-induced Ca2+ release. These properties are mainly responsible for the ability of PKA and PKG to inhibit initial contraction. The inhibition of sustained contraction is mediated by the ability of both protein kinases to inhibit RhoA activity and to stimulate MLC phosphatase activity.
The interplay of smooth muscle cells, interstitial cells, and enteric neurons (interneurons, sensory neurons, and excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons) is seen to best advantage in the regulation of the peristaltic reflex. The reflex is triggered by mucosal stimuli produced by the passage of digesta through the intestine and only exceptionally by distention, which uses an extrinsic sensory pathway. Mucosal stimulation releases 5-HT from enterochromaffin cells; 5-HT acts on 5-HT4 receptors located on the nerve terminals of intrinsic, sensory CGRP-containing neurons; the information is relayed sequentially through somatostatin and opioid interneurons to ascending and descending excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons. The ascending limb of the reflex involves the release of acetylcholine and tachykinins from excitatory motor neurons and mediates orad contraction of circular muscle; the descending limb, which mediates caudad relaxation of circular muscle, involves the combined release of VIP, PACAP, and NO from inhibitory motor neurons, accentuated by VIP/PACAP-mediated NO production in muscle cells. A distinct set of VIP/PACAP/NOS interneurons that synapse with tonic cholinergic/tachykinin motor neurons innervating longitudinal muscle mediates reciprocal caudad contraction and orad relaxation of longitudinal muscle. The ability of 5-HT4 agonists to initiate peristalsis, particularly when combined with opioid antagonists, underlies their therapeutic potential.
References
1. Gabella G. Structure of muscles and nerves in the gastrointestinal tract. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:335.

127

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

2. Gabella G. Structure of intestinal musculature. In: Wood JD (ed.). Motility and Circulation. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 1, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:103.
3. Gabella G. Quantitative morphological study of smooth muscle cells of the guinea-pig teniae coli. Cell Tissue Res 1976;170:161.
4. Okamoto T, Schlegel A, Scherer PE, Lisanti MP. Caveolins, a family of scaffolding proteins for organizing "preassembled signaling complexes" at the plasma membrane. J Biol Chem 1998;273:5419.
5. Shaul PE, Anderson RG. Role of plasmalemmal caveolae in signal transduction. Am J Physiol 1998;275:L843.
6. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Heterologous desensitization mediated by G protein-specific binding to caveolin. J Biol Chem 2000; 275:30211.
7. Gerthoffer WT, Gunst SJ. Signal transduction in smooth muscle. Invited review: focal adhesion and small heat shock proteins in the regulation of actin remodeling and contractility in smooth muscle. J Appl Physiol 2001;91:963.
8. Murphy RA. Contraction of muscle cells. In: Berne RM, Levy MN (eds). Physiology, 2nd edn. St Louis, MO: CV Mosby, 1988:315.
9. Gabella G, Blundell D. Gap junctions of the muscles of the small and large intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1981;219:469.
10. Somlyo AP, Somlyo AV, Shuman H. Electron probe analysis of vascular smooth muscle. J Cell Biol 1979;81:316.
11. Rayemakers L, Wuytack F, Batra S, Casteels R. A comparative study of the calcium accumulation by mitochondria and microsomes isolated from the smooth muscle of the guinea-pig teniae coli. Pflugers Arch 1977;368:217.
12. Bitar KN, Burgess GM, Putney JW Jr, Makhlouf GM. Source of activator calcium in isolated guinea pig and human gastric muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G280.
13. Bitar KN, Bradford PJ, Putney JW Jr, Makhlouf GM. Stoichiometry of contraction and Ca2+ mobilization by inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate in isolated gastric smooth muscle cells. J Biol Chem 1986;261: 16591.
14. Berridge MJ, Irvine RF. Inositol phosphates and cell signaling. Nature 1989;341:197.
15. Burgess GM, McKinney JS, Fabiato A, et al. Calcium pools in saponin-permeabilized guinea pig hepatocytes. J Biol Chem 1983; 258:15336.
16. Hartshorne DJ. Biochemistry of the contractile process in smooth muscle. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:423.
17. Bond M, Somlyo AV. Dense bodies and actin polarity in vertebrate smooth muscle. J Cell Biol 1982;95:403.
18. Sobieszek A. Vertebrate smooth muscle myosin: enzymatic and structural properties. In: Stephen NL (ed.). The Biochemistry of Smooth Muscle. Baltimore, MD: University Park Press, 1977:413.
19. Murphy RA. Muscle cells of hollow organs. News Physiol Sci 1988;3:124.
20. Somlyo AP, Somlyo AP. Signal transduction and regulation in smooth muscle. Nature 1994;372:231.
21. Somlyo AP, Somlyo AP. Ca2+ sensitivity of smooth muscle and nonmuscle myosin II: modulated by G proteins, kinases and phosphatases. Physiol Rev 2003; 83:1325.
22. Murthy KS. Signaling for contraction and relaxation in smooth muscle of the gut. Annu Rev Physiol 2006;68:345.
23. Kamm KE, Stull JT. Dedicated myosin light chain kinases with diverse cellular functions. J Biol Chem 2001;276:4527.
24. Harshorne DJ, Eto M, Erodi F. Myosin light chain phosphatase: subunit composition, interaction and regulation. J Mus Res Cell Motil 1998;19:325.
25. Makhlouf GM, Murthy KS. Signal transduction in gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Cell Signal 1997;9:269.
26. Sward K, Mita M, Wilson DP, et al. The role of RhoA and Rhoassociated kinase in vascular smooth muscle contraction. Curr Hypertens 2003;5:66.

27. Murthy KS, Zhou H, Grider JR, et al. Differential signaling by muscarinic receptors in smooth muscle: m2-mediated inactivation of MLC kinase via Gi3, Cdc42/Rac1 and p-21-activated kinase 1 pathway, and m3-mediated MLC20 phosphorylation via Rho-associated kinase/myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1 and protein kinase C/CPI-17 pathway. Biochem J 2003;374:145.
28. Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG. Adrenergic receptors: models for the study of receptors coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins. J Biol Chem 1988;263:4993.
29. Barnard EA. Separating receptor subtypes from their shadows. Nature 1988;335:381.
30. Gilman AG. G proteins and regulation of adenylyl cyclases. Biosci Rep 1995;15:65.
31. Hollinger S, Hepler JR. Cellular regulation of RGS proteins: modulators and integrators of G protein signaling. Annu Rev Biochem 2002;67:653.
32. Berridge MJ, Irvine RF. Inositol triphosphate, a novel second messenger in cellular signal transduction. Nature 1984;312:321.
33. Exton JH. Regulation of phosphoinositide phospholipases by hormones, neurotransmitters, and other agonists linked to G proteins. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1996;36:481.
34. Nishizuka Y. The molecular heterogeneity of protein kinase C and its implications for cellular regulation. Nature 1988;334:661.
35. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Phosphoinositide metabolism in intestinal smooth muscle: preferential production of Ins(1,4,5)P3 in circular muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G945.
36. Cockcroft S, Thomas GMH. Inositol-lipid-specific phospholipase C isoenzymes and their differential regulation by receptors. Biochem J 1992;288:1.
37. Berridge MJ, Gallione A. Cytosolic calcium oscillators. FASEB J 1988;2:3074.
38. McPherson PS, Campbell KP. The ryanodine receptor/Ca2+ release channel. J Biol Chem 1993;268:13765.
39. Furuichi T, Yoshikawa S, Miyawaki A, et al. Primary structure and function expression of the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate-binding protein P400. Nature 1989;342:32.
40. Mignery GA, Sudhof TC, Takel K, DeCamilli P. Putative receptor for inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate similar to ryanodine receptor. Nature 1989;342:192.
41. Putney JW Jr, Broad LM, Braun FJ, et al. Mechanisms of capacitative calcium entry. J Cell Sci 2001;114:2223.
42. Kitazawa T, Kobayashi S, Horiuti K, et al. Receptor-coupled permeabilized smooth muscle: role of the phosphatidyl-inositol cascade, G-proteins and modulation of the contractile response to Ca2+. J Biol Chem 1989;264:5339.
43. Kobayashi S, Somlyo AV, Somlyo AP. Heparin inhibits the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate-dependent but not the independent calcium release induced by guanine nucleotide in vascular smooth muscle. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988;153:625.
44. Bitar KN, Makhlouf GM. Receptors on smooth muscle cells: characterization by contraction and specific antagonists. Am J Physiol 1982;242:G400.
45. Bitar KN, Bradford P, Putney JW Jr, Makhlouf GM. Cytosolic calcium during contraction of isolated mammalian gastric muscle cells. Science 1986;232:1143.
46. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Contraction mediated by Ca2+ release in circular and Ca2+ influx in longitudinal intestinal muscle cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1988;244:432.
47. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Fluoride activates G protein-dependent and independent pathways in dispersed intestinal smooth muscle cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994;202:1681.
48. Murthy KS, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. InsP3-dependent Ca2+ mobilization in circular but not longitudinal muscle cells of intestine. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G937.
49. Makhlouf GM, Murthy KS. In: Cellular physiology of the gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of Gastrointestinal Tract, 4th edn. New York: Academic Press, 2006:315.

128

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

50. Kuemmerle JF, Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Agonist-activated, ryanodine-sensitive, IP3-insensitive Ca2+ release channels in longitudinal muscle of intestine. Am J Physiol 1994;266:C1421.
51. Murthy KS, Kuemmerle JF, Makhlouf GM. Agonist-mediated activation of PLA2 initiates Ca2+ in intestinal longitudinal smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1995;269:G93.
52. Kuemmerle JF, Makhlouf GM. Activation of Cl- channels by contractile agonists depolarizes longitudinal muscle and triggers Ca2+ influx via voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels. Gastroenterology 1994; 106:A527.
53. Kuemmerle JF, Makhlouf GM. Agonist-stimulated cyclic ADP ribose: endogenous modulator of Ca2+-induced Ca2+-release in intestinal longitudinal muscle. J Biol Chem 1995;270:25488.
54. Murthy KS, Zhou H, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Sequential activation of heterotrimeric and monomeric G proteins mediates PLD activity in smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G381.
55. Murthy KS, Grider JR, Kuemmerle JF, Makhlouf GM. Sustained muscle contraction induced by agonists, growth factors, and Ca2+ mediated by distinct PKC isozymes. Am J Physio Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G201.
56. Harnett KM, Cao W, Biancani P. Signal transduction pathways that regulate smooth muscle function. I. Signal transduction in phasic (esophageal) and tonic (gastroesophageal) sphincter smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G407.
57. Murthy KS, Teng B-Q, Zhou H, et al. Gi1/Gi2-dependent signaling by single-transmembrane natriuretic peptide clearance receptor. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;278:G974.
58. Bitar KN, Makhlouf GM. Relaxation of isolated gastric smooth muscle cells by vasoactive intestinal peptide. Science 1982;216:531.
59. Grider JR, Murthy KS, Jin JG, Makhlouf GM. Stimulation of nitric oxide from muscle cells by VIP: prejunctional enhancement of VIP release. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G774.
60. Murthy KS, Severi C, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Inhibition of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) production and IP3-dependent Ca2+ mobilization by cyclic nucleotides in isolated gastric muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G967.
61. Murthy KS, Zhang K, Jin JG, et al. VIP-mediated G-protein-coupled Ca2+ influx activates a constitutive nitric oxide synthase in dispersed gastric muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1993;265:G660.
62. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Interaction of cA-kinase and cG-kinase in mediating relaxation of dispersed smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1995;268:C171.
63. Sunahara RK, Dessauer CW, Gilman AG. Complexity and diversity of mammalian adenylyl cyclases. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1996;36:461.
64. Murthy KS, Zhou H, Makhlouf GM. PKA-dependent activation of PDE3A and PDE4 and inhibition of adenylyl cyclase V/VI in smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:C508.
65. Francis SH, Turko IV, Corbin JD. Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases: relating structure and function. Prog Nucl Acid Res Mol Biol 2001;65:1.
66. Murthy KS. Activation of phosphodiesterase 5 and inhibition of guanylate cyclase by cGMP-dependent protein kinase in smooth muscle. Biochem J 2001;360:199.
67. Murthy KS. cAMP inhibits IP3-dependent Ca2+ release by preferential activation of cGMP-primed PKG. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;281:G1238.
68. Jin JG, Murthy KS, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Activation of cAMPand cGMP-dependent pathways by relaxant agents in isolated gastric muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G470.
69. Murthy KS, Zhou H, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Inhibition of sustained smooth muscle contraction by PKA and PKG preferentially meditated by phosphorylation of RhoA. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G1006.
70. Wooldridge AA, MacDonald JA, Erodi F, et al. Smooth muscle phosphatase is regulated in vivo by exclusion of phosphorylation of

threonine 696 of MYPT1 by phosphorylation of serine 695 in response to cyclic nucleotides. J Biol Chem 2004;279:34495. 71. Walker LA, MacDonald JA, Liu X, et al. Site-specific phosphorylation and point mutations of telokin modulates its Ca2+-desensitizing effect in smooth muscle. J Biol Chem 2001;276:24519. 72. Chasse SA, Dohlman HG. RGS proteins: G protein-coupled receptors meet their match. Assays Drug Dev Technol 2003;1:357. 73. Casteels R. Membrane potential in smooth muscle cells. In: Bulbring E, Brading AF, Jones AW, Tomita T (eds). Smooth Muscle: An Assessment of Current Knowledge. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1981:105. 74. Sanders KM. Electrophysiology of dissociated gastrointestinal muscle cells. In: Wood JD (ed.). Motility and Circulation. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 1, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:163. 75. Szurszewski JH. Electrical basis of gastrointestinal motility. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:383. 76. Sanders KM, Smith TK. Electrophysiology of colonic smooth muscle. In: Wood JD (ed.). Motility and Circulation. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 1, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:251. 77. Sanders KM, Publicover NG. Electrophysiology of gastric musculature. In: Wood JD (ed.). Motility and Circulation. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 1, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:187. 78. Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell. New York: Garland Publishing, 1983:291. 79. Walsh JV Jr, Singer JJ. Calcium action potentials in single freshly isolated smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1980;239:C162. 80. Walsh JV Jr, Singer JJ. Voltage clamp of single freshly dissociated smooth muscle cells: current-voltage relationships for three currents. Pflugers Arch 1981;390:207. 81. Singer JJ, Walsh JV Jr. Passive properties of the membrane of single freshly isolated smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1980;239:153. 82. Benham CD, Bolton TB. Patch-clamp studies of slow potentialsensitive potassium channels in longitudinal smooth muscle cells of rabbit jejunum. J Physiol (Lond) 1983;340:469. 83. Benham CD, Bolton TB, Lang RJ, Takewaki T. Calcium-activated potassium channels in single smooth muscle cells of rabbit jejunum and guinea-pig mesenteric artery. J Physiol (Lond) 1986;371:45. 84. Bolton TB, Lang RJ, Takewaki T, Benham CD. Patch and whole-cell voltage clamp of single mammalian visceral and vascular smooth muscle cells. Experientia 1985;41:887. 85. Andreas C, Sanders KM. Ca2+-activated K+ channels of canine colonic myocytes. Am J Physiol 1989;257:C470. 86. Ganitkevich VY, Shuba MF, Smirnov SV. Potential-dependent calcium inward current in a single isolated smooth muscle cell of the guinea-pig teniae caeci. J Physiol (Lond) 1986;380:1. 87. Droogmans G, Callewaert G. Ca2+-channel current and its modification by the dihydropyridine agonist BAY k8644 in isolated smooth muscle cells. Pflugers Arch 1986;406:259. 88. Mitra R, Morad M. Ca2+ and Ca2+-activated K+ currents in mammalian gastric smooth muscle cells. Science 1985;229:269. 89. Bechem M, Hebisch S, Schramm M. Ca2+ agonists: new, sensitive probes for Ca2+ channels. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1988;9:257. 90. Singer JJ, Walsh JV Jr. Large conductance Ca2+ activated K+ channels in smooth muscle cell membrane. Biophys J 1984;45:68. 91. Singer JJ, Walsh JV Jr. Characterization of calcium-activated potassium channels in single smooth muscle cells using the patch-clamp technique. Pflugers Arch 1987;408:98. 92. Jin JG, Katsoulis S, Shmidt WE, Grider JR. Inhibitory transmission in teniae coli mediated by distinct vasoactive intestinal peptide and apamin-sensitive pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994;270:433. 93. Brown DA, Adams PR. Muscarinic suppression of a novel voltagesensitive K+ current in a vertebrate neurone. Nature 1980;283:673.

129

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

94. Sims SM, Singer JJ, Walsh JV Jr. Cholinergic agonists suppress a potassium current in freshly dissociated smooth muscle cells of the toad. J Physiol (Lond) 1985;367:503.
95. Sims SM, Walsh JV Jr, Singer JJ. Substance P and acetylcholine both suppress the same K+ current in dissociated smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1986;251:C580.
96. Thuneberg L. Interstitial cells of Cajal. In: Wood JD (ed.). Motility and Circulation. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 1, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:349.
97. Burns AJ, Lomaz AEZ, Torihashi S, et al. Interstitial cells of Cajal mediate inhibitory neurotransmission in the stomach. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:12008.
98. Yamamoto M. Electron microscopic studies on the innervation of the smooth muscle and the interstitial cells of Cajal in the small intestine of the mouse and bat. Arch Histol Jpn 1977;40:171.
99. Ward SM, Sanders KM. Interstitial cells of Cajal: primary targets of enteric motor innervation. Anat Rec 2001;262:125.
100. Ward SM. Interstitial cells of Cajal in enteric neurotransmission. Gut 2000;47(Suppl 4):iv40.
101. Sanders KM, Koh SD, Ward SM. Interstitial cells of Cajal as pacemakers in the gastrointestinal tract. Annu Rev Physiol 2006;68: 307.
102. Langton P, Ward SM, Carl A, et al. Spontaneous electrical activity of interstitial cells of Cajal isolated from canine proximal colon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:7280.
103. Ward SM, Burns AJ, Torihashi S, Sanders KM. Mutation of the proto-oncogene c-kit blocks development of interstitial cells and electrical rhythmicity in murine intestine. J Physiol (Lond) 1994; 480:91.
104. Huizinga JD, Thuneberg L, Kluppel M, et al. W/kit gene required for interstitial cells of Cajal and for intestinal pacemaker activity. Nature 1995;373:347.
105. El-Sharkawy TY, Morgan KG, Szurszewski JH. Intracellular activity of canine and human gastric smooth muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1978;279:291.
106. Szurszewski JH. Mechanism of action of pentagastrin and acetylcholine on the longitudinal muscle of the canine antrum. J Physiol (Lond) 1975;252:335.
107. Sanders KM. Colonic electrical activity: concerto for two pacemakers. News Physiol Sci 1989;4:176.
108. Kobayashi S, Furness JB, Smith TK, Pompolo S. Histological identification of the interstitial cells of Cajal in the guinea-pig small intestine. Arch Histol Cytol 1989;52:267.
109. Sanders KM, Ordog T, Koh SD, Ward SM. A novel pacemaker mechanism drives gastrointestinal rhythmicity. News Physiol Sci 2000;15:291.
110. Sanders KM, Burke EP, Stevens RJ. Effects of methylene blue on rhythmic activity and membrane potential in the canine proximal colon. Am J Physiol 1989;256:G779.
111. Hara Y, Kubota M, Szurszewski JH. Electrophysiology of the smooth muscle in the small intestine of some mammals. J Physiol (Lond) 1986;372:501.
112. Suzuki N, Prosser CL, Dahms V. Boundary cells between longitudinal and circular layers: essential for electrical slow waves in cat intestine. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G287.
113. Smith TK, Reed BJ, Sanders KM. Electrical pacemakers of canine proximal colon are functionally innervated by inhibitory motor neurons. Am J Physiol 1989;256:C466.
114. Smith TK. Spontaneous junction potentials and slow waves in the circular muscle of isolated segments of guinea-pig ileum. J Auton Nerv Syst 1989;27:147.
115. Morgan KG, Szurszewski JH. Mechanisms of phasic and tonic actions of pentagastrin on canine gastric smooth muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1980;301:229.
116. Morgan KG, Schmalz PF, Go VL, Szurszewski JH. Electrical and mechanical effects of molecular variants of CCK on antral smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1978;235:E324.

117. Sanders KM, Vogalis F. Organization of electrical activity in the canine pyloric canal. J Physiol 1989;416:49.
118. Morgan KG, Muir TC, Szurszewski JH. The electrical basis for contraction and relaxation in canine fundal smooth muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1981;311:475.
119. Smith TK, Reed BJ, Sanders KM. Origin and propagation of electrical slow waves in circular muscle of canine proximal colon. Am J Physiol 1987;252:C215.
120. Bauer AJ, Sanders KM. Gradient in excitation-contraction coupling in canine gastric antral circular muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1985;369:283.
121. Smith TK, Reed BJ, Sanders KM. Interaction of two electrical pacemakers in muscularis of canine proximal colon. Am J Physiol 1987;252:C290.
122. Costa M, Brookes SJH, Steele PA, et al. Neurochemical classification of myenteric neurons in the guinea pig ileum. Neuroscience 1996;75:949.
123. Costa M, Furness JB, Llewellyn-Smith IJ. Histochemistry of enteric nervous system. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:1.
124. Llewellyn IJ, Furness JB, Gibbins IL, Costa M. Quantitative ultrastructural analysis of enkephalin-, substance P-, and VIPimmunoreactive nerve fibers in the circular muscle of the guinea pig small intestine. J Comp Neurol 1988;272:139.
125. Wilson AJ, Llewellyn-Smith IJ, Furness JB, Costa M. The source of the nerve fibres forming the deep muscular and circular muscle plexuses in the small intestine of the guinea-pig. Cell Tissue Res 1987;247:497.
126. Watchow DA, Furness JB, Costa M. Distribution and coexistence of peptides in nerve fibers of the external muscle of the human gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 1988;95:32.
127. Costa M, Furness JB, Pompolo S, et al. Projections and chemical coding of neurons with immunoreactivity for nitric oxide synthase in the guinea pig small intestine. Neurosci Lett 1992;148:121.
128. Furness JB, Costa M. Identification of gastrointestinal neurotransmitters. In: Bertaccini G (ed.). Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology: Mediators and Drugs in Gastrointestinal Motility. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1982;59:279.
129. Makhlouf GM, Grider JR. Receptors for gut peptides on smooth muscle cells of the gut. In: Makhlouf GM (ed.). Neural and Endocrine Biology of the Gut. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 2, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:281.
130. Makhlouf GM, Grider JR, Schubert ML. Identification of physiological function of gut peptides. In: Makhlouf GM (ed.). Neural and Endocrine Biology of the Gut. Handbook of Physiology, Vol. 2, Sect. 6: The Gastrointestinal System. New York: American Physiological Society, 1989:123.
131. Makhlouf GM. Enteric neuropeptides: role in neuromuscular activity of the gut. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1985;6:214.
132. Micheletti R, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Identification of bombesin receptors on isolated muscle cells from human intestine. Regul Pept 1988;21:219.
133. Zetler G. Antagonism of the gut-contracting effects of bombesin and neurotensin by opioid peptides, morphine, atropine or tetrodotoxin. Pharmacology 1980;21:348.
134. Yau WM, Lingle PF, Youther ML. Interaction of enkephalin and caerulein on guinea pig small intestine. Eur J Pharmacol 1983;90: 245.
135. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Regional and cellular heterogeneity of cholecystokinin receptors mediating muscle contraction in the gut. Gastroenterology 1987;92:175.
136. Grider JR, Cable MB, Said SI, Makhlouf GM. Vasoactive intestinal peptide: relaxant neurotransmitter in teniae coli of the guinea pig. Gastroenterology 1985;89:36.
137. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Suppression of inhibitory neural input to colonic circular muscle by opioid peptides. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1987;243:205.

130

Smooth muscle of the gut CHAPTER 6

138. Grider JR, Jin JG. VIP release and L-citrulline production from isolated ganglia of the myenteric plexus: evidence for regulation of VIP release by nitric oxide. Neuroscience 1993;54:521.
139. Jin JG, Murthy KS, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Stoichiometry of VIP release and NO formation during nerve stimulation of rabbit gastric muscle. Am J Physiol 1997;271:G357.
140. Jin JG, Misra S, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Functional difference between substance P and neurokinin A: relaxation of gastric muscle by substance P is mediated by VIP and nitric oxide. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G678.
141. Grider JR, Katsoulis S, Schmidt WE, Jin JG. Regulation of the descending relaxation phase of intestinal peristalsis by PACAP. J Auton Nerv Syst 1994;50:151.
142. Grider JR. Interplay of VIP and nitric oxide in the regulation of the descending relaxation phase of peristalsis. Am J Physiol 1993; 264:G334.
143. Murthy KS, Teng B-Q, Jin J-G, Makhlouf GM. G protein-dependent activation of smooth muscle eNOS via natriuretic peptide clearance receptor. Am J Physiol 1998;275:C1409.
144. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. VIP/PACAP-dependent activation of membrane-bound NO synthase in smooth muscle mediated by pertussis toxin-sensitive Gi1-2. J Biol Chem 1994;269:15977.
145. Teng B, Murthy KS, Kuemmerle JF, et al. Expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in human and rabbit gastrointestinal smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G342.
146. Allescher HD, Kurjak M, Huber A, et al. Regulation of VIP release from rat enteric nerve terminals: evidence for a stimulatory effect of NO. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G568.
147. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Identification of the G protein-activating domain of the natriuretic peptide clearance receptor (NPR-C). J Biol Chem 1999;274:17587.
148. Murthy KS, Teng B-Q, Zhou H, et al. Gi1/Gi2-dependent signaling by single-transmembrane natriuretic peptide clearance receptor. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;278:G974.
149. Zhou H, Murthy KS. Identification of G-protein-activating sequence of the single-transmembrane natriuretic peptide receptor C (NPR-C). Am J Physiol 2003;284:C1255.
150. Murthy KS, Jin JG, Makhlouf GM. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthase activity in dispersed gastric muscle cells by protein kinase C. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G161.
151. Jin JG, Katsoulis S, Schmidt WE, Grider JR. Inhibitory transmission in teniae coli mediated by distinct vasoactive intestinal peptide and apamin-sensitive pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994;270:433.
152. Bitar KN, Makhlouf GM. Specific opiate receptors on isolated mammalian gastric smooth muscle cells. Nature 1982;297:72.
153. Souquet JC, Grider JR, Bitar KN, Makhlouf GM. Receptors for mammalian tachykinins on isolated intestinal smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1985;249:G533.
154. Biancani P, Walsh JH, Behar J. Vasoactive intestinal peptide: a neurotransmitter for relaxation of the rabbit internal anal sphincter. Gastroenterology 1985;89:867.
155. Wiley JW, O'Dorisio TM, Owyang C. Vasoactive intestinal peptide mediated CCK-induced relaxation of sphincter of Oddi. J Clin Invest 1988;81:1920.
156. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Colonic peristaltic reflex: identification of VIP as mediator of descending relaxation. Am J Physiol 1986; 251:G40.
157. Grider JR. Identification of neurotransmitters regulating intestinal peristaltic reflex in humans. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1414.
158. Grider JR. Tachykinins as transmitters of ascending contractile component of the peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol 1989;257: G709.
159. Grider JR, Arimura A, Makhlouf GM. Role of somatostatin neurons in intestinal peristalsis: facilitatory interneurons in descending pathways. Am J Physiol 1987;253:G434.
160. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Role of opioid neurons in the regulation of intestinal peristalsis. Am J Physiol 1987;253:G226.

161. Grider JR. Interplay of somatostatin, opioid, and GABA neurons in the regulation of peristalsis reflex. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G696.
162. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Enteric GABA: mode of action and role in the regulation of the peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G690.
163. Grider JR. Regulation of excitatory neural input to longitudinal intestinal muscle by myenteric interneurons. Am J Physiol 1998; 275:G73.
164. Grider JR, Jin JG. Distinct populations of sensory neurons mediate the peristaltic reflex elicited by muscle stretch and mucosal stimulation. J Neurosci 1994;14:2854.
165. Grider JR. CGRP as a transmitter in the sensory pathway mediating peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G1139.
166. Grider JR, Kuemmerle JF, Jin JG. 5-HT released by mucosal stimuli initiates peristalsis by activating 5-HT4­5-HT1p receptors on sensory CGRP neurons. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G778.
167. Foxx-Orenstein AE, Kuemmerle JF, Grider JR. Distinct 5-HT receptors mediate the peristaltic reflex induced by mucosal stimuli in human and guinea pig intestine. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1281.
168. Grider JR, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Jin J-G. 5-hydroxytryptamine4 receptor agonists initiate the peristaltic reflex in human, rat, and guinea pig intestine. Gastroenterology 1998;115:370.
169. Foxx-Orenstein AE, Jin J-G, Grider JR. 5-HT4 receptor agonists and -opioid receptor antagonists act synergistically to stimulate colonic propulsion. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G979.
170. Jin J-G, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Grider JR. Propulsion in guinea pig colon induced by 5-hydroxytryptamine via 5-HT4 and 5-HT3 receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;288:93.
171. Foxx-Orenstein AE, Grider JR. Regulation of colonic propulsion by enteric excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitter. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G433.
172. Hall KE, Greenberg GR, El-Sharkawy TY, Diamant NE. Relationship between porcine motilin induced migrating motor complex-like activity, vagal integrity and endogenous motilin release in dogs. Gastroenterology 1984;87:76.
173. Poitras P. Motilin is a digestive hormone in the dog. Gastroenterology 1984;87:909.
174. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Coexpression of ligand-gated P2X and G protein-coupled P2Y receptors in smooth muscle: preferential activation of P2Y receptors coupled to phospholipase C (PLC)-1 via Gq/11 and to PLC-3 via Gi3. J Biol Chem 1998;273:4695.
175. Murthy KS, Makhlouf GM. Adenosine A1 receptor-mediated activation of phospholipase C-3 in intestinal muscle: dual requirement for  and  subunits of Gi3. Mol Pharmacol 1995;47:1172.
176. Kuemmerle JF, Martin DC, Murthy KS, et al. Coexistence of contractile and relaxant 5-HT receptors coupled to distinct signaling pathways in intestinal muscle cells: convergence of the pathways on Ca2+ mobilization. Mol Pharmacol 1992;42:1090.
177. Morini G, Kuemmerle JF, Impicciatore M, et al. Coexistence of histamine H1 and H2 receptors coupled to distinct signal transduction pathways in isolated intestinal muscle cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1993;264:598.
178. Singer CA, Salinthone S, Baker KJ, Gerthoffer WT. Synthesis of immune modulators by smooth muscle. Bioessays 2004;26:646.
179. Shi X-Z, Sarna SK. Transcriptional regulation of inflammatory mediators secreted by human colonic circular smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G274.
180. Cao W, Cheng L, Behar J, Fiocchi C, et al. Proinflammatory cytokines alter/reduce esophageal circular muscle contraction in experimental cat esophagitis. Am J Physiol 2004; 287:G1131.
181. Akiho H, Blennerhassett P, Deng Y, Collins SM. Role of IL-4, IL-13, and STAT6 in inflammation-induced hypercontractility of murine smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G226.
182. Shea-Donohue T, Urban JF Jr. Gastrointestinal parasite and host interactions. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2004;20:3.
183. Shi X-Z, Lindholm PF, Sarna SK. NF-kappa B activation by oxidative stress and inflammation suppresses contractility in colonic circular smooth muscle cells. Gastroenterology 2003;124:1369.

131

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

184. Hu W, Mahavadi S, Li F, Murthy KS. Up-regulation of RGS4 and down-regulation of CP-17 mediate inhibition of colonic muscle contraction by interleukin-1. Am J Physiol 2007;293:C1991.
185. Shi X-Z, Pazdrak K, Saada N, et al. Negative transcriptional regulation of human colonic smooth muscle Cav 1.2 channels by p50 and p65 subunits of NF-kappa B. Gastroenterology. 2005;129:1518.
186. Hu W, Li F, Mahavadi S, Murthy KS. Interleukin-1 up-regulates RGS4 through the canonical IKK2/IB/NF-B pathway in rabbit colonic smooth muscle. Biochem J 2008;412:35.
187. Cao W, Harnett KM, Cheng L, et al. H2O2: a mediator of esophagitisinduced damage to calcium-release mechanisms in cat lower esophageal sphincter. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005; 288:G1170.
188. Cao W, Vrees MD, Potenti FM, et al. Interleukin 1beta-induced production of H2O2 contributes to reduced sigmoid colonic circular smooth muscle contractility in ulcerative colitis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2004;311:60.

189. Murthy KS, Mahavadi S, Makhlouf GM. Identification of the signaling mechanisms that mediate inhibition of colonic muscle contraction by interleukin-1: up-regulation of RGS4 and downregulation of CPI-17. Gastroenterology 2005;128:A497.
190. Hu W, Li F, Murthy KS. Interleukin-1 stimulates expression of NADPH oxidases NOX1 and NOX4 in colonic smooth muscle: mediation by NF-B and differential modulation by c-jun kinase and ERK1/2. Gastroenterology 2006;130:A505.
191. Huang J, Hu W, Mahavadi S, Murthy KS. Down-regulation of soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) expression and activity by inteleukin1 in colonic smooth muscle cells is mediated by PKG-dependent activation of JNK. Gastroenterology 2006;130:A688.
192. Huang J, Mahavadi S, Murthy KS. Dual mechanism for inhibition of cAMP by interleukin-1 in smooth muscle: inhibitory snitrosylation of adenylyl cyclase V/VI via iNOS-derived NO and stimulation of PDE4 expression and activity. Gastroenterology 2006;130:A691.

132

A COMPONENTS
7 The mucosal immune system and
gastrointestinal inflammation
Fabio Cominelli, Kristen O. Arseneau, Richard S. Blumberg, William F. Stenson, Theresa T. Pizarro

The mucosal immune system, 133 Gastrointestinal inflammation, 146

Immune-mediated gastrointestinal and liver diseases, 158

The mucosal immune system
The intestinal mucosal immune system is one of the largest immunological compartments in the body. This system of epithelial cells, lymphoid cells (i.e., B and T cells), and myeloid cells (i.e., macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, eosinophils, and mast cells) is charged with the daunting task of maintaining a delicate homeostatic balance ­ defending against the many pathogenic organisms and toxic antigens that can penetrate the epithelial barrier and cause intestinal injury, and ignoring the multitude of commensal organisms and dietary antigens present in the gut that are of no threat to the host. Of all the organ systems, only the gastrointestinal tract and a few other epithelial surfaces are challenged to distinguish between foreign or non-self-antigens and selfantigens in such a dramatic fashion.
To meet this challenge, the intestinal mucosal immune system has evolved several important gut-specific modifications: flattened epithelial microfold (M) cells that transport antigen; specialized epithelial cells (follicle-associated epithelium) overlying lymphoid aggregates and dendritic cells that selectively sample lumenal antigens; the immunoglobulin A (IgA) system that helps to exclude and remove foreign antigens; and unique mechanisms that generate local, specific secretory immunity in the context of systemic tolerance [1­6]. The functional segregation of intestinal from systemic compartments emphasizes the separate role of the intestine as a unique lymphoid organ that is linked to other mucosal surfaces, such as those of the lung, breast, and genitourinary tract, to create a common mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

(MALT) [7]. Functional linkage of the MALT is accomplished by the regulated traffic of lymphocytes between the affiliated tissues [8].
Advances in cellular and molecular biology have greatly facilitated the understanding of the general operation of the intestinal immune system, which protects the organism against the invasion and systemic dissemination of pathogens while limiting the infiltration of commensal bacteria. These commensal bacteria confer benefit to the host by promoting the digestion of nutrients and the development of gut immunity, as well as by preventing colonization by pathogens. In this context, toll-like receptors and NOD-like receptors, which are expressed on intestinal epithelial cells and other mucosal cells, play a critical role in controlling mucosal immunity. Foreign antigens are sampled, processed, presented, and recognized through the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), T-cell receptors, and immunoglobulins. Responsive cellular elements are stimulated after antigen contact through accessory molecules, adhesion molecules, and signal transduction. Activated immune cells then perform their functional role through the production of cytokines and other humoral factors, as well as through cytolysis. The immune response generated by these events is self-limited after the foreign antigen is cleared. However, under pathological conditions, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), the persistence of an aberrant immune response can result in chronic intestinal inflammation and tissue injury.
Components of the immune system T lymphocytes T lymphocytes are a critical component of the gut mucosal immune system, which must maintain tight regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses against infectious agents and tumors in an environment that is rich with benign non-self-antigens. As important regulators of effector function, T lymphocytes recognize and eliminate infectious agents and tumors, and orchestrate a coordinated immune

133

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

(a)

Ta chain

Tb chain

NN

V region

J region

(b) TCR ab
ge VV ed
CC

CD3z

S-S S-S S-S S-S

C region

S-S

CD3 CD3

CC

Figure 7.1 Structure of the T-cell receptor (TCR). (a) The TCR comprises ab and gd heterodimers and is responsible for antigen recognition. Its structure consists of a leader peptide, a long extracellular domain, a transmembrane region, and a short cytoplasmic tail, and is organized into variable (V), joining (J), constant (C), and, for the b and g chains, diversity (D) regions. (b) The cluster of differentiation-3 (CD3) complex, which forms noncovalent associations with the ab and gd chains of the TCR, is composed of at least four proteins: g, d, e, and z chains. The TCR and associated CD3 complex together are responsible for antigen-specific interactions with antigen-presenting cells.

defense through their regulatory effects on other cell populations.
T cells are derived from bone marrow stem cells and migrate to the thymus, where they mature and are educated about self-antigen. Self-tolerant T cells then migrate to secondary lymphoid tissues throughout the body, including the Peyer patches of the gut. These naïve T cells populate the Peyer patches and await sensitization by lumenal antigens, which are transported to the Peyer patch follicles by specialized follicle-associated epithelial cells (M cells). A specific mucosal immune response is initiated by this interaction and directs the naïve T cell to a functional activated phenotype. The activated T cells migrate out of the intestinal tract to the afferent lymphatics that drain into the mesenteric lymph nodes, enter the efferent lymphatics of the mesenteric lymph nodes, and pass through the thoracic duct into the peripheral blood. Circulating activated T lymphocytes home to the original sites of antigenic stimulation and reenter the gut mucosa through flat endothelial cells on postcapillary venules, where they provide protective immunity within the lamina propria.
During antigen presentation, most T cells recognize processed nominal antigens or peptide fragments from the whole antigen in association with components of the MHC on the surface of an antigen-presenting cell [9]. The antigenspecific or clonotypic T-cell receptor (TCR) on the surface of the lymphocyte is responsible for antigen recognition, and is composed of immunoglobulin-like heterodimeric glycoproteins formed primarily as  and  heterodimers. Most circulating mature T cells express the  heterodimer on their receptor; only 5% express the  heterodimer and, rarely, the TCR exists on the cell surface as a  homodimer. However, among intraepithelial lymphocytes throughout the gastro-

intestinal mucosa,  T cells predominate. Indeed, their proximity to the epithelium means that  T cells are ideally situated to contribute to the initial stages of mucosal immunity. Overexpression experiments and x-ray crystallography have proved that the  heterodimer recognizes antigen in association with an MHC molecule [10]. The mechanisms by which  T cells recognize antigen are not as clearly defined; however, most  T cells recognize ligands that are fundamentally different from the short peptides that  T cells see in the context of MHC molecules [11]. Subsets of  T cells can recognize small bacterial phosphoantigens, alkylamines, synthetic aminobisphosphonates, and stress-inducible MHCrelated molecules MICA/B, as well as several other ligands [12].
The TCR is composed of a leader peptide, a long extracellular domain, a transmembrane region, and a short cytoplasmic tail [13]. These protein segments are organized into variable (V), joining (J), constant (C), and, for the - and chains, diversity (D) regions, which are each encoded by distant gene segments on chromosomes 7 (- and -chains) and 14 (- and -chains) that recombine during T-cell development in the thymus (Fig. 7.1a). Several mechanisms contribute to the antigen-recognizing capacity of the TCR: (1) multiple V-, J-, and D-region genes; (2) recombination of the D region in multiple reading frames; (3) addition of nucleotides not included in the germline configuration at the V­D and D­J junctions (non-germline or N-region additions); and (4) different combinations of either the - and or the - and -chains [13]. As a result, most of the variability of the TCR is concentrated in the V­D­J region, otherwise known as the complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3). This hypervariable region represents the clonotypic deter-

134

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

minant of the receptor, whereas sequences closer to the aminoterminal region (CDR1 and CDR2) are more involved in interactions with MHC molecules. Simultaneous crystallization of the TCR  heterodimer and the MHC class I molecule has shown that the CDR3 region of the TCR is a major contact site for antigenic peptide [10]. At least four proteins (, , , and ) of the cluster of differentiation-3 (CD3) complex form noncovalent associations with the  and  chains of the TCRs on the surface of T cells (see Fig. 7.1b). The CD3 complex is invariant and therefore does not contribute to the antigen specificity of the TCR, but the CD3 proteins are involved in the assembly and transport of the TCR to the cell surface and in signal transduction after the TCR binds antigen in the context of the MHC. Together, the TCR and the associated CD3 complex are responsible for cognate, or antigenspecific, interactions with the antigen-presenting cell.
Several molecules play important roles in non-cognate, or antigen-nonspecific, interactions between a T cell and an antigen-presenting cell. T cells are classified into distinct functional subtypes according to the combinations of these molecules expressed on their cell surfaces. T cells that express the 60-kDa glycoprotein CD4 help coordinate immune responses and recognize antigenic peptides in the context of class II MHC molecules, whereas T cells that express the 32kDa glycoprotein CD8 recognize antigenic peptides in the context of class I MHC molecules and are either cytotoxic or they secrete cytokines that influence immune response net-

works [14]. The interactions between CD4 and class II MHC molecules and between CD8 and class I MHC molecules provide a stabilizing environment for the cognate interactions between TCRs and antigenic peptides. CD4 and CD8 also play important roles in signal transduction through intracellular interactions with nonreceptor ligands.
Before activation, T cells must adhere to the local connective tissue matrix and antigen-presenting cells. Two intracellular signals activate the T cell: an antigen-specific signal through the TCR and the CD3 complex (i.e., a cognate signal), and an antigen-independent signal through accessory molecules on the T cell, such as CD4 or CD8, and their ligand counterparts on the antigen-presenting cell (i.e., a non-cognate signal). An intracellular signaling cascade is then initiated that leads to the expression of new cell surface antigens, cell growth, and the functional expression of the T cell.
On activation of the antigen-presenting cells by interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23, helper T (Th) cells, which express CD4 on their surface, differentiate into one of several distinct functional phenotypes (Fig. 7.2). Th1 cells participate in the early events of T cell and B cell development (IgG1 production) and cell-mediated immunity (delayed hypersensitivity). Differentiation of Th1 cells is regulated by polarizing cytokines such as IL-12, IL-18, IL-23, and IL-27, and transcription factors such as TBET, STAT1, and STAT4 [15]. Th1 cells express a characteristic profile of Th1 cytokines, including interferon- (IFN-), IL-2, and lymphotoxin, which

Figure 7.2 Differentiation of T lymphocytes into distinct functional phenotypes. Type 1 helper T (Th1) cells are regulated by polarizing cytokines, such as IL-12, IL-18, IL-23, and IL-27, and transcription factors, including STAT1, STAT4, and TBET. Th1 cells produce specific cytokines, such as IL-2 and IFN-g. Th2 cells are regulated by IL-4 and the transcription factors STAT6 and GATA3. Cytokines produced by these Th2 cells include IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. IL-4 and IFN-g serve as negative regulators of Th1 and Th2 polarization, respectively. Th17 cells are generated by TGF-b and are also dependent on other cytokines, including IL-6 and IL-23. Th17 cells produce a distinct profile of cytokines, including IL-6, IL-17A, and IL-17F. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) include two distinct subsets of CD4+ T cells: natural Tregs, which express the specific transcription factor FOXP3 and suppress effector T cells by contact; and the adaptive Tregs, Tr1 and Th3 cells, which are FOXP3-negative and produce immunosuppressive cytokines such as TGF-b and IL-10, respectively.

Effector T cells

IL-2 IFN-
Th1
STAT1 STAT4 TBET

IL-4
IFN-
IL-12 IL-17 IL-18 IL-23

IL-4 IL-5 IL-13

IL-6 IL-17A IL-17F

Th2 Th17
STAT6 GATA3
IL-6 IL-4 IL-17
IL-23 TGF-

CD80

Th0

TCR

MHC CD28 APC CD86

Regulatory T cells Treg Contact FOXP3 Th3 TGFFOXP3­ Tr1 IL-10
135

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

mediate inflammatory immune responses within the gastrointestinal mucosa. Th2 cells provide help for B cells and are involved in antibody-mediated immunity (humoral immunity). Th2 differentiation is mediated by IL-4 and the transcription factors STAT6 and GATA3. Cytokines secreted by Th2 cells include IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13.
Although the Th1 and Th2 paradigm has been used for nearly two decades, researchers have now identified the Th17 component of the CD4 T-cell effector response. The participation of the Th17 lineage has furthered the understanding of CD4 T-cell biology in many organ systems, including the gastrointestinal tract [16]. This discovery may revolutionize the understanding of immune regulation in health and disease. Interestingly, the development of the Th17 lineage depends on the pleiotropic cytokine, transforming growth factor (TGF)-, which is also required for the development of regulatory T cells, establishing an important link between Th17 and regulatory T-cell development. Th17 cells are characterized by the production of a distinct profile of cytokines, including IL-6, IL-17A, and IL-17F.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs), also known as suppressor cells, suppress the activation of other T cells at sites of inflammation and minimize collateral tissue damage. Tregs include two distinct subsets of CD4+ T cells: natural Tregs, which mature in the thymus, are self-antigen-specific and express CD25, GITR, CTLA4, and the lineage-specific transcription factor FOXP3 on their cell surface [17,18]; adaptive Tregs (Tr1 and Th3 cells) develop when mature T cells are activated under particular conditions of suboptimal antigen exposure or costimulation. Adaptive Tregs produce immunosuppressive cytokines such as TGF- and IL-10 [19]. Tregs may be particularly important in the prevention of autoimmune gastritis and IBD [20,21]. Tregs suppress the activation of T cells (primarily Th1 cells) using a contact-dependent mechanism through surface expression of the T-cell inhibitory receptor CTLA4 in the presence of TGF-. Adoptive transfer experiments have shown that natural Tregs maintain homeostasis in the healthy gastrointestinal tract by acting as primary regulators of the immune response to commensal bacteria. These effects are mediated by IL-10, TGF-, and CTLA4. Consistent with these phenotypes, T cells are often considered to be either effector cells (i.e., Th1 and Th2) or regulatory cells (i.e., Treg, Th3, and Tr1) [22].
Major histocompatibility complex and antigen presentation The strict dichotomy between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in terms of their recognition of antigens in the context of class II and class I MHC, respectively, has important functional implications. An understanding of the molecular basis of antigen processing is essential to appreciate these effects.
The human equivalent of the mouse MHC is known as the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. The MHC or HLA products and the genes that encode them are subdivided into

three classes. The MHC class I and class II glycoproteins are involved in antigen presentation to T cells. The three main MHC class I equivalent genes in humans are designated HLAA, HLA-B, and HLA-C; and the three main MHC class II equivalent genes are designated HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, and HLA-DR. The class III MHC genes encode for a variety of functionally distinct proteins (e.g., complement components, heat shock proteins, and tumor necrosis factors).
Each MHC class I protein is expressed on the cell surface as a dimer composed of two noncovalently linked polypeptide chains: a 43-kDa integral membrane glycoprotein called the heavy or -chain, and an associated non-MHC-encoded, nonglycosylated 12-kDa protein called 2-microglobulin (Fig. 7.3a). The - or heavy chain consists of three extracellular folded domains, 1, 2, and 3, that are encoded by separate exons and which share structural homology with immunoglobulins. The 1 and 2 domains form a groove consisting of a series of -pleated sheets bound by two -helices that bind peptide of relatively strict length (nine amino acids) [23,24]. The degree of observed variability within the 1 and 2 domains suggests that antigenic peptides reside in the groove and that exposed surfaces of the -helices interact with the V region of the TCR. Class II molecules are non-disulfidelinked heterodimeric glycoproteins consisting of a 32- to 34kDa -chain and a 29- to 32-kDa -chain (see Fig. 7.3b). The extracellular portion of a class II molecule consists of two domains called 1-2 and 1-2. X-ray crystallography shows that, similar to the class I MHC molecule, the 1 and 1 domains of a class II MHC molecule form a peptide-binding pocket with somewhat less stringency in peptide length (13­18 amino acids).
Despite the structural similarities between these two classes of MHC molecules, distinct cellular compartments and trafficking pathways determine the source of antigenic peptides for each class. MHC class I molecules primarily bind cytoplasmic proteins, whereas class II molecules bind peptides derived from exogenous proteins that have been internalized by antigen-presenting cells. At any given time, cells display a summary of their internal antigenic exposure through class I MHC molecules and their external antigenic exposure through class II MHC molecules. Under normal circumstances, selfproteins are displayed, leading to a state of tolerant inactivity. Under abnormal circumstances, deleterious intracellular events lead to the display of MHC class I molecules bound with foreign peptides, the activation of CD8+ T cells, and the generation of cytolytic T cells. Similarly, extracellular exposure to foreign agents results in the cell-surface display of class II molecules bound with foreign peptides, leading to the activation of CD4+ T cells, the induction of B cells through Th cell activity, and the production of antibodies.
The CD8­MHC class I pathway is propelled by internal cellular events. Because virtually all nucleated cells express MHC class I molecules, essentially all cells can act as antigen-presenting cells for CD8+ T cells, providing important

136

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7
(a) (b) Hypervariable domains

S-S S-S

a-chain

a-chain

b-chain

S-S S-S S-S S-S

Figure 7.3 Structure of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). (a) Each MHC class I protein consists of a dimer composed of two noncovalently linked polypeptide chains: the heavy (or a-) chain and an associated non-MHC-encoded nonglycosylated protein called b2microglobulin. (b) Class II molecules are nondisulfide-linked heterodimeric glycoproteins consisting of an a-chain and a b-chain.

b2-microglobulin
C MHC class I

CC MHC class II

protection against harmful intracellular processes such as viral infection or neoplasia. The CD4­MHC class II pathway responds to external cellular events, but the restriction of constitutive MHC class II expression and antigen-presenting capacity to B cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, venular endothelial cells, and probably intestinal epithelial cells during inflammation limits the possibilities and consequences of activating CD4+ T cells. Moreover, the restricted expression of accessory molecules essential to T-cell activation also imposes strict limits on antigen-initiated T-cell activation.
B lymphocytes B cells mediate humoral immunity ­ the production of antibodies in response to an antigen ­ which is part of the adaptive immune system. B cells are produced in and, unlike T cells, mature in the bone marrow (Fig. 7.4). Mature B cells express a B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) that is composed of surface immunoglobulin noncovalently associated with a disulfide-linked Ig- and Ig- heterodimer. The membranebound immunoglobulin forms the antigen-recognition component of the BCR, and the Ig-/Ig- heterodimer is the BCR signaling component [25]. Similar to the CD3 complex associated with the TCR, Ig- and Ig- link the surface immunoglobulin with cytoplasmic protein kinases, which become functionally active after antigen binding. The functional response depends on the specific signaling cascade that is activated, as well as on signal strength and duration, and modulation of the signal by coreceptor molecules (i.e., the CD19/CD21 complex, CD22, and CD72) [26,27].
Antigenic stimulation of mature B cells causes clonal expansion of the responding B cell and the generation of a secreted form of membrane-bound, antigen-specific immuno-

globulin. Some of the clonally expanded B cells differentiate into memory B cells. After further modulation by antigenspecific T cells, B cells switch to the isotype form associated with the antigen-specific V region (usually to isotypes of IgG in the periphery and IgA in the gastrointestinal-associated lymphoid tissues) and differentiate into plasma cells, which secrete extremely high levels of immunoglobulin.
Like T cells, subsets of B cells can be identified on the basis of phenotypic markers other than membrane immunoglobulins. CD5, a T-cell marker, is expressed on 5%­10% of the Bcell lineage. CD5+ cells, or B1 cells, are capable of producing autoantibody in autoimmune disease. They are generated most often from fetal and neonatal splenic B-cell populations and transferred fetal precursors, and rarely from adult bone marrow [28,29]. Most B cells do not express CD5 and are known as B2 or common B cells. CD40, which is expressed on all B cells, binds to CD40 ligand on activated T cells and participates in the isotype switch. CD40 is also an important costimulatory molecule.
Immunoglobulins Immunoglobulins are antibodies expressed on the surface of B cells, serving as their clonotypic antigen receptors, similar to the TCR on T cells [30]. After binding their cognate antigens, the surface immunoglobulins initiate a cascade of signaling events that activate the B cell, prompt clonal proliferation, and generate plasma cells. This results in the production of antibodies that travel throughout tissue fluids to detect and bind to the antigenic molecules that first triggered their production.
Each B cell expresses a unique immunoglobulin molecule that contains variable regions conferring its antigen

137

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function
Antigen BCR

Antigen-specific T cell Memory B cell

Plasma cells

Figure 7.4 Production and differentiation of B cells. B cells mediate humoral immunity and the production of antibodies after interaction between specific antigens and the B-cell antigen receptor (BCR). B cells are produced and mature in the bone marrow. After further modulation by antigen-specific T cells, the responding B cells undergo clonal expansion and differentiate into plasma cells, which are responsible for the secretion of antigen-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG). Some of the clonally expanded B cells differentiate into memory B cells.

specificity. The secreted antibodies consist of two identical light chains linked by disulfide bridges to two identical heavy chains, which are cross-linked by disulfide bridges to each other. Each of the five classes of immunoglobulins are defined by differences in effector function and a unique heavy chain isotype, designated  (IgA),  (IgD),  (IgE),  (IgG), and  (IgM). These five heavy chain isotypes associate with light chains of two isotypes,  and . In humans, there are four different IgG subclasses (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4) and two different IgA subclasses (IgA1 and IgA2). Although some of the immunoglobulin heterogeneity can be attributed to the different classes and subclasses, most derives from the variable regions located on the amino terminals of the heavy and light chains and encoded by the V-, D-, and J-region gene segments. It is estimated that an individual B cell can theoretically produce more than 10 000 distinct immunoglobulin variable regions.
Natural killer cells Natural killer (NK) cells, which comprise about 10% of the peripheral blood lymphocytes, play an important role in early innate immune responses. These large, granular lymphocytes lack cognate receptors but express a variety of tolllike receptors (TLRs) on the cell surface that recognize highly conserved pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), suggesting that NK cells provide a nonspecific first line of defense through their ability to kill pathogen-infected and transformed cells [31]. Natural killer cells may also have some function in adaptive immunity through interactions with antigen-presenting dendritic cells. Natural killer cells elicit antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity through the binding of a target cell opsonized with IgG to CD16 on the NK cell.
Natural killer cell function is best characterized by its cytotoxic effects, which are tightly regulated by a balance of class I HLA-specific inhibitory and activating signaling receptors

(i.e., killer immunoglobulin-like receptors [KIRs], C94/ NKG2, CD2, CD16, lymphocyte function-associated antigen [LAF]-1, and TLRs). During innate immune responses, the NK cell recognizes target cells that lack surface expression of class I MHC molecules. Because many viruses and tumors, including intestinal cancers, down-regulate class I MHC molecules to evade adaptive immune responses, this mechanism of recognition is extremely important. On contact with a target cell, the NK cell releases pore-forming proteins called perforins, proteolytic enzymes called granzymes, and chemokines into the target cell, which leads to destruction of the cytoskeletal proteins, chromosomal degradation, and apoptosis.
Myelomonocytic cells Cells of the myelomonocytic lineage include monocytes and their progeny (macrophages and dendritic cells) and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils) (Fig. 7.5). They evolve from a common myeloid progenitor cell in the bone marrow in response to cytokines, including several interleukins (e.g., IL-1, IL-3, and IL-6), and macrophage and granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (e.g., G-CSF, GM-CSF, and M-CSF).
Monocytes, mononuclear phagocytes that mature into macrophages when residing within tissues, and dendritic cells play central roles in both innate and adaptive immunity. In innate immunity, their phagocytic function and inflammatory cytokine secretion are important for the accumulation of inflammatory cells and the destruction of invading pathogens, whereas in adaptive immunity they mainly exert their effects through their ability to endocytose, process, and present foreign antigens to T cells [32]. Peripheral blood monocytes almost uniformly express the CD14 marker, which they shed on entering tissues during inflammatory responses, such as infiltration into the lamina propria

138

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

Erythrocyte Megakaryocyte
(platelets)

HSC

CMP

CLP

GMP

B cell T cell NK cell

Monocyte Basophil Eosinophil Neutrophil

Dendritic cell Macrophage
Figure 7.5 Differentiation of myelomonocytic cells. Myelomonocytic cells include monocytes and their progeny (macrophages and dendritic cells), and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils). Myelomonocytic cells are derived from a common hematopoietic stem cell (HSC), which differentiates into a common myeloid progenitor (CMP) cell in the bone marrow in response to cytokines and colony-stimulating factors. Thus, basophils and eosinophils on the one hand and neutrophils and macrophages on the other are derived from a common granulocyte­macrophage progenitor (GMP) cell. CLP, common lymphoid progenitor cell; NK cell, natural killer cell.
during IBD. These recruited monocytes evolve into tissue macrophages that have active phagocytic functions, which is important not only for the eradication of invading microorganisms but also as the essential first step in initiating antigen processing and presentation for MHC class II pathways, a prerequisite for activating CD4+ T cells that orchestrate further immune responses. Macrophages promote inflammation by secreting IL-12 and IL-23, which drive CD4+ T cells to the Th1 phenotype. This leads to the secretion of IFN- and subsequent activation of the phagocytic and antigenpresentation functions of the macrophage.
Dendritic cells are the most potent antigen-presenting cells and are found in the Peyer patches, lamina propria, and epithelium of the gastrointestinal mucosa [33]. Within tertiary lymphoid tissues such as the lamina propria, dendritic cells are considered to be immature, exhibiting active phagocytic functions but poor antigen-presentation functions. When exposed to microbial products ­ specifically, phylogenetically conserved PAMPs ­ dendritic cells mature and migrate to secondary lymphoid organs, including the mesenteric lymph nodes. Here they mature further, up-regulate

their antigen-presentation functions through the expression of costimulatory molecules, such as CD80 and CD86, and activate naïve T lymphocytes [34]. It is now clear that multiple dendritic cell lineages exist, and that each contributes in a specific way to innate and adaptive immune responses within the gastrointestinal tract. A network of dendritic cells in the lamina propria of the ileum, colon, and the dome region of the Peyer patches express membrane-bound CX3CR1 (fractalkine) and appear to play a unique role in lumenal antigen sampling. These CX3CR1+ cells extend their dendrites through the epithelium to directly sample microbial products, in addition to the more conventional phagocytotic mechanism for recognizing bacteria delivered via M cells and intestinal epithelial cells [6,35]. CX3CR1+CD11c+CD11b+ cells are the predominant dendritic cell subset observed in the terminal ilea of mice, and the expression of the integrin -chain CD103 (E) is characteristic of dendritic cells in the colonic lamina propria [36,37]. The unique physiological roles and functions of these dendritic cell subsets require further investigation.
Neutrophilic polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils) are an essential component of innate immunity and function as the first responders to infection [38]. They are continuously produced in the bone marrow and circulate through the peripheral blood, where they remain acutely posed for activation and response to invading pathogens. When infection occurs, activated neutrophils rapidly extravasate across the endothelium and into the affected mucosa with the help of adhesion molecules expressed on their surface. They infiltrate infected tissues within hours of the initial insult and phagocytose and kill the invading pathogen. Neutrophil granules contain antimicrobial cationic peptides, proteases, and reactive oxygen species that can be secreted directly into the phagosome or into the extracellular spaces to form neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) which degrade virulence factors and microbes that have not yet been ingested [39]. Neutrophil secretion of reactive oxygen species can also regulate intracellular signaling mechanisms, allowing neutrophils to mediate the nature of subsequent inflammatory responses through the production of specific cytokines and chemokines that polarize the resulting adaptive immune response toward a unique phenotype. To mediate their proinflammatory effects and contain collateral tissue damage, neutrophils constitutively undergo apoptosis and are phagocytosed by macrophages.
Evidence that the initiating factor in Crohn's disease may be caused by a defect in innate immunity, as opposed to an abnormality in adaptive cell-mediated immunity, has cast new light on the role of neutrophils in the pathogenesis of this disease [40]. In support of this theory, genetic diseases that have a known effect on neutrophil function, such as chronic granulomatous disease, glycogen storage disease type IB, and Turner syndrome, manifest abnormalities similar to those seen in Crohn's disease. Impaired migration,

139

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

decreased bactericidal and phagocytic functions, and lower superoxide production characterize neutrophils in patients with Crohn's disease. Moreover, mice that express a cellspecific disrupted Stat3 gene in their neutrophils and macrophages develop enterocolitis, suggesting that these cell types are indeed involved in Crohn's disease pathogenesis.
Neutrophils also contribute to acute liver damage associated with hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury and alcoholic hepatitis [41]. In response to signals from proinflammatory cytokines, CXC chemokines, and complement factors, neutrophils are primed and accumulate in the sinusoids, postsinusoidal venules, and portal venules of the hepatic vasculature. When a chemotactic signal is received, the neutrophils extravasate across the endothelium into the parenchyma, where they adhere to hepatocytes and are activated to produce reactive oxygen species and proteases, similar to their function in the intestine. Protease secretion is associated with the promotion of subsequent inflammatory responses through the production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines; secretion of reactive oxygen species leads to oxidative stress and neutrophil-mediated cellular necrosis.
Nonimmune parenchymal cells A variety of parenchymal cells, which are not classical immune cells, exhibit important immunological functions within the gastrointestinal tract. These cell types likely do not initiate specific immune responses through the education of naïve lymphocytes but rather integrate and enhance ongoing immune responses and contribute to immunopathology in disease states. These cell types include intestinal epithelial cells, mesenchymal cells (e.g., fibroblasts), smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells. Intestinal epithelial cells form a barrier between the intestine and the lumen and perform several immune-related functions, such as the expression of cytokines and chemokines. Fibroblasts, through the expression of cell surface molecules, connective tissue components, and cytokines, regulate local lymphocyte survival and function and contribute to TGF--mediated fibrosis associated with chronic inflammation. Smooth muscle cells can present antigens in an MHC class II-restricted fashion in the context of inflammation and respond to inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4. This alters intestinal motility, which may play a role in peristalsis and the elimination of lumenal pathogens. Endothelial cells play a key role in regulating tissue inflammation by both directing the recruitment of leukocytes and myeloid cells and secreting a variety of soluble mediators that enhance inflammation.
The intestinal mucosal immune system The intestinal mucosal immune system, also known as the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), can be divided into several functionally and anatomically contained compartments: (1) the loosely organized effector sites (lamina propria

and intestinal epithelium), (2) the macroscopic intestinal lymphoid structures (Peyer patches and mesenteric lymph nodes), and (3) the microscopic intestinal lymphoid structures (cryptopatches and isolated lymphoid follicles). Peyer patches, which are rounded lymphoid follicles found in the mucosa and submucosa of the ileum, constitute an afferent limb of the GALT that recognizes antigens through specialized sampling mechanisms involving M cells contained within the follicle-associated epithelium adjacent to the Peyer patches and dendritic cells that extend their dendrites through open tight junctions in the epithelial barrier (Fig. 7.6). Detection of lumenal antigens that cross the epithelial barrier by way of M cells results in the education and dissemination of B and T lymphoblasts to other tissues linked to the mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), such as the lungs, breasts, and genitourinary tract, and the loosely affiliated compartments of the lamina propria. The lamina propria represents an efferent or effector limb of the intestinal mucosal immune system; it is populated with lymphoid effector cells, such as B cells, plasma cells, T cells, and NK cells, and with mononuclear and polymorphonuclear phagocytes and mast cells (see Fig. 7.6). Plasma cells in the lamina propria secrete IgA immunoglobulin, which provides protection against bacteria, viruses, and lumenal antigens. The immune compartment within the epithelium consists of a unique resident population of T cells, known as the intraepithelial lymphocytes, which, unlike peripheral T cells, predominantly express the  TCR. The intestinal epithelial lymphocytes help maintain barrier function through their cytotoxic effects on abnormal epithelial cells.
Organized lymphoid structures and lymphoblast homing Peyer patches are the most clearly defined of the organized lymphoid structures in the gastrointestinal mucosal immune system (see Fig. 7.6). They are surrounded by the follicleassociated epithelium, which contains specialized M cells. M cells play an important role in mucosal immune surveillance by delivering selected samples of intralumenal antigens to the organized mucosal lymphoid tissues. M cells are derived directly from undifferentiated, immature epithelial stem cells in the crypts. Their differentiation to mature follicle-associated epithelial M cells may be influenced by subjacent B cells within the lamina propria [42]. M cells have fewer, shorter, and wider microvilli than absorptive epithelial cells. Similar to the M cell antigen-sampling mechanism, dendritic cells found adjacent to intestinal epithelial cells can also directly sample lumenal antigens across the epithelium by opening tight junctions and extending their dendrites into the lumen [35]. Although M cell transport is necessary for induction of mucosal immune responses, this portal system also provides a means for pathogenic bacteria and viruses to enter the intestinal mucosa [43]. Among the many infectious agents known to undergo endocytosis and transport by way of M

140

Peyer patch

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7
Lamina propria

M
mf

IEC

IEL

High endothelial venule
Efferent lymphatics

B T

Lymphoid follicle

Germinal center

Mesenteric lymph node

MC
DC
NK

N
Postcapillary venule

Figure 7.6 The distinct compartments of the intestinal mucosal immune system or gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT): (1) Peyer patches and mesenteric lymph nodes. Peyer patches take part in antigen recognition through specialized sampling mechanisms involving microfold (M) cells contained within the follicle-associated epithelium adjacent to the Peyer patches and dendritic cells (DC) that extend their dendrites through open

tight junctions in the epithelial barrier. (2) Lamina propria and intestinal epithelium. The lamina propria is populated with lymphoid effector cells, including B cells, plasma cells, T cells, and natural killer cells, and by mononuclear and polymorphonuclear phagocytes and mast cells. Intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) are a unique resident population of T cells. mf, macrophage; MC, mast cell; NK, natural killer cell; N, neutrophil; B, B cell.

cells are the human immunodeficiency virus, reoviruses, Vibrio cholerae, and species of mycobacteria. M cells also transport commensal bacteria into the Peyer patches, thereby initiating IgA antibody immune responses and tolerance.
Intestinal cryptopatches and isolated lymphoid follicles are two other organized lymphoid structures within the mucosal immune system. It is hypothesized that they combine with the Peyer patches to form a primary lymphoid organ. Cryptopatches are aggregates of immature T cell precursors found adjacent to the crypts in mouse small intestine, and are a site of extrathymic development of T lymphocytes [44]. The T-cell precursors residing in cryptopatches can differentiate into mature intraepithelial lymphocytes expressing either the  TCR or the  TCR [45]. Isolated lymphoid follicles are an organized lymphoid structure of unknown function also found in the murine small intestine. Similar to Peyer patches, they are covered by a follicle-associated epithelium containing M cells and are composed primarily of mature B2 B cells and CD4+ T cells [46]. Isolated lymphoid follicles can develop de novo in response to lumenal stimulation and in the presence of lymphotoxin-sufficient B cells and a functioning tumor necrosis factor (TNF-) receptor 1 [47].

Antigens and microorganisms transported out of the lumen by M cells come into contact with lymphocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells that have migrated into the lymphoid aggregates or Peyer patches below the M cells. Some of these cells enter the intraepithelial pocket, a large invaginated subdomain on the basolateral surface of the M cell that forms a docking site for specific populations of lymphocytes and occasionally dendritic cells and which effectively shortens the distance that antigen-containing transcytotic vesicles must travel to cross the epithelial barrier [48]. Naïve B and T lymphocytes that have never encountered their cognate antigen express a combination of cell surface receptors that directs them to emigrate into lymphoid aggregates such as Peyer patches associated with the follicleassociated epithelium [49]. A vast network of immature dendritic cells exists in the subepithelial dome or apical portion of the lymphoid follicle immediately below the follicleassociated epithelium. These immature dendritic cells likely capture most of the antigens from the intestinal lumen and present them to the naïve lymphocytes in the intestinal lymphoid follicles. A specific mucosal immune response is initiated by these interactions, which may preferentially

141

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

direct naïve T cells to a Th2, Th3, or Tr1 phenotype over a Th1 phenotype [50]. Such an outcome is likely a consequence of the properties of the dendritic cells within the Peyer patches and plays an important role in generating mucosal tolerance as opposed to an immune response.
Activated lymphocytes from intestinal lymphoid follicles begin a maturational journey during which they leave the intestinal tract and migrate into the afferent lymphatics that drain into the mesenteric lymph nodes [51,52]. During this process, the lymphocytes mature into T and B lymphoblasts enriched in IgA-bearing B cells. The B lymphocytes become surface IgA-bearing lymphoblasts after being promoted to switch their immunoglobulin isotype by regulatory (i.e., "switch") T cells within the Peyer patches [4,5,53]. Lymphocytes then enter the efferent lymphatics of the mesenteric lymph nodes and pass through the thoracic duct into the peripheral blood. These lymphocytes subsequently reenter the loosely affiliated lamina propria through interactions with flat endothelial cells of the postcapillary venules and home to mucosal sites. B lymphoblasts mature into IgAsecreting plasma cells under the control of antigen-activated T lymphocytes that have completed a similar maturational journey. Lymphoblasts that have homed to the gastrointestinal mucosa and matured into effector cells provide protective immunity within the lamina propria.
Lymphoblasts recirculate or home to the sites of the original antigenic stimulation and to other mucosal secretory sites. After antigenic stimulation in the gastrointestinal tract, IgA lymphoblasts circulate to the mucosal secretory sites of the breast, lung, and eye, where antigen-specific antibodies are secreted [52,54]. For example, a breast-feeding mother can passively transfer secretory IgA in her breast milk to her nursing child. The secretory IgA in the transferred breast milk protects the infant against bacteria or viruses in the mother's gastrointestinal tract, supporting the importance of the common mucosal immune system. The intestinal immune system thus has the capacity to selectively sample antigens from the gut and subsequently induce immune responses that provide protection for the gastrointestinal tract and other mucosal surfaces.
Nonorganized lamina propria The lamina propria lies beneath the intestinal epithelium and serves as a loosely affiliated effector compartment of T and B lymphocytes, plasma cells, NK cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and mast cells. Virtually all T cells within the lamina propria express the  TCR, as well as the CD45 surface marker, which indicates that these are memory cells that have had previous encounters with antigens, presumably in the Peyer patches [55]. The CD4+ cells in the lamina propria exert an important helper­inducer function for immunoglobulin production, and respond to antigen by producing cytokines rather than by proliferating [56]. Most CD8+ lamina propria lymphocytes, in addition to a signific-

ant proportion of CD4+ cells, express a unique 7-integrin associated with a novel -chain, E, which plays a role in intestinal epithelial cell binding [57]. Cytotoxic effector precursor cells in the intestine participate in host mucosal defense mechanisms when necessary, but do not damage the surrounding tissue when they are not needed. Lamina propria lymphocytes can be induced to mediate cell-mediated cytotoxicity by incubation with IL-2, interferons, lectins, and monoclonal antibodies directed against the TCR. This is typical of antigen-primed effector cells and is consistent with the CD45RO memory phenotype [58­64]. Although cytotoxic effector cells are present, the lymphocytes in the intestinal lamina propria are poor mediators of cell-mediated cytotoxicity, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and cell-mediated cytolysis [58,59]. Activated cytotoxic CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes are more abundant in the lamina propria of patients with IBD [65].
Most mucosal T lymphocytes are also CD95L+ and CD69+ and exhibit elevated levels of cytoplasmic Ca2+, consistent with an activated phenotype [66]. Controlled activation of the intestinal immune system may be important in regulating effector cell function. This includes cytotoxic function, which may be directed at the lymphocytes themselves to down-regulate immune responses and regulate the level of cytotoxic function within the various compartments of the bowel wall [67,68]. For example, administration of antiTNF- therapeutics, which are used to treat human IBD, can attenuate murine ileitis through a mechanism that involves down-regulation of intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis and simultaneous up-regulation of apoptosis among lamina propria lymphocytes [68]. In this way, the gut remains in a state of physiological inflammation, poised for intervention when necessary but generally held in abeyance.
About 40% of the lymphoid cells in the lamina propria are B cells derived primarily from precursors in Peyer patches [69]. These B cells and their progeny plasma cells are predominantly focused on the synthesis of IgA, rather than of IgM, IgG, or IgE. Lamina propria B cells are induced to differentiate terminally into IgA-secreting cells cytokines derived from Th1 cells (IFN-) and Th2 cells (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10), indicating the importance of this antibody to mucosal protection [2,4,54,70­76]. In diseases such as IBD, the numbers of lamina propria B cells and plasma cells that produce IgG are markedly increased [77].
Immunoglobulin secretion The synthesis and secretion of dimeric IgA is a major protective mechanism of the intestinal tract, which contains more than 70% of the immunoglobulin-producing cells in the body [78]. Plasma cells produce dimeric IgA ­ two IgA monomers joined by a polypeptide J-chain. The J-chain participates in the transport of IgA and IgM molecules across the intestinal epithelium through interaction with the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) on the basal surface of

142

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

Figure 7.7 Immunoglobulin (Ig) secretion in the gut. The synthesis and secretion of IgA is a major protective mechanism for the intestinal mucosa. Dimeric IgA (dIgA) produced by plasma cells (PC) is transported across the intestinal epithelium through interaction with the polymeric IgR (PIgR). IgA bound to a portion of the PIgR, known as secretory component, is then secreted into the intestinal lumen. IgG transport is mediated by the major histocompatibility complex class I-related molecule FcRn (neonatal Fc receptor for IgG). IgG transport is bidirectional, unlike that for IgA. M, microfold cell; mf, macrophage.

PlgR

M mf

dlgA

PC

lgG

FcRn

epithelial cells (Fig. 7.7) [79­81]. IgA bound to a portion of the pIgR that is known as secretory component is then secreted into the intestinal lumen. Secretory component may protect secretory IgA from proteolytic degradation in the hostile lumenal environment and stabilize the structure of the polymeric IgA complex.
IgA is also translocated across hepatocytes or bile duct epithelium into the bile and carried to the duodenum [82,83]. The presence of secretory IgA in bile provides passive immunity and protects the biliary tract and the proximal parts of the small intestine. A second implication of the hepatobiliary secretion of IgA is that complexes of IgA and antigen can be transported into the bile from the circulation. Hepatic removal of IgA­antigen complexes may protect against harmful absorbed substances, including dietary antigens and bacterial products.
The major function of secretory IgA in host defense is protection against bacteria, viruses, and lumenal antigens [2,52,78]. Secretory IgA provides passive immunity by inhibiting the adherence of bacteria to epithelial cells and preventing their effective colonization and proliferation. Secretory IgA neutralizes bacterial toxins and viruses, thereby preventing their action on intestinal epithelial cells. Secretory IgA also blocks the absorption of antigens from the gut and may be particularly important in disease states in which the mucosal barrier is broken. Intracellularly, IgA can neutralize pathogens that possess a transcytotic pathway for IgA [84]. Unlike other immunoglobulins, such as IgG, which can be secreted by intestinal B cells, IgA does not activate complement.

Transcellular pathways for the transport of IgE and IgG also exist in intestinal epithelial cells. IgE transport is mediated by the expression of CD23 (FcR1 or IgE receptor) on epithelial cells and may be important in intestinal allergic responses and parasitic infestations [85]. IgG transport is mediated by the MHC class I-related molecule FcRn (neonatal Fc receptor for IgG). Unlike the transport of IgA and IgE, IgG transport is bidirectional (apical to basal and basal to apical).
Intraepithelial lymphocytes The human intestinal epithelium contains a unique population of lymphoid cells, the intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs), which reside between intestinal epithelial cells along their basolateral surfaces [86]. About 10­20 IELs exist per 100 villi within the small intestine. Given the vast surface area of the intestinal epithelium, IELs represent a significant proportion of all the T cells in the human body [87]. The composition of the IEL subsets differs substantially from that of the circulating T-cell subsets. IEL populations are dominated by CD8+ T cells (> 70% in the small intestine) and largely express the CD8 homodimer, which is uncommon among circulating T cells [88]. T cells lacking both CD8 and CD4 (CD8­CD4­), or double-negative cells, comprise more than 10% of murine small intestinal IELs, as well as the majority of IELs found in other compartments, but they are rarely found among circulating lymphocytes [89­91]. CD4+ T cells, which are common in the systemic circulation, are underrepresented among IELs and mostly exist as double-positive cells that also express CD8. These

143

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

double-positive CD8 + CD4 +  T cells are not found among circulating lymphocytes. Lastly, IELs contain an increased proportion of cells expressing the TM TCR compared with systemic T cells.
The  TCR is expressed on all of the IELs in the large intestine and on about half of the IELs in the small intestine, indicating that these cells respond to MHC class I or class I-like molecules. IELs that express the  TCR are mostly CD8+ and are cytolytic in function, and they secrete Th1 cytokines [86]. It has been hypothesized that these cells are primed to antigen in the Peyer patches and enter the circulation through the mesenteric lymph nodes and the thoracic duct [48]. They home to the lamina propria and intestinal epithelium of the small and large intestines through their expression of the 47 and E7 integrins [57,92].
IELs that express the  TCR, as well as those that express the  TCR in conjunction with the CD8 homodimer, comprise the remaining half of the small intestinal IEL population [86]. Unlike the TCR+ CD8+ IELs in the large intestine, these IEL subsets do not circulate through the lymphatics and the blood and do not appear to be memory driven. As they do not recognize antigen presented by MHC class I and class I-like molecules, it has been proposed that these IEL subsets may be primed in situ by the epithelial cells, possibly through an autoantigen that is induced in response to infection or transformation events [93]. However, the identity and nature of this autoantigen remains unclear. A unique feature of TCR+ IELs is that, unlike TCR+ IELs, they can develop independently of the thymus, most likely within the intestinal cryptopatches [94,95].
Despite their contiguity to the gut lumen, potential exposure to a variety of antigens, and the expectation that these cells express a diverse, polyclonal array of  and  TCRs, IELs within the small and large intestines are oligoclonal and express a small number of  and  TCRs, based on an analysis of CDR3 regions [96­98]. A limited variety of T-cell clones is widely disseminated throughout the intestinal epithelium [99]. The expression of CD8 by IELs suggests that they function biologically as cytolytic effectors as a consequence of antigen recognition. IELs exhibit a high level of cytolytic activity in a variety of in vitro systems, especially after activation, and it is likely that they also do so in disease states in vivo [100]. A major biological function of IELs in health is the secretion of cytokines (e.g., IFN- and keratinocyte growth factor), which regulate epithelial cell function and possibly responses to lumenal antigens [101]. On activation, IELs may acquire cytolytic machinery that can contribute to epithelial cell death through apoptosis. Their cytolytic capabilities, large number, and extremely limited TCR repertoire indicate that IELs are a regionally specific population of cells involved in immunosurveillance against abnormal epithelial cells. IELs may be the first line of defense against deleterious epithelial events. Their numbers are markedly increased in intestinal graft-versus-host disease,

gluten-sensitive enteropathy, and protozoal infections of the epithelium, such as those caused by Cryptosporidium and Isospora species.
Innate and adaptive immunity Two types of immunity normally function along the mucosal surfaces: innate (natural) immunity and adaptive (acquired) immunity. Natural immunity is nonspecific and rapidly mobilized, whereas acquired immunity is specific for antigens on foreign substances and is mobilized slowly over several days and weeks after an initial or primary exposure. In general, specific immunity amplifies the initial protection provided by innate immunity in a focused, antigen-specific manner, in part through the further mobilization of the natural immune components. In the adaptive immune system, lymphocytes interact with antigens through receptors (the Tcell receptor and the B-cell receptor) that are specific for that antigen. When a specific antigen is presented to a lymphocyte with a receptor capable of recognizing it, that lymphocyte undergoes clonal expression. Unlike innate immunity, adaptive immunity is characterized by the acquisition of memory during the course of a specific immune response, which produces a more rapid mobilization of directed, specific immunity in future or secondary antigen encounters.
Innate immune system Innate intestinal immunity has two components: nonimmunological and immunological. The mucosal surface of the intestine expresses a variety of nonimmunological physiochemical barriers to exclude, inactivate, or clear pathogenic substances and organisms. These barriers include gastric acid, digestive enzymes, and other potentially antipathogenic factors, such as bile acids, lysozymes, intestinal mucus, normal peristalsis, indigenous microbial flora, and the epithelial cell itself, whose tight junctions are usually impenetrable when intact. In diseases such as AIDS, defects in one or more of these factors may increase susceptibility to invasive pathogens.
A second class of innate immunity is composed of immunological factors [102]. These include cellular and soluble elements. Virtually all classes of intestinal cells participate in innate immunity, including NK cells, a subclass of T cells called NK-T cells, phagocytes, mast cells, and epithelial cells, among others. In response to specific cell surface signals delivered by a variety of receptors, these cells either engulf microorganisms (e.g., phagocytes) or secrete a wide variety of soluble substances. The latter function to remove pathogens (e.g., cryptdins from intestinal epithelial cells), recruit other cell types (e.g., IL-8 from intestinal epithelial cells), arm other cell types against microbial invasion (e.g., IFN- from NK-T cells), remove cells altered by infection or malignancy (e.g., granzymes and perforins from NK cells), or modify specific immune responses (i.e., IL-4 from NK-T cells). Many of these responses are initiated by interactions between specific components of microbes and either soluble

144

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

or cell surface receptors on host cells that recognize characteristic microbial structures, such as the recognition of bacterial lipopolysaccharide by TLRs.
In contrast to the adaptive immune system, in which there are many thousands of distinct T-cell and B-cell receptors, there are relatively few (several hundred) receptors in the innate immune system. The receptors present on cells of the innate immune system recognize a few highly conserved molecules that exist in large groups of microorganisms and are termed pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). These microbial molecules, which include lipopolysaccharides, peptidoglycans, and lipoteichoic acids, share certain attributes: (1) they are not expressed by the host, (2) they are required for microbial survival, and (3) they are shared by a broad group of pathogens. The receptors of the innate immune system are expressed on antigen-presenting cells, which include monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells; some are also expressed on intestinal epithelial cells. The receptors of the innate immune system ­ the pattern recognition receptors ­ include TLRs, which recognize lipopolysaccharides, and macrophage mannose receptors, which recognize carbohydrates with large numbers of mannose units, characteristic of microorganisms. Pattern recognition receptors are expressed uniformly on large numbers of cells of a given class. For example, all macrophages express the same mannose receptor, in contrast to the acquired immune system, in which different T cells express thousands of different TCRs. Recognition of bacterial products by pattern recognition receptors results in prompt intracellular signaling events and a biological response. For example, recognition of lipopolysaccharide by TLRs results in the activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) and, as a consequence, the induction of a wide variety of inflammatory- and immune-response genes. This prompt biological response in the innate immune system occurs over a few hours, in contrast to the much slower response in the adaptive immune system, which involves clonal expression of relevant lymphocytes over several days. The innate immune system is therefore much better situated than the adaptive immune system to deal with acute infections caused by pathogens new to the host.
Adaptive immune system Adaptive immunity also has two components: humoral and cellular immunity. Humoral immunity is mediated by antibodies derived from B lymphocytes, and defends against extracellular events. Cellular immunity is derived from T lymphocytes and provides protection from deleterious intracellular events that are not amenable to the effects of antibodies. Both types of adaptive immunity possess several properties that differentiate them from innate immunity. First, to respond to the wide variety of potential antigens to which humans may be exposed during a lifetime, a large number of clonally distinct lymphocytes specific for particu-

lar determinants or epitopes on a molecule are maintained. The molecular basis for this clonotypic specificity is determined by a cell surface receptor (i.e., immunoglobulin for B cells and TCRs for T cells) that is unique to each cell or clone. Second, each cell or clone expressing its unique or clonotypic receptor is selected to differentiate a self-antigen from a nonself- or foreign antigen. This process, primarily the result of positive selection (i.e., selection of receptors that recognize self) and negative selection (i.e., deletion of receptors that recognize non-self) of B cells in the bone marrow and T cells in the thymus during lymphocyte development, results in the production of an army of lymphocytes that are tolerant or unresponsive to self [29,103,104].
In the absence of tolerance, inappropriate recognition of self may occur, resulting in autoimmunity. The intestine, liver, and peritoneum participate in the extrathymic pathways of T-cell and B-cell development, and self-reactive lymphocytes that escape from the normal selection processes may reside within these organs [29,105]. The fact that intestinal autoimmunity is not commonly observed suggests that peripheral mechanisms in the intestine prevent the activation of potentially pathogenic clones.
The adaptive immune system generates memory during the course of the immune response that results in the expansion of long-lived cells, which are the progeny of the original responsive antigen-specific B-cell or T-cell clones. After reexposure to the original offending antigen, the adaptive immune system responds more rapidly with a response that is quantifiably larger and more specific. For example, B-cell immunoglobulins are generated that bind more avidly to their antigens.
Autoimmunity and oral unresponsiveness Despite the processes of negative and positive selection, healthy persons maintain low numbers of autoreactive T-cell and B-cell clones. Rather than a failure of immunological selection within the central immunological compartments, the existence of these autoreactive clones may indicate the presence of B-cell and T-cell clones that recognize dominant microbe-derived peptides to which a person may be exposed and which also resemble or mimic peptides derived from normal self-antigens. The healthy host must therefore maintain active peripheral mechanisms to prevent potential autoreactive clones from becoming autoimmune clones that participate in immune-mediated diseases. This is likely accomplished through suppressor T-cell networks, the effects of immunoregulatory cytokines (e.g. TGF-, IL-10), the negative feedback effects of antibodies on B cells, the presentation of antigenic peptides to the TCR in the absence of an appropriate costimulatory signal, and the existence of antiidiotype networks (i.e., antibodies that bind to the antigen-binding site of an antibody and block its function) [106]. The end result of these mechanisms is active suppression, clonal anergy, or clonal deletion through apoptosis.

145

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

The gastrointestinal tract must continuously mount immune responses against bacteria, viruses, and other antigens. Individuals with a genetic predisposition for the dysregulation of self-reactive T cells are vulnerable to autoimmune disorders. Autoimmunity appears to play a role in the development of several chronic inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, including celiac sprue, autoimmune gastritis, and IBD [107­112].
The gastrointestinal tract exhibits a fascinating example of specific tolerance to orally ingested antigens, called oral tolerance [113,114]. The oral administration of antigens can lead to systemic antigen-specific unresponsiveness, which results in the lack of specific T-cell and B-cell responsiveness to those antigens. Concurrently, local specific secretory immunity can develop, resulting in lymphoblasts capable of IgA production [115]. This dichotomy between systemic and mucosal compartments appears to reflect a solution to the need for excluding the specific antigen during future encounters and avoiding inappropriate systemic responsiveness. Not surprisingly, the gastrointestinal tract possesses mechanisms to protect against mounting adverse immunological reactions. If this were not the case, numerous bacterial and viral antigens and food components could lead to frequent cross-reactive immunological stimulatory events and result in a high frequency of intestinal autoimmune disorders, and many foods would give rise to diverse and uncontrollable food-induced allergic reactions.
Gastrointestinal inflammation
Inflammation is a prominent component of several important gastrointestinal diseases, including gastroesophageal reflux disease, Helicobacter pylori gastritis, eosinophilic gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, IBD, celiac disease, pancreatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, autoimmune hepatitis, and various other enteric infections. The inflammatory response can be viewed as an effector mechanism for the immune response. For example, when a bacterial infection activates the immune system, antibodies that are specific to the invading bacteria are produced and bind to the bacteria, and neutrophils that express antibody receptors on their surface efficiently phagocytose the antibody-coated bacteria. In this example, a portion of the inflammatory response ­ phagocytosis by neutrophils ­ acts as an effector mechanism for the humoral component of the immune response. The inflammatory response can also be viewed as a damage control mechanism that is invoked only if the immune response breaks down or is overwhelmed. Lastly, inflammation can be viewed as a component of the larger process of wound healing. After injury, blood clotting and fibrinolysis are followed by the infiltration of inflammatory cells. Repair of the epithelium and the migration of inflammatory cells are regulated by the same cytokines and mediators. Events that affect

inflammation also affect epithelial healing, and events that affect epithelial healing also affect inflammation.
The immune processes largely eliminate foreign antigens without the development of clinically apparent inflammation. In fact, a limited state of immune activation is present in the healthy small intestine and colon due to the stimulation of lamina propria immune cells by the enormous antigen load in the intestinal lumen. Indeed, no other organ is faced with foreign antigens in such abundance. This basal inflammatory state is clearly demonstrated by comparing the gastrointestinal histology of rodents raised in germ-free conditions with those raised in conventional conditions. Germfree rodents have fewer lymphocytes and macrophages, smaller Peyer patches with fewer germinal centers, and no plasma cells. The villi in germ-free rodents are thinner and the crypts are shallower. Epithelial proliferation is diminished, and the time required for epithelial cells to migrate from the crypt to the villus tip is doubled.
The development of clinically apparent inflammation suggests that the immune system has been overwhelmed by an abnormally large or invasive antigen load, by an antigen in a location inaccessible to the immune response (e.g., osteomyelitis), or by an antigen that is resistant to the immune response (e.g., tuberculosis). The inflammatory response likely evolved when our ancestors were confronted with unsanitary environments and infectious agents in contaminated food and water. Ingestion of viral, bacterial, and parasitic agents led to gastrointestinal tract infections, and the inflammatory response evolved to deal with them. Many of the inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract today reflect the activation of defense mechanisms that evolved in response to infectious agents but which have been adapted (or maladapted) to defend against noninfectious insults. Some chronic inflammatory diseases, such as IBD, may result from dysregulation of the immune response, resulting in an inappropriately prolonged and inappropriately amplified immune activation.
The epithelium is essential to the control and regulation of the inflammatory response in the gastrointestinal tract. The intact epithelium acts as a barrier, preventing the immune cells in the lamina propria from being overwhelmed by lumenal antigens. Breaks in the epithelial monolayer expose lamina propria immune cells to the several hundred species of bacteria that flourish in the human colon, resulting in a clinically apparent inflammatory response. The diversity of antigenic stimuli triggers nonspecific inflammatory responses. In diseases marked by breaks in the epithelial barrier, the immune or inflammatory response to the initiating agent may be difficult to distinguish in the midst of the response to the normal intestinal flora that invade through the epithelial breaks.
Gastrointestinal inflammation is remarkable in that diverse initiating events, such as infections, ischemia, radiation, and chemical toxins, all induce inflammatory responses that are clinically, endoscopically, and histologically similar.

146

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

For example, the colonoscopic and histological appearances of ulcerative colitis, radiation proctitis, shigellosis, and ischemic colitis are similar. The commonality of the inflammatory responses is explained partly by the similarity between the proinflammatory cytokines, the patterns of leukocyte migration, and the inflammatory mediators induced by these initiating events. Moreover, in each of these diseases, the inflammatory response is largely directed against normal colonic flora that has activated the immune cells of the lamina propria as a result of the loss of epithelial integrity.
Gastrointestinal inflammation is also distinguished by the organ-level physiological response, primarily increased motility and secretion [116,117]. The gastrointestinal tract responds to enteric infections by attempting to wash out the offending microbes with increased electrolyte and water secretion and increased motility, resulting in cramps and diarrhea. The increases in secretion and motility are mediated by the inflammatory response. Regardless of the initiating event, the gastrointestinal tract mounts a stereotypical inflammatory response. Therefore, the same increases in secretion and motility (and resultant diarrhea and cramping) are the responses to noninfectious inflammatory events (e.g., radiation enterocolitis and IBD) for which there are no pathogenic organisms to wash out. Consequently, both infectious and noninfectious gastrointestinal inflammatory disorders manifest similar clinical symptoms.
Immune cell trafficking and adhesion molecules Neutrophil and monocyte trafficking Intestinal inflammation and tissue damage cause circulating neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes to home to the postcapillary venules located near the inflamed regions, and to migrate into the lamina propria through the spaces between adjacent endothelial cells. This process is mediated by the activation of distinct families of adhesion molecules expressed on the surfaces of leukocytes and endothelial cells.
Neutrophils enter the gastrointestinal tissues by binding to adhesion molecules on the endothelium of postcapillary venules. After 1 or 2 days in the gastrointestinal mucosa, they pass between epithelial cells into the intestinal lumen, where they die and are expelled in the stool. Although neutrophils differentiate in the bone marrow, they are primed and activated in the lamina propria [118]. Priming enhances the ability of neutrophils to produce reactive oxygen species. Neutrophil priming and activation are mediated by interaction with particulate stimuli (e.g., bacteria) or by stimulation with soluble factors, such as cytokines, inflammatory mediators, and bacterial products (e.g., endotoxins). Because neutrophils are incapable of proliferation, elevated numbers of neutrophils at sites of inflammation reflects increased trafficking out of the bloodstream and into the gastrointestinal tissues.
Gastrointestinal macrophages are derived from circulating monocytes produced in the bone marrow [119,120].

Monocytes enter the circulation and, like neutrophils, bind to adhesion molecules expressed on endothelial cells in the postcapillary venules of the intestine. Bound monocytes pass between endothelial cells and enter the gastrointestinal tissue, where they begin to differentiate into mature macrophages. As a monocyte differentiates, it can acquire capacities for phagocytosis, proliferation, and bacterial killing. Macrophage differentiation is controlled by cytokines and other soluble factors present in the lamina propria, and different combinations of cytokines and mediators result in macrophages with different phenotypes. As with neutrophils, the large increase in the number of macrophages during clinically apparent inflammation reflects increased migration of monocytes out of the bloodstream, rather than the proliferation of macrophages already in the lamina propria. Receptors on the surface of macrophages determine the stimuli to which the macrophage can respond, as well as the macrophage phenotype.
For the most part, neutrophil and monocyte trafficking in the gastrointestinal tract is similar to that in other organ systems; however, the number of leukocytes passing through the gastrointestinal tract greatly exceeds that in other organs. Because the surface area of the gastrointestinal tract is large, even the modest degree of inflammation seen in the healthy small intestine and colon involves the trafficking of a substantial number of monocytes and neutrophils. In diffuse inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, such as ulcerative colitis, the trafficking of leukocytes through the inflamed mucosa expands to the point that most leukocytes produced in the bone marrow travel through the gastrointestinal mucosa into the lumen [121].
Adhesion molecules on leukocytes and on the vascular surface of endothelial cells mediate the migration of neutrophils and monocytes from the peripheral circulation into the lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 7.8) [122,123]. The adhesion molecules that participate in the binding of inflammatory cells to the vascular endothelium fall into three subgroups: selectins, 2-integrins, and the immunoglobulin superfamily of adhesion molecules. The initial adherence of leukocytes to the endothelium is mediated by selectins expressed on the surface of both the circulating leukocytes and the endothelial cells. The three members of the selectin family are L-selectin (leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 [LAM-1]), E-selectin (endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 [ELAM-1]), and P-selectin [124]. The natural ligands for all three selectins are sialylated Lewis X oligosaccharides, which are found on almost all cell types. Among the molecules with sialylated Lewis X moieties are the selectins themselves, so that L-selectin on neutrophils can bind to E-selectin or P-selectin on endothelial cells.
Selectin bonds are responsible for leukocyte rolling. Because only weak selectin bonds form between circulating leukocytes and endothelial cells, leukocytes can roll along the surface of the endothelium by making and breaking

147

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function
Endothelium

Rolling

Activation

Selectin dependent

Adhesion

Aggregation and transmigration

Integrin dependent

Figure 7.8 Adhesion and transmigration of leukocytes during intestinal inflammation. Leukocytes adhere to the vascular endothelium through cellular adhesion molecules. The processes of rolling and activation are dependent on selectins, whereas adhesion, aggregation, and transmigration are dependent on integrins. In the gut, specific integrins that mediate these processes are expressed on endothelial cells, such as mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM1), with its natural ligand on leukocytes being a4b7.

selectin-mediated bonds. Rolling reduces leukocyte velocity
before the formation of stronger adhesion bonds that fully
immobilize leukocytes on the surface of the endothelium.
These stronger bonds are formed between the remaining two families of adhesion molecules, 2-integrins, which are expressed on the surface of the leukocytes, and members
of the immunoglobulin superfamily of adhesion molecules
(e.g., intracellular adhesion molecule-1 [ICAM-1], vascular
cell adhesion molecule-1 [VCAM-1], and mucosal addressin
cell adhesion molecule-1 [MAdCAM-1]), which are ex-
pressed on endothelial cells.
The integrins form a large group of adhesion molecules
[125], each of which is a heterodimer that consists of noncovalently associated  and  subunits. Integrins are divided into subfamilies based on common  subunits, with the 1 and 2 subunits being the most important for inflammation (e.g., CD18, VLA, 47). 1-integrins are involved in lymphocyte trafficking, whereas 2-integrins are involved in the adhesion of monocytes and neutrophils to endothelial cells [126]. The 2-integrins CD11a/CD18 (leukocyte functionassociated antigen-1 [LFA-1] or L2) and CD11b/CD18 (macrophage-1 antigen [Mac-1] or M2) bind to ICAM-1 on endothelial cells. CD11a/CD18 also binds to ICAM-2 and
is expressed on neutrophils in their basal state. ICAM-1
and ICAM-2 are the most prominent members of the
immunoglobulin superfamily of adhesion molecules and are
expressed on endothelial cells in the basal state. They bind to 2-integrins expressed on the surface of adhering leukocytes [122]. ICAM-2 is expressed at higher levels than ICAM-1.
ICAM-2 expression is not increased by cytokine stimulation, whereas ICAM-1 expression is enhanced by IL-1, TNF-, and IFN-. Thus, the relative importance of ICAM-1 increases in conditions of inflammation.

The final step in leukocyte trafficking in intestinal inflammation is the passage of leukocytes between epithelial cells and out into the lumen [127,128]. Leukocytes that have passed into the lumen can be found in the stool, which is a clinical sign of inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. Adhesion molecules, including ICAM-1, and neutrophil chemotactic factors are expressed on epithelial cells in the presence of inflammation. Chemotactic factors have also been identified in the colonic lumen.
Lymphocyte trafficking Lymphocyte trafficking shares many similarities with neutrophil and monocyte migration into the gastrointestinal tract. Lymphocyte trafficking is mediated by the expression of receptors and counterreceptors on lymphocytes and endothelial cells. As with leukocyte migration, the interaction of lymphocytes with endothelial cells involves three families of cell surface proteins: integrins, selectins, and immunoglobulin-like adhesion receptors. Although lymphocytes destined for the intestine display some integrins that are commonly expressed on leukocytes (e.g., CD11a/CD18), they also express 4 integrins, which are predominantly expressed on lymphocytes (e.g., 47, an integrin expressed in CD4 and CD8 gut trophic lymphocytes), and E7, which is expressed on almost all intraepithelial lymphocytes and 40% of lamina propria lymphocytes. The 47 integrin binds to MAdCAM-1, a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that is selectively expressed on the high endothelial venules of mucosal lymphoid organs. Thus, the migration of selected lymphocyte populations to the intestine is directed by the selective expression of 47 on these lymphocytes and the selective expression of MAdCAM-1 on certain endothelial populations. A highly specific receptor, CCR9, is expressed

148

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

on T cells that selectively migrate to the small intestine [129]. CCR9+ lymphocytes bind to a single chemokine ligand called CCL25, or TECK, which appears to be specifically expressed in the gastrointestinal tract. Regulated expression of selectins, integrins, and adhesion molecules controls the migration of naïve lymphocytes into Peyer patches through high endothelial venules and the subsequent homing of activated memory lymphocytes into the effector compartments of the loosely affiliated lamina propria.
Antiadhesion molecule therapy in gastrointestinal disease Adhesion molecules are gatekeepers to circulating immune cells programmed to home to areas of intestinal inflammation. Interactions between integrins and adhesion molecules permit neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes to cross the endothelial barrier and enter the inflamed lamina propria. Therapeutic strategies that block the ability of immune cells to migrate into the inflamed intestine could therefore be very effective for the treatment of acute and chronic inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract. This has been demonstrated in animal models of IBD in which blockade of ICAM-1 attenuates acute ileitis in the SAMP1/Yit mouse model of human Crohn's disease, as well as colitis induced in rats by administration of dextran sodium sulfate [130,131]. As a result, drug development strategies targeting adhesion molecules in humans first focused on the 2-integrin/ICAM1 interaction. Although blockade of ICAM-1 using antisense oligonucleotide therapy (alicaforsen, ISIS-2302) was inconclusive for the treatment of Crohn's disease, it may be effective for ulcerative colitis [132­135].
Clinical investigations of Crohn's disease have focused on monoclonal antibodies against the 4 integrin, specifically blocking the interaction between 47 and MAdCAM-1. MAdCAM-1 expression is specific to the gastrointestinal tract and during intestinal inflammation it is significantly upregulated. A large, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of 905 patients with active Crohn's disease showed that anti-4 integrin therapy (natalizumab) did not induce a significant clinical response or remission [136]. However, in patients who did respond, their response could be maintained by ongoing administration of natalizumab. The safety of natalizumab is an area of debate after a patient died of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy during an open-label extension of the clinical trial [137]. A second humanized antibody targeting the 47 integrin (MLN02) has been extensively studied in patients with ulcerative colitis. A short-term clinical trial of 188 patients with ulcerative colitis showed that 33% of patients administered MLN02 achieved clinical remission by week 6 compared with only 14% of placebo-treated patients [138]. Preclinical studies in mouse models of Crohn's-like ileitis have also shown promising results using antibody neutralization of CCL25/ CCR9, the chemokine receptor complex involved in lympho-

cyte homing to the small intestine [139]. Clinical studies using CCR9 antagonists are in progress. Taken together, these results indicate the potential value of treatment strategies that target adhesion molecules and related mechanisms of leukocyte trafficking for the treatment of IBD.
Leukocyte chemotaxis and activation The migration of neutrophils across a polarized epithelium and into the lumen is a characteristic event of the active phase of several inflammatory diseases that affect the gastrointestinal and hepatobiliary tracts, including H. pylori gastritis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, bacterial enterocolitis, cholangitis, and acute cholecystitis. After the neutrophil has adhered to the endothelium and passed between the endothelial cells, it must migrate to the site of bacterial invasion or other injury by a process called chemotaxis. After entering the affected tissue, the neutrophil must acquire the ability to produce reactive oxygen species in maximal amounts [140]. The process of enhancing the capacity of the neutrophil for producing reactive oxygen species is called priming, and the stimulation of their production is called activation.
Chemoattractants are molecules that stimulate the migration of neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, and other cells. Chemotaxis is the migration of a cell in the direction of the higher concentration of chemoattractant. Chemotactic agents act by binding to specific receptors on the leukocyte plasma membrane, which triggers signaling, reorganization of the cytoskeleton, and movement of the leukocyte. Among the agents that induce neutrophil chemotaxis are IL-8 (CXCL8), formylmethionylleucylphenylalanine (fMLP), the complement component C5a, platelet-activating factor, and leukotriene B4 (LTB4). Each chemotactic agent has a separate receptor on the neutrophil plasma membrane. The direction of neutrophil migration after the binding of a chemoattractant to its receptor is determined by the location of the receptor on the neutrophil membrane. Receptors are distributed over the surface of the cells, and migration occurs in the direction of the receptor where ligand binding has occurred. Monocytes and eosinophils also are capable of chemotaxis, but they respond to a different range of agents.
The adhesion of neutrophils and monocytes to endothelial cells and their migration to the site of inflammation are two highly integrated components of the inflammatory response. The regulation of these events is coordinated by cytokines and inflammatory mediators. A single biological event, such as the phagocytosis of bacteria by a macrophage, results in the production of agents (e.g., IL-1) that induce the expression of adhesion molecules but not neutrophil chemotaxis, and other agents (e.g., IL-8 and LTB4) that induce the expression of adhesion molecules and neutrophil chemotaxis. Some soluble mediators, such as eosinophil chemotactic factor, are chemotactic for only one cell type, whereas others act on multiple cell types. Thus, the mediators that induce the

149

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Mast cell

Macrophage

Lamina propria Neutrophil

Epithelial cell

T cell

ECF TGF-b
Eosinophil chemotaxis

LTB4 IL-1 IL-8 PAF IFN-g

Neutrophil chemotaxis
Vascular space

Leukocyte adherence

Monocyte chemotaxis

Figure 7.9 Network of chemotactic factors during intestinal inflammation. In the intestine, multiple cell types in the epithelium and lamina propria are capable of producing chemotactic factors including eosinophil chemotactic factor (ECF), transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b), leukotriene B4 (LTB4), interleukin (IL)-1, IL-8, platelet-activating factor (PAF), and interferon (IFN)-g. Some inflammatory cells, especially macrophages and neutrophils, produce several of these factors, which can be specific for one cell type or multiple cell types.

expression of adhesion molecules and leukocyte chemotaxis constitute a complex and highly redundant network (Fig. 7.9). In chronic inflammatory diseases, multiple agents that induce leukocyte adhesion and chemotaxis act in parallel. The redundancy suggests that therapeutic agents aimed at one specific element in this complex network may not successfully block the inflammatory response.
The complexity of the network of chemotactic agents raises the question of whether all of these factors operate in every gastrointestinal inflammatory event, or whether some factors are prominent in certain inflammatory events but not in others. The composition of the inflammatory infiltrate may yield some insight. For example, a large number of eosinophils suggests the presence of eosinophil chemotactic factors. In most inflammatory states, it is likely that more than one chemotactic factor is operative and that different factors are more or less prominent as the inflammatory response develops. In response to infectious agents, neutrophil infiltration typically occurs within a few hours and monocyte infiltration occurs later, suggesting that factors promoting neutrophil chemotaxis appear earlier in the development of inflammation than those promoting monocyte chemotaxis.
Circulating neutrophils do not produce the maximum amount of reactive oxygen species that they are capable of producing. After entering the tissue, neutrophils are primed by IL-1, TNF-, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), or lipopolysaccharide, which enhances

their ability to make reactive oxygen species. Neutrophils can also be primed by exposure to the extracellular matrix. Exposure to C5a, LTB4, or fMLP can activate the neutrophil respiratory burst with the production of superoxide, singlet oxygen, and hydroxyl radical. More typically, activation of the respiratory burst in neutrophils is the result of the phagocytosis of bacteria, which neutrophils kill with reactive oxygen species generated intracellularly within the phagosome. Although the generation of reactive oxygen species serves the useful purpose of killing bacteria, considerable evidence indicates that reactive oxygen species produced by neutrophils contribute to the tissue destruction seen in acute and chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, including IBD [141].
Neutrophil response to bacterial infection Study of the chemotactic agents that affect neutrophils reveals connections between neutrophil chemotaxis and bacterial infection. The nature of the agents that induce neutrophil chemotaxis suggests that the inflammatory response evolved to deal with bacterial infections. fMLP is a synthetic peptide that mimics the activity of bacterially derived peptides with formylated N-terminal methionine groups. The binding of fMLP to its receptor results in the migration of neutrophils towards the bacteria [142]. The chemokine IL-8 is produced by a variety of cell types, including intestinal epithelial cells and activated monocytes. Intestinal epithelial cells produce IL-8 when infected with invasive bacterial

150

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

species such as Salmonella [143]. IL-8 serves as an early warning system for host events by triggering the influx of neutrophils to sites of bacterial invasion in the intestine. C5a production is also part of the immune response to bacterial invasion [144]. The binding of immunoglobulins to invading bacteria results in complement activation and the production of C5a, which attracts neutrophils to the site of the antibodycoated bacteria. Platelet-activating factor and LTB4 are secondary amplification agents for the inflammatory response. Phagocytosis of invading bacteria activates neutrophils and macrophages, resulting in the production of platelet-activating factor and LTB4, which in turn induce the migration of other neutrophils and macrophages to the site of bacterial invasion [145]. Thus, each of the neutrophil chemoattractant receptors can be related, directly or indirectly, to neutrophil migration to sites of bacterial infection. The multiplicity of mechanisms stimulating neutrophil migration towards sites of bacterial infection suggests the evolutionary importance of this response.
fMLP is a molecule of particular interest in neutrophil chemotaxis and activation in the gut [142]. Escherichia coli and other bacteria found in the normal colon produce a series of formulated oligopeptides, of which fMLP is the prototype. These formulated oligopeptides bind to fMLP receptors on neutrophils and macrophages. The intact epithelial monolayer acts as a barrier to the passage of fMLP, preventing the activation of lamina propria neutrophils by fMLP. Diseases marked by defects in the epithelial monolayer result in the exposure of lamina propria neutrophils to fMLP and the recruitment of additional neutrophils to the area of epithelial damage. Neutrophils have two classes of fMLP receptors: high-affinity receptors and low-affinity receptors. Binding of fMLP to the high-affinity receptor results in chemotaxis; binding to the low-affinity receptor activates the respiratory burst and other neutrophil functions involved in bacterial killing, suggesting a mechanism mediated by highaffinity fMLP receptors, by which neutrophil migration is induced by low concentrations of a bacterial product at a considerable distance from the bacteria. As the neutrophils migrate toward the bacteria, the concentration of fMLP increases and low-affinity receptors are activated. Binding of fMLP to low-affinity receptors initiates a series of events, particularly activation of the enzymes required for producing reactive oxygen species that prepare the neutrophils for bacterial killing.
Leukocyte chemotaxis in gastrointestinal disease The activities of leukocyte chemotactic agents can be disease specific. Infection with the ulcer-causing pathogen H. pylori is characterized by the continuous recruitment of neutrophils to the inflamed gastric tissues. The H. pylori bacterium contains several chemotactic signaling proteins (cheW, cheA, and cheY) that are essential not only for the establishment of H. pylori infection but also for achieving and maintaining a

high level of infection, as well as achieving colonization of all regions of the stomach [146]. The neutrophil-activating protein of H. pylori, HP-NAP, is a virulence factor that stimulates the transmigration of neutrophils across the endothelium and into the inflamed gastric mucosa. HP-NAP is also capable of inducing activated neutrophils of the innate immune response to express IL-12 and IL-23, which in turn promote an adaptive Th1 polarizing immune response within the H. pylori-infected mucosa [147].
Neutrophil migration has been studied more extensively in ulcerative colitis than in other gastrointestinal diseases. Ulcerative colitis is characterized by a massive influx of neutrophils into colonic sites of active inflammation. In contrast, defective neutrophil recruitment to inflamed lesions of the gastrointestinal tract is a primary pathological abnormality associated with Crohn's disease, the other IBD [148]. Chemokines are chemotactic cytokines that both promote leukocyte migration to areas of inflammation and initiate leukocyte activation. Mucosa affected by ulcerative colitis has high levels of several important chemokines and neutrophil chemotactic factors, including IL-8 (CXCL8), epithelial cell-derived neutrophil activator (ENA)-78 (CXCL5), growth-related oncogene (GRO)- (CXCL1), and LTB4 [149,150]. In ulcerative colitis, production of IL-8 by both macrophages and epithelial cells is induced by IL-1 and TNF, proinflammatory cytokines that are produced at increased levels. LTB4 is produced primarily by activated neutrophils, and the mucosa affected by ulcerative colitis is heavily infiltrated with activated neutrophils. Inhibitors of 5-lipoxygenase, the key enzyme in the synthesis of LTB4, are effective in the treatment of chemically induced animal models of colitis. Based on these animal studies, clinical trials of an inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase and an inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein (FLAP) were performed in patients with acute ulcerative colitis. However, no differences in clinical response rates were observed between treated and untreated patients [151]. The failure of leukotriene synthesis inhibitors in human trials, despite success in animal models, may reflect the fact that inflammation had been present for weeks to months in the patients with ulcerative colitis, allowing time for the development of a more complex and redundant network of chemotactic agents.
Cytokines Cytokines are an ever-expanding group of small protein hormones secreted by a variety of cell types, including immune cells (e.g., lymphocytes and macrophages) and nonimmune cells (e.g., endothelium, epithelium, fibroblasts, and smooth muscle cells). These regulatory proteins have autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine functions, and mediate immunity, inflammation, and hematopoiesis. Cytokines are produced de novo in response to immune stimulation. They generally act in a temporally and spatially limited manner, at very low concentrations. Cytokines have a high level of redundancy in

151

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

their effector functions, which include regulating the expression of membrane-bound proteins (including cytokine receptors) and regulating the proliferation, differentiation, and secretion of effector molecules. This redundancy, along with the pleiotropism of cytokine action, creates a complex network of cytokines that are difficult to classify.
Classification schemes for cytokines have focused on their functional roles (e.g., effector molecules vs regulatory molecules) and on the cells that produce them (e.g., Th1, Th2, Treg). For example, Th1 cells predominantly secrete IL-2 and IFN- and are associated with cell-mediated immunity; Th2 cells predominantly secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 and are associated with humoral immunity; and Treg cells predominantly secrete IL-10 and TGF- and are associated with suppression [152]. Despite the appeal of defining cytokines and T-cell clones in this manner, the pleiotropism and redundancy of cytokine action makes such classification difficult. Therefore it has become more common to describe combinations of cytokines as type 1 or type 2 when identifying patterns of cytokine production, so as not to overemphasize the source of the cytokine. These issues are important considering the increased evidence that certain idiopathic diseases, such as IBD, and inappropriate immune responses to certain infectious pathogens may be associated with distinct cytokine profiles.
The redundancy in cytokine effects is likely related to redundancy in their receptors, many of which are composed of common subunits shared between receptors [153]. Cytokine receptors are grouped into families and exert their effects by activating intracellular signaling pathways within a target cell. The hematopoietic cytokine receptor (R) family includes many of the interleukin receptors. A common feature of these receptors is that they function as multimers with each other and other nonhematopoietic cytokine receptor family members, such as IL-2R or IL-15R. The interferon receptor family includes the receptors for type I interferons (IFN- and IFN-) and type II interferon (IFN-); they share extracellular fibronectin-like domains with the hematopoietic cytokine receptors. There are two receptors for TNF-, p55 (TNFR1) and p75 (TNFR2), which are homologous to CD95 (Fas antigen), CD40, CD27, and nerve growth factor receptor, and which are involved in proliferation and programmed cell death (apoptosis) [154]. Chemokine receptors are seven membrane-spanning G protein-linked receptors that are coupled to cell activation through calcium mobilization.
Cytokine expression in the gastrointestinal tract is tightly regulated to maintain homeostasis between proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines. Some of the mechanisms used to regulate this balance include soluble cytokine receptors, such as the IL-18 binding protein (IL-18BP), which competitively binds secreted IL-18 and neutralizes its activity, and naturally occurring receptor antagonists, such as the IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) [154]. IL-1ra spe-

cifically inhibits the proinflammatory actions of IL-1 by competitively binding to IL-1 receptors located on target cells with no known agonistic effects.
The relationship between chronic active inflammatory states and the development of malignancies is well established. Hepatitis B and hepatitis C can lead to hepatocellular carcinoma, and infection with certain strains of human papilloma virus can cause cervical cancer. Within the gastrointestinal tract, ulcerative colitis is associated with an elevated risk of developing colorectal cancer, and infection with H. pylori is a risk factor for gastric carcinoma. Although the mechanisms by which a chronic inflammatory response leads to carcinoma are still unclear, cytokine production may be an integral part of the process. Genetic polymorphisms for the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1 are associated with an elevated relative risk of developing gastric cancer [155]. In addition to its proinflammatory properties, IL-1 is also a potent inhibitor of acid secretion. Whether or not these polymorphisms are causative for gastric cancer remains unknown. However, the associations emphasize the importance of cytokines as mediators of inflammatory responses and tumorigenicity. Cytokine polymorphism profiles may also prove to be useful screening tools for identifying patients at risk of developing gastric carcinomas.
In chronic inflammatory diseases that result from a dysregulated immune response to pathogens, neutralizing monoclonal antibodies targeting key proinflammatory cytokines can mitigate inflammation and restore gut homeostasis. A classic example of such cytokine-targeted therapies is the use of anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies to treat IBD. In clinical trials, the chimeric anti-TNF monoclonal antibody infliximab induced a clinical response in more than 60% of patients with steroid-refractory and fistulizing Crohn's disease and nearly 70% of patients with steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis [156­158].
Lipid mediators of inflammation Prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and platelet-activating factor are referred to collectively as lipid mediators of inflammation. They are produced under many circumstances by the same cell types in response to similar stimuli. Phagocytosis in macrophages results in the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), LTB4, and platelet-activating factor. Although the lipid mediators are structurally distinct, they have many overlapping biological effects: PGE2, LTB4, and platelet-activating factor enhance vascular permeability; LTB4 and plateletactivating factor activate neutrophils.
Prostaglandins and leukotrienes are the products of arachidonic acid metabolism and are referred to as eicosanoids [150,159,160]. Prostaglandins are produced through the cyclooxygenase (COX) pathway, whereas leukotrienes are produced through the 5-lipoxygenase pathway. Two distinct cyclooxygenases are involved in prostaglandin synthesis. COX-1 is a constitutive enzyme found in most mammalian

152

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

cell types. In the gastrointestinal tract, COX-1 is expressed in lamina propria mononuclear cells, fibroblasts, muscle cells, epithelial cells, and vascular endothelial cells. COX-2 is expressed in response to inducing stimuli, including IL-1, TNF-, and other proinflammatory cytokines. COX-2 expression can be induced in macrophages, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and other cell types.
Under most circumstances, the rate-limiting step in the synthesis of prostaglandins is the availability of arachidonic acid. Under basal conditions, cells have almost no free arachidonic acid. The activation of phospholipases (particularly phospholipase A2) makes arachidonate available by releasing it from membrane phospholipids. A wide variety of stimuli can activate phospholipase A2, resulting in the release of arachidonate. Phagocytosis in macrophages activates phospholipase A2, as do receptor-mediated events such as the binding of bradykinin to its receptor. Activation of phospholipase typically results in the rapid release of arachidonate and the production of prostaglandins within a few seconds up to 1 or 2 min. Synthesis of prostaglandins can also be regulated by the infiltration of prostaglandin-producing cells into the gastrointestinal tract. The large increase in prostaglandin levels in IBD may reflect the trafficking of prostaglandin-producing monocytes and macrophages into the lamina propria. A third mechanism for the regulation of prostaglandin production is the promotion of the synthesis of COX-1 and COX-2. Synthesis of COX-2 can be induced by proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1, TNF-) and phorbol esters, and occurs over a few hours. Thus, the regulation of prostaglandin production by the induction of COX-2 occurs over a longer time frame than the regulation of prostaglandin production by phospholipase activation.
Among the products of arachidonic acid metabolism through the COX pathway are PGE2, thromboxane A2, and prostacyclin. PGE2 is made by macrophages, epithelial cells, and fibroblasts, and has several biological functions that suggest a role in inflammation and tumor growth. The binding of PGE2 to its receptor initiates a signaling cascade that controls cell proliferation and migration, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. PGE2 is also capable of stimulating tumor metastasis and inhibiting tumor surveillance through the down-regulation of cytokine production and natural killer activity. Finally, PGE2 can cause DNA oxidation, which can lead to carcinogenic mutations. Epidemiological studies of colorectal cancer have demonstrated that the use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which block cyclooxygenase activity and inhibit PGE2 production, is associated with a lower incidence of colorectal cancer [161]. These studies further point to the link between chronic inflammation and the subsequent development of malignancy, and have resulted in a renewed interest in NSAIDs as chemopreventive agents for patients who are at high risk for developing colorectal cancer, including patients with ulcerative colitis, familial adenomatous polyposis, or hereditary nonpolyposis

colon cancer. Newer NSAIDs (e.g., celecoxib, rofecoxib) selectively block COX-2 production and were hypothesized to have better safety profiles than the original inhibitors, which block both COX-1 and COX-2; however, large clinical trials of both drugs have shown that long-term use is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events [162­164].
Leukotrienes are made through the 5-lipoxygenase pathway. The cellular distribution of 5-lipoxygenase is much more limited than that of COX-1 and COX-2. LTB4, a potent neutrophil chemoattractant, is produced by neutrophils, macrophages, and mast cells. The peptidyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4) are made in macrophages, mast cells, and eosinophils. They increase vascular permeability and induce vasoconstriction and smooth muscle contraction, and they may induce epithelial Cl- secretion.
Inflamed mucosa from patients with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis contains markedly elevated levels of PGE2 and LTB4 [165]. Analysis of neutrophil chemotaxis in ulcerative colitis showed that LTB4 is a major neutrophil chemoattractant; however, randomized controlled trials in which 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors are used as single therapeutic agents have not shown effective results in treating ulcerative colitis. In many inflammatory diseases, NSAIDs, which block COX-1 and COX-2 production, diminish inflammation and relieve clinical symptoms; however, in ulcerative colitis, NSAIDs exacerbate clinical activity. Elevated PGE2 levels in ulcerative colitis are associated with enhanced COX-2 expression. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated COX2 expression in epithelial cells from inflamed tissue affected by ulcerative colitis [166].
Platelet-activating factor is a phosphatidylcholine with an ether-linked alcohol fatty acid on the first carbon and an acyl-linked acetyl group on the second carbon. There are no intracellular stores of platelet-activating factor and its synthesis is initiated by the remodeling of phosphatidylcholine through the activation of phospholipase A2. Plateletactivating factor is made by neutrophils, macrophages, mast cells, and eosinophils, and it is often produced in parallel with prostaglandins and leukotrienes. The biological effects of platelet-activating factor include enhanced vascular permeability, vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation, neutrophil chemotaxis, smooth muscle contraction, and epithelial Cl- secretion. Many of these biological effects overlap with those of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Platelet-activating factor is rapidly degraded to the inactive metabolite lysoplatelet-activating factor by the enzyme acetylhydrolase. Acetylhydrolase has both intracellular and secreted forms. Intestinal epithelial cells secrete acetylhydrolase, which may be an important mechanism for the defense of the gastrointestinal tract against platelet-activating factor [167]. Exposure of neonatal piglets to platelet-activating factor results in intestinal hemorrhagic lesions and intestinal injury consistent with necrotizing enterocolitis [168].

153

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Nitric oxide Nitric oxide is a small, biologically active compound formed when nitric oxide synthase (NOS) oxidizes the guanidine nitrogen of arginine. The biological effects of nitric oxide include actions as a vasodilator, a neurotransmitter, and an important component of the inflammatory response [169,170].
The three distinct isoforms of NOS differ in their cofactor requirements, tissue distribution, transcriptional regulation, and posttranscriptional modification. Neuronal NOS (nNOS) is constitutively expressed and is found in neuronal tissue. The nitric oxide produced by nNOS is the principal nonadrenergic noncholinergic (NANC) neurotransmitter in the gastrointestinal tract. nNOS is found in enteric nerves in the myenteric plexus and circular muscle and is present in neurons containing vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) [171]. Nitric oxide produced by nNOS participates in the control of peristalsis and sphincter function in the gut. Impaired nitric oxide production through nNOS may contribute to several disorders of bowel motility, including achalasia, functional dyspepsia, diabetic gastroparesis, infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, intestinal pseudoobstruction, and colitis [172].
Endothelial NOS (eNOS) is also constitutively expressed and was originally found in endothelial cells, although it is also present in epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, platelets, and T cells. Nitric oxide produced by endothelial cells relaxes vascular smooth muscle cells and dilates the vasculature. Inhibition of eNOS in vivo causes an increase in blood pressure. Hypertension is the major side effect of nonspecific NOS inhibitors. nNOS and eNOS synthesize nitric oxide in relatively small quantities. The physiological effects of nitric oxide as a vasodilator and as a neurotransmitter occur at quite low concentrations and are transient. Calciumdependent enzymes control the transient expression of both nNOS and eNOS, and both are inhibited by calmodulin.
Unlike nNOS and eNOS, which are constitutively expressed, the third NOS isoform, inducible NOS (iNOS), can be induced by proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1, TNF-, IFN-) and by bacterial lipopolysaccharide. iNOS is produced in nanomolar concentrations compared with nNOS and eNOS, which are produced in picomolar concentrations. Therefore, iNOS produces nitric oxide in quantities that greatly exceed those required for its physiological function as a vasodilator or neurotransmitter. In addition, nitric oxide production by iNOS is delayed for several hours after stimulation but remains active for up to 5 days. In macrophages, the large quantity of nitric oxide produced by iNOS is used for killing bacteria and tumor cells [173]. Nitric oxide works in conjunction with reactive oxygen species (i.e., hydroxyl radical, superoxide, and hydrogen peroxide) generated within phagosomes to kill phagocytosed bacteria.
iNOS is induced in intestinal epithelial cells in inflammatory states, such as IBD, infectious colitis, and diverticulitis

[174,175]. IL-1, TNF-, IFN-, and lipopolysaccharide induce iNOS in epithelial cells in vitro. However, a critical question is whether or not nitric oxide plays a pathogenic or protective role during intestinal inflammation [176]. Many studies have demonstrated that the biological effects of nitric oxide are organ specific and vary depending on the amount, the timing of production, and the particular inflammatory state. Administration of nitric oxide is protective to the intestinal mucosa, and results in maintenance of blood flow, inhibition of platelets and leukocyte adhesion, down-regulation of mast cell reactivity, and reduction of superoxide-induced damage. However, increased production of iNOS-induced nitric oxide by intestinal epithelial cells is associated with prolonged colonic inflammation. Studies using animal models of colitis have generated interesting hypotheses regarding the complex role of nitric oxide in intestinal inflammation. Animal models of chemically induced colitis that used NOS inhibitors to block nitric oxide production produced conflicting results ­ nitric oxide either improved or exacerbated the colitis [177­182]. Time-dependent studies of endotoxin-induced vascular damage have shown that early administration of NOS inhibitors results in increased tissue damage, whereas late administration results in a dose-dependent reduction in damage [183]. The specific NOS isoform has also been proposed to be a factor influencing the beneficial or pathogenic effects of nitric oxide in intestinal inflammation. However, studies using mice that lack specific NOS isoforms (e.g., nNOS­/­, eNOS­/­, iNOS­/­) have also produced conflicting results [184,185]. A possible explanation may be that iNOSinduced nitric oxide is protective during the early phases of acute inflammation but that continuous overproduction during chronic inflammation contributes to inflammation. Because of this functional complexity, it is likely that the clinical efficacy of any drug therapies that are developed to target nitric oxide or NOS production will be influenced primarily by the specific NOS isoform present and cell types affected, as well as by the timing of therapy.
Intestinal epithelial cells Intestinal epithelial cells interact with the inflammatory response at several levels. The secretion of electrolytes and water by epithelial cells is an important part of the gastrointestinal response to inflammation. The interaction of inflammation and epithelial cell electrolyte and water secretion has been studied by assessing the effects of individual inflammatory mediators on electrolyte and water secretion, or by identifying the mediators that regulate electrolyte and water secretion in specific inflammatory states. Histamine, PGE2, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), and LTB4 are just a few of the inflammatory mediators that induce epithelial cell Cl- secretion (Fig. 7.10). Neural mechanisms also affect epithelial cell Cl- secretion directly or indirectly through inflammatory cells. The neurotransmitter acetylcholine induces Cl- secretion in epithelial cells directly [186].

154

ZO-2/3 ZO-1

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

Claudin (1­5)

Paracellular permeability

Chloride secretion

Mucus secretion

Occludin

Cl

f-Actin

JAM-1 E-cadherin

MHC II IFN-

IgAR TNF VIP

5-HT PGE2 Histamine

LTC4

Figure 7.10 Epithelial barrier structure and function. The epithelium serves as a barrier that separates lumenal antigens from the inflammatory cells of the lamina propria. The epithelial barrier is regulated by paracellular pathways that are controlled by tight junctions between adjacent epithelial cells. Tight junctions are composed of several tight junctional proteins, including occludins, members of the claudin family, the junctional adhesion molecule (JAM)-1, ZO-1, ZO-2, ZO-3, f-actin, and E-cadherin. The tight junctional proteins function together as a complex to regulate selective intestinal permeability through the epithelial barrier (inset). The secretion of electrolytes and water by epithelial cells is an important component of the

gastrointestinal response to inflammation. Histamine, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), serotonin (5-HT), and leukotriene C4 (LTC4) are inflammatory mediators that induce epithelial cell Cl- secretion within the intestine. Neuropeptides, such as vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), induce mast cell activation with release of histamine and 5-HT, resulting in epithelial cell Cl- secretion. Cl- secretion is accompanied by Na+ secretion and, consequently, by the passage of water across the epithelium into the intestinal lumen, with resulting diarrhea. IFN-g, interferon-g; IgAR, receptor for immunoglobulin A; MHC II, major histocompatibility complex class II molecules; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Neuropeptides such as substance P, VIP, and neuropeptide Y induce mast cell activation, resulting in the release of histamine and 5-HT and thus the activation of epithelial cell Cl- secretion [187]. Cl- secretion is accompanied by Na+ secretion and, consequently, by the passage of water across the epithelium into the intestinal lumen. Diarrhea is the clinical manifestation of the enhanced enterocyte Cl- secretion induced by these mediators. These same inflammatory mediators induce the secretion of mucus by goblet cells in the gastrointestinal tract. Diarrhea protects the host from infectious agents and their toxins by speeding their passage through the gastrointestinal tract and out of the organism. Mucus secretion protects the host from infectious agents in the gastrointestinal tract by preventing the binding of the infectious agents and their toxins to intestinal epithelial cells.
The interaction of inflammation and epithelial electrolyte and water secretion has also been studied by identifying the inflammatory mediators that regulate electrolyte and water secretion in specific inflammatory conditions. One relatively simple animal model of intestinal inflammation is the sensitization of rats to egg albumin followed by antigenic challenge. In this model, antigenic challenge results in increased Cl- secretion and increased paracellular permeability [188]. The increase in paracellular permeability was demonstrated by the increase in the uptake of chromium 51-EDTA from the

intestinal lumen after antigen challenge of previously sensitized rats. The relative contribution of various inflammatory mediators to the increase in Cl- secretion seen in this model was tested with a series of blocking agents. Ketanserin (a 5-HT antagonist), diphenhydramine (a histamine H1 antagonist), and piroxicam (a COX inhibitor) inhibited egg albumin-induced Cl- secretion by 30%, 42%, and 52% respectively. The combination of piroxicam and diphenhydramine inhibited the secretory response by 82%. These data suggest that, even in this simple model, more than one inflammatory mediator contributes to the increase in Cl- secretion, and the mediators involved indicate that more than one cell type produces mediators. Histamine and 5-HT are products of mast cell activation. PGE2, the prostaglandin most likely to be involved in Cl- secretion, is produced by fibroblasts or epithelial cells themselves. In a similar study, challenge of Trichinella-immunized rats with Trichinella larvae resulted in increased intestinal fluid secretion [189]. Treatment of the rats with the combination of indomethacin (indometacin), a COX inhibitor, and diphenhydramine ablated the increase in the fluid secretion induced by exposure to Trichinella. In the Trichinella model, increased fluid secretion is caused by a combination of prostaglandins and histamine, whereas in the egg albumin model, increased secretion results from a combination of prostaglandins,

155

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

histamine, and 5-HT. Stimulation of intestinal epithelial cells with proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF- and IFN- inhibits Cl- secretion. Interestingly, pretreatment with probiotics or commensal bacteria, which are essential to the normal development of the mucosal immune system, restores normal levels of Cl- secretion, suggesting a possible role for these agents in gastrointestinal inflammatory disorders [190].
Epithelial barrier function The epithelium serves as a barrier that physically separates lumenal antigens from the lamina propria inflammatory cells, thus preventing activation of the inflammatory cells by antigens. However, the epithelial barrier is not impenetrable and it uses sophisticated mechanisms to regulate the trafficking of macromolecules between the environment and the host, primarily through paracellular pathways that are controlled by tight junctions (see Fig. 7.10) [191,192]. Tight junctions were originally believed to be impermeable, but are now recognized to be composed of several tight junctional proteins (e.g., occludin, members of the claudin family, the junctional adhesion molecule [JAM], ZO-1, ZO-2, and ZO-3) that function together as a complex to regulate selective intestinal permeability through the epithelial barrier. Tight junctions are dynamic structures that are capable of rapidly altering permeability in response to extracellular stimuli. Barrier disruption is seen in several gastrointestinal disorders. Enteropathogenic E. coli and Giardia infections can both induce large increases in tight junction permeability in vitro [193,194]. During inflammation, increased production of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF- and IFN-, causes reorganization of several tight junctional proteins, including ZO-1, JAM-1, occludin, claudin-1, and claudin4, and results in increased permeability, or a "leaky gut." Intestinal barrier dysfunction has been proposed to be a major mechanism of disease pathogenesis in IBD, and may possibly even represent the primary defect. Under normal conditions, SAMP-1/Yit mice naturally develop a chronic ileitis that closely resembles human Crohn's disease. Wildtype mice that receive bone marrow chimera from SAMP1/Yit mice do not develop ileitis. However, SAMP-1/Yit mice that are reconstituted with bone marrow chimera from wildtype mice develop severe ileitis and have increased epithelial permeability, which precedes the onset of ileitis [195]. These data suggest that the primary defect in the SAMP-1/Yit mouse model of human Crohn's disease has a nonhematopoietic source and likely relates to epithelial barrier dysfunction.
One consequence of many forms of intestinal injury is the development of breaks in the epithelial barrier. These breaks are seen in infectious disease, IBD, celiac disease, and injury caused by radiation and chemotherapeutic agents. There is an orchestrated response to these breaks beginning with the rapid migration of epithelial cells shouldering the wound to

cover the defect. Epithelial cells elongate and cover the broad areas of denuded mucosal surface (see Chapter 8).
Epithelial cells and antigen presentation Absorptive intestinal epithelial cells can also function as antigen-presenting cells. Epithelial cells of the small intestine constitutively express MHC class II molecules, possibly as a consequence of the intraepithelial lymphocyte secretion of IFN- [196]. Colonic epithelial cells do not normally express measurable levels of MHC class II molecules, except in the setting of inflammation, presumably in response to local cytokine production [197]. In vitro studies of intestinal epithelial cell function show that they take up, process, and present soluble antigens to CD4+ T cells in the context of MHC class II molecules [198]. Although soluble antigens can be taken up apically and basolaterally, MHC class II molecules primarily segregate in the basolateral region, where antigen presentation to antigen-specific, MHC class IIrestricted T cells occurs. There is evidence that, under normal conditions, intestinal epithelial cells take up, process, and present soluble antigens from the lumen in vivo. The implications of these studies are that intestinal epithelial cells may augment or modify afferent pathways that normally result from antigenic events within Peyer patches. Despite in vivo evidence for functional class II MHC expression, intestinal epithelial cells seem to preferentially engage and stimulate CD8+ cells that exhibit suppressor activity, an activity that may contribute to the suppressor tone of the intestine [199,200].
Epithelial cell gene expression In the presence of inflammation, epithelial cells express a series of genes that are not expressed in the absence of inflammation, including genes coding for COX-2 [166,201], iNOS [174,202], and IL-8 [143]. An immunohistochemical study of the human colon revealed expression of iNOS in epithelial cells from areas of inflammation in ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, and diverticulitis, but not in epithelial cells from uninflamed areas of the same surgical resections [174]. In parallel studies of the cellular distribution of iNOS and COX-2 in ulcerative colitis resections, both of these proteins were expressed in exactly the same populations of epithelial cells in areas of inflammation [166]. This colocalization suggests a common regulatory mechanism for the expression of these genes. The genes for IL-8, iNOS, and COX-2 each have an NF-B site in their promoters. NF-B is an important transcription factor in the regulation of the synthesis of numerous inflammation-related proteins (e.g., TNF-, IL-1, TLR-2, ICAM-1, E-selectin, IL-8, iNOS, and COX-2) [203].
NF-B is a heterodimer that consists of p50 and p65 subunits. In unstimulated cells, NF-B is bound to IB-, which is found in the cytoplasm. When cells are stimulated, IB- is phosphorylated and degraded, and NF-B is released. The

156

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

release of NF-B from IB- allows NF-B to enter the nucleus, where it binds to the promoter regions of target genes. NF-B is activated by proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF- and IL-1), oxidants, phorbol esters, plateletactivating factor, and lipopolysaccharide. The importance of NF-B in the response to infection is demonstrated by the finding that mice lacking the p50 subunit of NF-B are unable to clear Listeria species and other organisms effectively [204]. However, given its many functions in regulating the immune response, cell cycle, and cell death, it is unclear whether NF-B has potential as a therapeutic target for inflammatory disease [205]. Drug-induced inhibition of NF-B could lead to serious detrimental effects on normal cellular function and response.
Activation of NF-B results in the parallel stimulation of a number of important genes involved in the innate and adaptive inflammatory responses. It is this parallel stimulation that probably accounts for the coexpression of iNOS and COX-2 in the same population of epithelial cells in ulcerative colitis. The presence of NF-B response elements in the genes for E-selectin, ICAM-1, IL-8, and TNF- allows for the coordinated expression of a series of proteins involved in the adhesion of neutrophils to the endothelium, the migration of neutrophils from the vascular space into gastrointestinal tissue, and the activation of those neutrophils. IL-1, TNF-, and NF-B are involved in a cycle of activation that results in amplification of the inflammatory response. IL-1 and TNF- both activate NF-B; in turn, the synthesis of IL-1 and TNF- is promoted by the binding of NF-B to response elements in their promoters. This positive regulatory cycle amplifies and perpetuates the inflammatory response.
Epithelial cells and toll-like receptors Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are members of the pattern-recognition receptor family and are important components of the innate immune system of the gastrointestinal tract [206]. TLRs recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), which are highly conserved and found on a broad spectrum of microorganisms, but not expressed by host cells. On activation, TLRs initiate a signaling cascade that results in the induction of several genes involved in the innate immune response to infection, including cytokines and chemokines, as well as molecules involved in antigen presentation and costimulatory molecules. TLRs are therefore a frontline mechanism of host defense and can result in rapid detection of a wide variety of microorganisms.
TLRs are sometimes expressed on the surface of intestinal epithelial cells. However, as the lumen is full of commensal bacteria, TLRs must possess a mechanism for tolerance to the PAMPs expressed by the nonpathogenic resident bacteria in the lumen, while also maintaining the capacity to mount an effective immune response against any invasive microorganisms. As a result, intestinal epithelial cells down-regulate surface expression of TLR2 and TLR4, which recognize bacterial

lipoproteins (e.g., peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharide). TLR2 and TLR4 are most commonly found intracellularly or on the basolateral surface of the intestinal epithelial cell, thereby effectively limiting their exposure to PAMP-expressing commensal bacteria that reside in the lumen [207­210]. Crypt epithelial cells express TLR2 and TLR4, while mature intestinal epithelial cells express TLR3 [211]. Because crypt epithelial cells are protected by their location from exposure to lumenal bacteria and their PAMPs, surface expression of TLR2 and TLR4 poses a minimal risk to the host defense. Similarly, expression of TLR3 on exposed intestinal epithelial cells does not lead to overstimulation of the innate immune system because TLR3 binds double-stranded RNA from viruses, which are not found in the lumen under normal conditions. A second mechanism for regulating TLR activation is the expression of high levels of TLR antagonists. These TLR-attenuating factors (TOLLIP, PPAR-, SIGIRR) block TLR signaling by interacting with components of the signaling cascade [212]. Through these regulatory mechanisms, TLRs maintain a careful balance between achieving tolerance for the resident microflora of the gut and rapidly detecting invasive pathogens and mounting immune responses against their presence in the epithelium and lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract.
Because of their pivotal role in maintaining gut homeostasis, TLRs have been implicated in several gastrointestinal diseases. The cause of IBD is unknown; however, it is believed to result from a dysregulated immune response to lumenal antigens in a genetically susceptible host. Loss of tolerance to the commensal microflora in genetically susceptible hosts, possibly as a result of abnormalities in the TLR/TLR antagonist system, may be the primary defect that leads to the development of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis [213]. Patients with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis express elevated levels of TLR4 in their colons [214], and polymorphisms in the TLR4 gene have been associated with the development of both diseases [215,216]. In addition, PPAR- expression by intestinal epithelial cells is decreased in patients with ulcerative colitis [217]. IL-2-deficient mice, which develop colitis similar to human ulcerative colitis, show increased TLR2 responsiveness to colonic bacteria [218]. These observations suggest that abnormalities in the expression of TLRs or their antagonists may be central to the development of IBD. TLRs may also play a role in H. pyloriinduced gastritis, as well as gastrointestinal bacterial, viral, and parasitic infections.
Mast cells Mast cells are inflammatory cells with large granules containing preformed mediators of inflammation (e.g., histamine and 5-HT). In response to stimulation, mast cells release these granules and produce newly formed non-granule-associated mediators (e.g., NO, PGD2, platelet-activating factor, and leukotrienes). In the healthy gastrointestinal

157

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

tract, mast cells are found in the lamina propria, submucosa, and muscle layers, as well as on the serosal surface [219]. More numerous and activated mast cells have been observed in the gastrointestinal mucosa of patients with helminthic infections, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, gastritis, and celiac sprue.
Mast cells can be activated by a variety of factors, but IgEdependent antigen activation is the most common. Antigenspecific IgE binds to receptors on the surface of the mast cell through its Fc component. Exposure of the mast cell to an appropriate antigen results in cross-linking of the IgE molecules, which in turn results in activation of the mast cell. IgE-mediated mast cell activation is an effective defense mechanism against intestinal worms and other parasites. Mast cell activation results in the release of substances (e.g., histamine, PGD2, and peptidyl leukotrienes) that promote intestinal motility and increase electrolyte and water secretion. These physiological responses allow the infected host to wash the parasites out of the digestive tract. IgE-mediated mast cell activation is also important in allergic disorders. Pollen cross-links IgE molecules on mast cells in the nasal mucosa, causing allergic rhinitis. Food antigens activate mast cells in the gastrointestinal tract by similar mechanisms. There would appear to be no evolutionary advantage to being able to mount an allergic response to gut parasites that would clear them from the gastrointestinal tract. It may be that food allergies represent the maladaptation of an inflammatory response designed to deal with intestinal parasites.
In addition to IgE-dependent antigen activation, mast cells also can be activated by the calcium ionophore A23187 and by the complement components C3a and C5a. Some subpopulations can be activated by substance P, which is a neurotransmitter that can be released by neural activation in the gastrointestinal tract. Substance P activation is of particular interest because it could provide a mechanism for the induction of intestinal inflammation by neural activation. There are both functional and anatomical interactions between mast cells and the enteric nervous system. In the rat, infection with the intestinal nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis results in mast cell hyperplasia. Immunohistochemical studies reveal that most of these mast cells are juxtaposed to enteric nerves. There are bidirectional interactions between nerves and mast cells. Neurotransmitters, particularly substance P, cause mast cell degranulation, and mast cells in turn release VIP, which can act as a neurotransmitter.
Mast cells are involved in the mediation of enhanced Cl- secretion after antigen exposure. Evidence for this functional relationship comes from studies of the mast cell-deficient mouse (W-WV). Antigen challenge in sensitized W-WV mice results in a 70% decrease in Cl- secretion in comparison with antigen challenge in wild-type littermates [220]. The Cl- secretion measured in mast cell-deficient mice (30% of that in wild-type mice) could be inhibited with NSAIDs, suggest-

ing that the prostaglandins that induce Cl- secretion are not of mast cell origin.
Immune-mediated gastrointestinal and liver diseases
A well-functioning immune system is essential to gastrointestinal health. Abnormalities in the mucosal immune system underlie a broad range of gastrointestinal diseases. This section provides a survey of the gastrointestinal, liver, and pancreatic diseases in which immunological abnormalities are known to contribute to disease pathogenesis.
Eosinophilic esophagitis Eosinophilic esophagitis is characterized by the abnormal presence of eosinophils in the esophagus [221]. The symptoms of this disease mimic those of gastroesophageal reflux diseases (GERD) and include difficulty eating, failure to thrive, vomiting, epigastric or chest pain, dysphagia, and food impaction. Patients with eosinophilic esophagitis have normal pH studies but show an increased number of eosinophils in the mucosa of the esophagus, accompanied by epithelial hyperplasia and an increased incidence of atopic disease. The underlying cause of the disease remains unclear but may involve allergies, in the form of food allergies, aeroallergens, or skin sensitization. The disease appears to involve Th2mediated immune responses generated from eosinophils or mast cells. Animal models of eosiniphilic esophagitis can be created through exposure to aeroallergens or through overexposure to Th2 cytokines, such as IL-5 and IL-13 [222,223]. These studies point to a connection between eosinophilic inflammation in the respiratory tract and esophagus. In support of this concept, patients with eosinophilic esophagitis report seasonal variations in their symptoms, and preliminary studies have documented an association between seasonal changes and the number of eosinophils in the esophagus [224,225]. Although there is no consensus on standard therapy for eosinophilic esophagitis, elemental diets and glucocorticoids have shown efficacy in clinical trials [226], and anti-IL-5 therapy has shown strong potential in preclinical and early clinical studies [227,228]. A strong familial association suggests a genetic predisposition. Linkage studies have identified an association with the gene encoding eotaxin-3 among patients with eosinophilic esophagitis [229]. Eotaxin3 is a chemokine for cells that express the eotaxin receptor CCR3+; it is overexpressed by hyperplastic epithelial cells in the esophagus of patients with eosinophilic esophagitis, most likely in response to IL-13 (see Chapter 33).
Autoimmune gastritis Autoimmune gastritis is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastric corpus in which the heterodimeric H+,K+-ATPase proton pump found on gastric parietal cells acts as an

158

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

autoantigen. Although T cells specific for both the  subunit and the  subunit of the H+,K+-ATPase are found within the gastric mucosa during autoimmune gastritis, autoreactivity to the  subunit is essential to the initiation of disease. Mouse models have demonstrated that deletion of the  subunit prevents gastritis, whereas deletion of the  subunit has little effect on the onset of disease. Autoimmune gastritis represents one of the few autoimmune diseases in which the specific autoantigen has been clearly defined.
Autoimmune gastritis is a Th1-mediated disease that involves a massive infiltration of pathogenic CD4+ T cells into the gastric mucosa, with an early increase in IFN- production, loss of parietal cells, and a subsequent loss of zymogenic cells due to disruptions in normal parietal cell development. Lymphocyte homing to the corpus mucosa is dependent on the specific interaction between 47 and MAdCAM-1. The subset of CD4+ T cells that is responsible for disease pathogenesis appears to be effector cells, as adoptive transfer experiments have shown that CD4+CD25­ T cells can cause autoimmune gastritis whereas CD4+CD25+ T cells (a regulatory phenotype) suppress the pathogenic effects, possibly by inhibiting IL-2 production or CTLA-4 expression. During autoimmune gastritis, natural Treg cells (CD4+CD25+ FOXP3+) are activated in a nonspecific manner by MHC class II molecules and by cytokines secreted from other activated effector cells. On activation, these natural Treg cells inhibit the activation of naïve T cells to the Th1 phenotype, thereby suppressing the resulting inflammatory response.
Autoimmune gastritis commonly occurs in association with other autoimmune or infectious diseases. Type I diabetes, autoimmune thyroid disease, and autoimmune gastritis often occur concomitantly in patients and are together known as autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome (APS) type 3. One-third of patients with autoimmune gastritis also have thyroid disease. In genetically susceptible individuals, H. pylori infection can either cause or aggravate autoimmune gastritis through a mechanism involving molecular mimicry. Activated CD4+ T cells from patients infected with H. pylori may cross-recognize the epitopes of H. pylori proteins and the autoantigenic H+,K+-ATPase, resulting in the generation of autoantibodies against gastric H+,K+-ATPase. This H. pyloriassociated autoimmune gastritis occurs in 20%­30% of patients infected with the bacteria (see Chapter 42).
Peptic ulcer disease and Helicobacter pylori About 50% of the world's population is infected with the stomach bacteria H. pylori. Most of these cases are asymptomatic; however, infection can lead to chronic gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, and an elevated risk of developing gastric cancer. H. pylori is a unique bacterium that achieves its pathogenic effects by eliciting an inefficient immune response in the host that fails to eradicate the bacteria from the gut and which causes inflammation and gastric tissue damage [230]. This orchestrated equilibrium of the host

immune response is achieved through several mechanisms: inhibition of nitric oxide production and phagocytosis by macrophages; production of the VacA virulence factor that interferes with antigen presentation and inhibits T-cell activation; and activation of Tregs that partially inhibit Th1 immune responses against the bacteria.
Infection with H. pylori stimulates both innate and adaptive immune responses within the gastric mucosa, as well as a specific humoral response. Infection is characterized by a Th1-polarized gastric immune response. Contact between the bacterium and the gastric epithelium leads to production of IL-8 through a mechanism involving injection of CagA into the epithelial cytosol [231]. In addition, interactions between the bacterium and TLRs on the surface of epithelial cells initiate signaling pathways that lead to epithelial secretion of a variety of proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines. IL-8 acts as a chemokine for recruitment and activation of polymorphonuclear cells into the gastric mucosa. Antigen-presenting cells produce additional Th1 polarizing cytokines (i.e., IL-6, IL-1, TNF-, and IL-12), which leads to recruitment and activation of CD4+ lymphocytes within the gastric mucosa that secrete IFN-, but not IL-4 and IL-5, consistent with a Th1 phenotype. Individuals who are positive for H. pylori infection develop specific antibodies against the bacterium, primarily in the form of IgG and IgA. Antibodies against membrane proteins, flagellin, urease, lipopolysaccharide, and H. pylori adhesion A are increased in infected patients, regardless of whether or not they display symptoms [232,233]. In addition, 20%­30% of patients infected with H. pylori also develop autoantibodies against the H+,K+ATPase proton pump on the surface of gastric parietal cells, resulting in chronic autoimmune gastritis (see Chapter 40).
Inflammatory bowel disease Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) includes Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, both of which are chronic relapsing and remitting inflammatory disorders of the gut. Although the exact cause remains unclear, IBD is believed to develop as the result of an overly aggressive adaptive mucosal immune response to intralumenal bacteria in a genetically susceptible host [234]. Chronic inflammation results from the production of proinflammatory cytokines and the recruitment and activation of effector lamina propria lymphocytes. The important role of cytokine mediators in promoting IBD pathogenesis is most clearly demonstrated by the therapeutic success of monoclonal antibodies targeting the proinflammatory cytokine TNF-. In clinical trials, anti-TNF antibody therapy induced a clinical response in 63% of patients with refractory Crohn's disease and 69% of patients with refractory ulcerative colitis [156,157]. Other mechanisms that may contribute to the chronic inflammation seen in IBD include a failure of regulatory T cells to suppress the initiated immune responses and the resistance of effector T cells to undergo apoptosis.

159

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Traditionally, Crohn's disease has been described as a Th1mediated immune disease marked by increased production of TNF-, IL-1, IL-12, and IL-18, whereas ulcerative colitis displayed cytokine profiles more representative of a Th2mediated disease (i.e., IL-4 and IL-5 production). However, this Th1/Th2 paradigm has been challenged by evidence that individual cytokines from both pathways may have distinct effects during the acute and chronic phases of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis; the Th1/Th2 classification no longer appear to be mutually exclusive in the case of IBD [235].
In contrast to the overly aggressive adaptive immune responses associated with the chronic stages of IBD, the acute phase of disease is marked by defects in innate immunity. A focus on the role of innate immunity in IBD pathogenesis developed in response to the identification of CARD15 as the first susceptibility gene for Crohn's disease [236,237]. CARD15 encodes the NOD2 gene product, an intracellular protein expressed by intestinal mucosal cells, including epithelial cells, which recognizes components of the bacterial cell wall and initiates a signaling cascade that activates NF-B and the innate immune system. The commensal bacteria play an important role in promoting IBD pathogenesis, and loss of tolerance has been proposed as a possible underlying cause for initiation of the disease. In support of this hypothesis, most animal models of IBD do not develop intestinal inflammation when raised under germ-free conditions, and probiotic bacteria taken as dietary supplements are effective therapy for patients with ulcerative colitis [238­243]. The intestinal epithelium plays an active role in maintaining innate immunity. It serves as a protective barrier between intestinal pathogens, the benign commensal flora, and the mucosal compartments. The epithelium also plays a role in antigen presentation and secretes cytokines and chemokines in response to bacterial interaction. Epithelial barrier dysfunction could represent a primary defect that leads to loss of tolerance in patients with IBD.
The prevailing model of the immunopathogenesis of IBD suggests that an initiating factor, most likely an invasive bacteria or a component of the commensal flora, breaches the epithelial barrier and triggers a defective innate immune response in a genetically susceptible host. T lymphocytes are then recruited into the lamina propria and mount a dysregulated adaptive immune response against the antigen, which is marked by overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines, resulting in chronic intestinal inflammation and fibrosis (see Chapter 57).
Celiac disease Celiac disease is an intestinal inflammatory disorder that occurs in genetically susceptible individuals in response to dietary intake of wheat, rye, and barley [244]. Gluten found in wheat contains two types of disease-activating proteins ­ gliadins and glutenins. Similarly, hordeins found in barley

and secalins found in rye can also activate celiac disease. Gluten-related peptides are insufficiently digested by gastric, pancreatic, and brush border enzymes, resulting in the presence of large gluten-related peptides rich in proline and glutamine within the lumen of the small intestine. Histologically, manifestations of celiac disease are villous atrophy and crypt hyperplasia within the small intestine. The presentation of gluten-related antigens to CD4+ lamina propria lymphocytes initiates a Th1-mediated immune response and the formation of gluten-reactive activated T cells within the mucosa. Notably, the immune response is characterized by the expression of IFN- and the transcription factor TBET, which polarizes immune responses towards a Th1 phenotype but no subsequent increase in expression of IL-12 or STAT4, as occurs in other intestinal inflammatory diseases [245]. Patients with celiac disease characteristically display an elevated number of intraepithelial lymphocytes, which function more like natural killer cells than typical antigen-specific T cells. This functional change is mediated through an upregulation of IL-15 expression by intestinal epithelial cells.
Genetic susceptibility plays an important role in the immunopathogenesis of celiac disease. Celiac disease represents a complex polygenic trait that involves multiple susceptibility genes. A strong association has been described with specific MHC class II alleles that are found at the HLA-DQ locus. In fact, almost all patients with celiac disease have one of two HLA-DQ alleles that encode specific HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 heterodimers, both of which are common in Caucasians. The HLA-DQ2 heterodimer that confers susceptibility occurs in 90%­95% of patients with celiac disease and is composed of the -chain of the MHC class II molecule encoded by either HLA-DQB1*0201 or 0202, in association with the -chain encoded by HLA-DQA1*05. The remaining 5%­10% of patients have the HLA-DQ8 heterodimer, which is composed of the -chain encoded by HLA-DQB1*0302 in association with the -chain encoded by HLA-DQA1*03 [246,247]. The HLA-DQ2 and -DQ8 heterodimers of the MHC class II complex have unique properties that augment their ability to bind and process gluten-related proteins. The architecture of their peptide-binding groove contains pockets that have an affinity for binding negatively charged molecules [248]. In celiac patients, neutrally charged gluten is deamidated and converted into glutamic acid by the intestinal mucosal enzyme TGase [249,250]. The negatively charged proline-rich deamidated gluten peptides then bind with high affinity to the HLA-DQ2 and -DQ8 heterodimers within the MHC class II complex, leading to the generation of gluten-reactive CD4+ T cells within the lamina propria (see Chapter 50).
Autoimmune pancreatitis Autoimmune pancreatitis is an extremely rare autoimmune disorder of unknown incidence and prevalence [251]. The hallmarks of autoimmune pancreatitis are lymphoplasma-

160

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

cytic infiltration around the pancreatic ducts and granulocytic epithelial lesions in the duct epithelium. Because of these features the condition is also called duct-destructive chronic pancreatitis. The disease often occurs in association with other autoimmune diseases, such as Sjögren syndrome, variants of primary sclerosing cholangitis, IBD, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and lupus erythematosus, suggesting that this unique form of chronic pancreatitis is also an autoimmune disease. The location of the inflammatory infiltrate suggests that the target antigen is likely contained within the duct epithelium. The association of autoimmune pancreatitis with other autoimmune diseases suggests the potential for a common antigen. Several autoantibodies present in other autoimmune diseases have been detected in patients with autoimmune pancreatitis, including antibodies targeting lactoferrin, carbonic anhydrase type II, rheumatoid factors, and antinuclear antibodies. The inflammatory response is mediated by T cells including both CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes; the CD4+ lymphocytes are skewed towards a Th1 phenotype [252,253]. As with other autoimmune diseases, HLA haplotypes have been reported in association with autoimmune pancreatitis, most notably DRB1*0405-DQB1*0401 [254]. Relatively little information is known regarding the environmental and immunological conditions that trigger disease (see Chapter 69).
Autoimmune liver diseases The autoimmune liver diseases include three separate disease processes: autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cholangitis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis. These diseases often occur in association with one another and share common immunopathogenic features related to autoimmunity.
Autoimmune hepatitis Autoimmune hepatitis is characterized by an accumulation of oligoclonal autoreactive T cells in the liver, and hepatitis in the periportal and periseptal interface [255]. Nearly 90% of patients with type I autoimmune hepatitis have pathogenic autoantibodies targeting the asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGR), which is expressed exclusively on hepatocytes. Other possible antigens include liver cytosolic antigen and soluble liver antigen. Recognition of these self-antigens leads to the generation of autoreactive CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes, and the development of chronic hepatitis in the form of antibody-dependent cell-mediated toxicity and liver damage. In type II autoimmune hepatitis, the self-antigen is believed to be the intracellular protein liver­kidney microsomal antibody type 1 (LKM-1, cytochrome P450 [CYP2D6]), which is expressed on the surface of hepatocytes. Patients with autoimmune hepatitis also present with anti-nuclear autoantibodies (ANA) and anti-smooth muscle autoantibodies (SMA). The dominant subset of T cells in autoimmune hepatitis express the V-chain T-cell receptor, indicating that the autoreactive T cells descend from a common lineage

[256]. Most of the T cells are +, but the number of  + T cells in the peripheral blood is increased compared with other autoimmune liver diseases [257]. The apoptotic pathway is also altered in autoimmune hepatitis. Activated lymphocytes from patients with autoimmune hepatitis express elevated levels of CD95, which is a marker for deletion, suggesting a defect in the apoptosis pathway [258]. Additional evidence for such a defect is seen in studies showing that activated lymphocytes from patients with autoimmune hepatitis fail to down-regulate expression of the antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 [259]. Finally, molecular mimicry may also be involved through cross-reactivity between specific viral proteins, such as hepatitis C virus core 178­187, and the self-antigens CYP2D6 or CYP2A7, resulting in hepatitis C virus-induced autoreactive CD8+ T cells [260].
The prevailing model of autoimmune hepatitis immunopathogenesis proposes that an initiating event, most likely some viral infection, leads to the activation of CD8+ lymphocytes and cell-mediated toxicity. In an HLA genetically susceptible host, antigenic CYP2D6, CYP2A7, and ASGR are released and phagocytosed by macrophages and other antigen-presenting cells. The antigens are then presented to CD4+ T cells, which undergo clonal expansion. Defects in the apoptotic pathway contribute to the presence of even more T-cell clones in hepatic tissues, which produce proinflammatory cytokines that mediate autoantibody production from B cells. The result of this inflammatory process is hepatocyte cytolysis, the formation of fibrosis, and eventually end-stage liver disease (see Chapter 84).
Primary sclerosing cholangitis Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary duct [261]. About 75% of patients with PSC also have IBD, primarily in the form of ulcerative colitis. Significant attention has been given to the study of polymorphic HLA genes that may confer genetic susceptibility; however, conflicting results have been reported, probably because of heterogeneity in the study populations. Some associations have been reported for the MHC class I chain-related (MIC) genes [262]. Because of the strong association between PSC and ulcerative colitis, it has been proposed that the self-antigen responsible for PSC may be a component of the gut microflora. Increased permeability of the gut due to ulcerative colitis could allow commensal bacteria to translocate across the intestinal epithelial barrier, enter the portal circulation, and migrate to the biliary ducts. In support of this theory, a study of liver explants from patients with PSC and primary biliary cholangitis found that bacteria could be cultured from 21 of 36 explants from patients with PSC, but 0 of 14 explants from patients with primary biliary cholangitis [263]. The primary autoantibody in PSC is the IgG class of p-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Potential epitopes for this autoantibody include catalase, which is an

161

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

antioxidant enzyme found in hepatocytes and biliary epithelial cells [264], the neutrophil protein bactericidal/ permeability-increasing (BPI) protein [261], or biliary epithelial cells themselves [265].
Similar to autoimmune hepatitis, the hepatic T-cell repertoire in PSC is mostly composed of + cells that express the V3-chain; levels of  + T cells are also increased. CD4+ T cells predominate in the portal tract, whereas CD8+ cells are primarily found at sites of necrosis. Macrophages also accumulate in the sinusoidal and perisinusoidal spaces. It has been postulated that the memory T cells found in the liver are originally activated in the gut as part of the immune response generated by IBD [266]. Autoreactive T cells are polarized towards the Th1 phenotype and predominantly produce the proinflammatory cytokine TNF-.
A model for PSC immunopathogenesis proposes that the disease is triggered by the presence of foreign antigen, possibly bacteria secondary to intestinal inflammation, within the biliary tract. Memory T cells from the gut bind to biliary epithelial cells and proliferate, leading to the increased expression of TNF- and other proinflammatory cytokines. The cytokines stimulate B cells to secrete immunoglobulins, including autoantibodies against biliary epithelial cells. The resulting inflammation leads to fibrosis formation in concentric rings around the biliary ducts, ischemia, atrophy, cholestasis, and eventually biliary cirrhosis (see Chapter 75).
Primary biliary cirrhosis Primary biliary cirrhosis is an autoimmune disease characterized by damage to the biliary epithelial cells that line the intrahepatic duct, chronic cholestasis, and fibrosis that leads to cirrhosis [267,268]. Evidence from familial case reports and a study of monozygotic twins suggest a strong genetic component to primary biliary cirrhosis [269,270]; however, only weak associations with particular genes have been identified. It is clear that the environment also plays a role in triggering the onset of disease. More than 95% of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis possess antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) that target the E2 component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC-E2). Biliary epithelial cells and salivary epithelial cells express PDC, or PDC-like epitopes that cross-react with PDC, on their apical surface and are the main target cells of the disease. PDC-E2-reactive Tcell subsets can be found in the liver and peripheral blood of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
Under normal conditions, PDC is located on the inner surface of the inner mitochondrial membrane, and is therefore separated from the extracellular immune system by three separate membranes. It is unclear how the antigen is capable of generating immune responses within this context. One theory suggests that mitochondria undergo apoptosis and release PDC into the cytoplasm, making PDC freely available in the cytoplasm until the cell completes its apoptotic cycle and it is released into the tissue. It is interesting to note that

primary biliary cirrhosis is limited to the biliary tissues even though PDC is widely distributed throughout the body. Although several questions regarding the immunopathogenesis of primary biliary cirrhosis still remain, it does appear that the hallmark of the disease is a loss of tolerance to PDC-E2 by T cells, which results in proliferation of reactive T-cell and B-cell clones, production of proinflammatory cytokines, and subsequent secretion of autoantibodies (see Chapter 85).
References
1. Owen RL, Jones AL. Epithelial cell specialization within human Peyer's patches: an ultrastructural study of intestinal lymphoid follicles. Gastroenterology 1974;66:189.
2. Mestecky J, McGhee JR. Immunoglobulin A (IgA): molecular and cellular interactions involved in IgA biosynthesis and immune response. Adv Immunol 1987;40:153.
3. Underdown BJ, Schiff JM. Immunoglobulin A: strategic defense initiative at the mucosal surface. Annu Rev Immunol 1986;4:389.
4. Kawanishi H, Saltzman L, Strober W. Mechanisms regulating IgA class-specific immunoglobulin production in murine gut-associated lymphoid tissues. II. Terminal differentiation of postswitch sIgAbearing Peyer's patch B cells. J Exp Med 1983;158:649.
5. Kawanishi H, Saltzman LE, Strober W. Mechanisms regulating IgA class-specific immunoglobulin production in murine gut-associated lymphoid tissues. I. T cells derived from Peyer's patches that switch sIgM B cells to sIgA B cells in vitro. J Exp Med 1983;157:433.
6. Niess JH, Brand S, Gu X, et al. CX3CR1-mediated dendritic cell access to the intestinal lumen and bacterial clearance. Science 2005;307:254.
7. McDermott MR, Bienenstock J. Evidence for a common mucosal immunologic system. I. Migration of B immunoblasts into intestinal, respiratory, and genital tissues. J Immunol 1979;122:1892.
8. Madri JA, Graesser D. Cell migration in the immune system: the evolving inter-related roles of adhesion molecules and proteinases. Dev Immunol 2000;7:103.
9. Weiss A. Structure and function of the T cell antigen receptor. J Clin Invest 1990;86:1015.
10. Garboczi DN, Ghosh P, Utz U, et al. Structure of the complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide and HLA-A2. Nature 1996;384:134.
11. Holtmeier W, Kabelitz D. Gammadelta T cells link innate and adaptive immune responses. Chem Immunol Allergy 2005;86:151.
12. Kabelitz D, Marischen L, Oberg HH, et al. Epithelial defence by gamma delta T cells. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2005;137:73.
13. Exley M, Terhorst C, Wileman T. Structure, assembly and intracellular transport of the T cell receptor for antigen. Semin Immunol 1991;3:283.
14. Julius M, Maroun CR, Haughn L. Distinct roles for CD4 and CD8 as co-receptors in antigen receptor signalling. Immunol Today 1993;14:177.
15. Szabo SJ, Kim ST, Costa GL, et al. A novel transcription factor, Tbet, directs Th1 lineage commitment. Cell 2000;100:655.
16. Weaver CT, Harrington LE, Mangan PR, et al. Th17: an effector CD4 T cell lineage with regulatory T cell ties. Immunity 2006;24:677.
17. Sakaguchi S. Naturally arising Foxp3-expressing CD25+CD4+ regulatory T cells in immunological tolerance to self and non-self. Nat Immunol 2005;6:345.
18. Fontenot JD, Rudensky AY. A well adapted regulatory contrivance: regulatory T cell development and the forkhead family transcription factor Foxp3. Nat Immunol 2005;6:331.
19. Bluestone JA, Abbas AK. Natural versus adaptive regulatory T cells. Nat Rev Immunol 2003;3:253.

162

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

20. McHugh RS, Shevach EM. Cutting edge: depletion of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells is necessary, but not sufficient, for induction of organ-specific autoimmune disease. J Immunol 2002;168:5979.
21. Maul J, Loddenkemper C, Mundt P, et al. Peripheral and intestinal regulatory CD4+ CD25(high) T cells in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 2005;128:1868.
22. Maloy KJ, Salaun L, Cahill R, et al. CD4+CD25+ T(R) cells suppress innate immune pathology through cytokine-dependent mechanisms. J Exp Med 2003;197:111.
23. Bjorkman PJ, Saper MA, Samraoui B, et al. The foreign antigen binding site and T cell recognition regions of class I histocompatibility antigens. Nature 1987;329:512.
24. Bjorkman PJ, Saper MA, Samraoui B, et al. Structure of the human class I histocompatibility antigen, HLA-A2. Nature 1987; 329:506.
25. Reth M, Hombach J, Wienands J, et al. The B-cell antigen receptor complex. Immunol Today 1991;12:196.
26. Harnett MM, Katz E, Ford CA. Differential signalling during B-cell maturation. Immunol Lett 2005;98:33.
27. Poe JC, Hasegawa M, Tedder TF. CD19, CD21, and CD22: multifaceted response regulators of B lymphocyte signal transduction. Int Rev Immunol 2001;20:739.
28. Wortis HH, Berland R. Cutting edge commentary: origins of B-1 cells. J Immunol 2001;166:2163.
29. Haughton G, Arnold LW, Whitmore AC, Clarke SH. B-1 cells are made, not born. Immunol Today 1993;14:84; discussion 87.
30. Cooper MD. Current concepts. B lymphocytes. Normal development and function. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1452.
31. O'Connor GM, Hart OM, Gardiner CM. Putting the natural killer cell in its place. Immunology 2006;117:1.
32. Panja A, Mayer L. Antigen presentation in the intestine. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol 1996;10:407.
33. Iwasaki A, Kelsall BL. Unique functions of CD11b+, CD8 alpha+, and double-negative Peyer's patch dendritic cells. J Immunol 2001;166:4884.
34. Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R. Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive immune responses. Nat Immunol 2004;5:987.
35. Rescigno M, Urbano M, Valzasina B, et al. Dendritic cells express tight junction proteins and penetrate gut epithelial monolayers to sample bacteria. Nat Immunol 2001;2:361.
36. Annacker O, Coombes JL, Malmstrom V, et al. Essential role for CD103 in the T cell-mediated regulation of experimental colitis. J Exp Med 2005;202:1051.
37. Johansson-Lindbom B, Svensson M, Pabst O, et al. Functional specialization of gut CD103+ dendritic cells in the regulation of tissue-selective T cell homing. J Exp Med 2005;202:1063.
38. Appelberg R. Neutrophils and intracellular pathogens: beyond phagocytosis and killing. Trends Microbiol 2007;15:87.
39. Fialkow L, Wang Y, Downey GP. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species as signaling molecules regulating neutrophil function. Free Radic Biol Med 2007;42:153.
40. Yamamoto-Furusho JK, Korzenik JR. Crohn's disease: innate immunodeficiency? World J Gastroenterol 2006;12:6751.
41. Jaeschke H, Hasegawa T. Role of neutrophils in acute inflammatory liver injury. Liver Int 2006;26:912.
42. Mach J, Hshieh T, Hsieh D, et al. Development of intestinal M cells. Immunol Rev 2005;206:177.
43. Neutra MR, Frey A, Kraehenbuhl JP. Epithelial M cells: gateways for mucosal infection and immunization. Cell 1996;86:345.
44. Taylor RT, Lugering A, Newell KA, Williams IR. Intestinal cryptopatch formation in mice requires lymphotoxin alpha and the lymphotoxin beta receptor. J Immunol 2004;173:7183.
45. Saito H, Kanamori Y, Takemori T, et al. Generation of intestinal T cells from progenitors residing in gut cryptopatches. Science 1998;280:275.
46. Lorenz RG, Newberry RD. Isolated lymphoid follicles can function as sites for induction of mucosal immune responses. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1029:44.

47. Lorenz RG, Chaplin DD, McDonald KG, et al. Isolated lymphoid follicle formation is inducible and dependent upon lymphotoxinsufficient B lymphocytes, lymphotoxin beta receptor, and TNF- receptor I function. J Immunol 2003;170:5475.
48. Neutra MR, Mantis NJ, Kraehenbuhl JP. Collaboration of epithelial cells with organized mucosal lymphoid tissues. Nat Immunol 2001;2:1004.
49. Farstad IN, Norstein J, Brandtzaeg P. Phenotypes of B and T cells in human intestinal and mesenteric lymph. Gastroenterology 1997;112:163.
50. Rimoldi M, Chieppa M, Salucci V, et al. Intestinal immune homeostasis is regulated by the crosstalk between epithelial cells and dendritic cells. Nat Immunol 2005;6:507.
51. Dunkley ML, Husband AJ. Distribution and functional characteristics of antigen-specific helper T cells arising after Peyer's patch immunization. Immunology 1987;61:475.
52. Bienenstock J, McDermott M, Befus D, O'Neill M. A common mucosal immunologic system involving the bronchus, breast and bowel. Adv Exp Med Biol 1978;107:53.
53. Cebra JJ, Komisar JL, Schweitzer PA. CH isotype `switching' during normal B-lymphocyte development. Annu Rev Immunol 1984;2:493.
54. McGhee JR, Mestecky J, Dertzbaugh MT, et al. The mucosal immune system: from fundamental concepts to vaccine development. Vaccine 1992;10:75.
55. Schieferdecker HL, Ullrich R, Hirseland H, Zeitz M. T cell differentiation antigens on lymphocytes in the human intestinal lamina propria. J Immunol 1992;149:2816.
56. Zeitz M, Quinn TC, Graeff AS, James SP. Mucosal T cells provide helper function but do not proliferate when stimulated by specific antigen in lymphogranuloma venereum proctitis in nonhuman primates. Gastroenterology 1988;94:353.
57. Cepek KL, Shaw SK, Parker CM, et al. Adhesion between epithelial cells and T lymphocytes mediated by E-cadherin and the alpha E beta 7 integrin. Nature 1994;372:190.
58. MacDermott RP, Franklin GO, Jenkins KM, et al. Human intestinal mononuclear cells. I. Investigation of antibody-dependent, lectininduced, and spontaneous cell-mediated cytotoxic capabilities. Gastroenterology 1980;78:47.
59. MacDermott RP, Bragdon MJ, Jenkins KM, et al. Human intestinal mononuclear cells. II. Demonstration of a naturally occurring subclass of T cells which respond in the allogeneic mixed leukocyte reaction but do not effect cell-mediated lympholysis. Gastroenterology 1981;80:748.
60. MacDermott RP, Bragdon MJ, Kodner IJ, Bertovich MJ. Deficient cell-mediated cytotoxicity and hyporesponsiveness to interferon and mitogenic lectin activation by inflammatory bowel disease peripheral blood and intestinal mononuclear cells. Gastroenterology 1986;90:6.
61. Targan S, Britvan L, Kendal R, et al. Isolation of spontaneous and interferon inducible natural killer like cells from human colonic mucosa: lysis of lymphoid and autologous epithelial target cells. Clin Exp Immunol 1983;54:14.
62. Fiocchi C, Tubbs RR, Youngman KR. Human intestinal mucosal mononuclear cells exhibit lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. Gastroenterology 1985;88:625.
63. Hogan PG, Hapel AJ, Doe WF. Lymphokine-activated and natural killer cell activity in human intestinal mucosa. J Immunol 1985; 135:1731.
64. Shanahan F, Deem R, Nayersina R, et al. Human mucosal T-cell cytotoxicity. Gastroenterology 1988;94:960.
65. Muller S, Lory J, Corazza N, et al. Activated CD4+ and CD8+ cytotoxic cells are present in increased numbers in the intestinal mucosa from patients with active inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Pathol 1998;152:261.
66. Kohne G, Schneider T, Zeitz M. Special features of the intestinal lymphocytic system. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol 1996;10: 427.

163

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

67. Boirivant M, Pica R, DeMaria R, et al. Stimulated human lamina propria T cells manifest enhanced Fas-mediated apoptosis. J Clin Invest 1996;98:2616.
68. Marini M, Bamias G, Rivera-Nieves J, et al. TNF-alpha neutralization ameliorates the severity of murine Crohn's-like ileitis by abrogation of intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:8366.
69. Craig SW, Cebra JJ. Peyer's patches: an enriched source of precursors for IgA-producing immunocytes in the rabbit. J Exp Med 1971;134:188.
70. Murray PD, McKenzie DT, Swain SL, Kagnoff MF. Interleukin 5 and interleukin 4 produced by Peyer's patch T cells selectively enhance immunoglobulin A expression. J Immunol 1987;139:2669.
71. Lebman DA, Griffin PM, Cebra JJ. Relationship between expression of IgA by Peyer's patch cells and functional IgA memory cells. J Exp Med 1987;166:1405.
72. Lebman DA, Coffman RL. The effects of IL-4 and IL-5 on the IgA response by murine Peyer's patch B cell subpopulations. J Immunol 1988;141:2050.
73. Harriman GR, Kunimoto DY, Elliott JF, et al. The role of IL-5 in IgA B cell differentiation. J Immunol 1988;140:3033.
74. Beagley KW, Eldridge JH, Kiyono H, et al. Recombinant murine IL5 induces high rate IgA synthesis in cycling IgA-positive Peyer's patch B cells. J Immunol 1988;141:2035.
75. Okahashi N, Yamamoto M, Vancott JL, et al. Oral immunization of interleukin-4 (IL-4) knockout mice with a recombinant Salmonella strain or cholera toxin reveals that CD4+ Th2 cells producing IL-6 and IL-10 are associated with mucosal immunoglobulin A responses. Infect Immun 1996;64:1516.
76. VanCott JL, Staats HF, Pascual DW, et al. Regulation of mucosal and systemic antibody responses by T helper cell subsets, macrophages, and derived cytokines following oral immunization with live recombinant Salmonella. J Immunol 1996;156:1504.
77. MacDermott RP, Stenson WF. Alterations of the immune system in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. Adv Immunol 1988;42:285.
78. Brandtzaeg P, Sollid LM, Thrane PS, et al. Lymphoepithelial interactions in the mucosal immune system. Gut 1988;29:1116.
79. Brandtzaeg P, Prydz H. Direct evidence for an integrated function of J chain and secretory component in epithelial transport of immunoglobulins. Nature 1984;311:71.
80. Brandtzaeg P, Korsrud FR. Significance of different J chain profiles in human tissues: generation of IgA and IgM with binding site for secretory component is related to the J chain expressing capacity of the total local immunocyte population, including IgG and IgD producing cells, and depends on the clinical state of the tissue. Clin Exp Immunol 1984;58:709.
81. Brandtzaeg P. Role of J chain and secretory component in receptormediated glandular and hepatic transport of immunoglobulins in man. Scand J Immunol 1985;22:111.
82. Delacroix DL, Hodgson HJ, McPherson A, et al. Selective transport of polymeric immunoglobulin A in bile. Quantitative relationships of monomeric and polymeric immunoglobulin A, immunoglobulin M, and other proteins in serum, bile, and saliva. J Clin Invest 1982;70:230.
83. Delacroix DL, Furtado-Barreira G, de Hemptinne B, et al. The liver in the IgA secretory immune system. Dogs, but not rats and rabbits, are suitable models for human studies. Hepatology 1983;3:980.
84. Mazanec MB, Kaetzel CS, Lamm ME, et al. Intracellular neutralization of virus by immunoglobulin A antibodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:6901.
85. Yang PC, Berin MC, Yu LC, et al. Enhanced intestinal transepithelial antigen transport in allergic rats is mediated by IgE and CD23 (FcepsilonRII). J Clin Invest 2000;106:879.
86. Hayday A, Theodoridis E, Ramsburg E, Shires J. Intraepithelial lymphocytes: exploring the Third Way in immunology. Nat Immunol 2001;2:997.
87. Ferguson A. Intraepithelial lymphocytes of the small intestine. Gut 1977;18:921.

88. Jarry A, Cerf-Bensussan N, Brousse N, et al. Subsets of CD3+ (T cell receptor alpha/beta or gamma/delta) and CD3­ lymphocytes isolated from normal human gut epithelium display phenotypical features different from their counterparts in peripheral blood. Eur J Immunol 1990;20:1097.
89. Stingl G, Koning F, Yamada H, et al. Thy-1+ dendritic epidermal cells express T3 antigen and the T-cell receptor gamma chain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987;84:4586.
90. Asarnow DM, Kuziel WA, Bonyhadi M, et al. Limited diversity of gamma delta antigen receptor genes of Thy-1+ dendritic epidermal cells. Cell 1988;55:837.
91. Itohara S, Nakanishi N, Kanagawa O, et al. Monoclonal antibodies specific to native murine T-cell receptor gamma delta: analysis of gamma delta T cells during thymic ontogeny and in peripheral lymphoid organs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:5094.
92. Cepek KL, Parker CM, Madara JL, Brenner MB. Integrin alpha E beta 7 mediates adhesion of T lymphocytes to epithelial cells. J Immunol 1993;150:3459.
93. Janeway CA Jr, Jones B, Hayday A. Specificity and function of T cells bearing gamma delta receptors. Immunol Today 1988;9:73.
94. Kanamori Y, Ishimaru K, Nanno M, et al. Identification of novel lymphoid tissues in murine intestinal mucosa where clusters of ckit+ IL-7R+ Thy1+ lympho-hemopoietic progenitors develop. J Exp Med 1996;184:1449.
95. Eberl G, Littman DR. Thymic origin of intestinal alphabeta T cells revealed by fate mapping of RORgammat+ cells. Science 2004; 305:248.
96. Blumberg RS, Yockey CE, Gross GG, et al. Human intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes are derived from a limited number of T cell clones that utilize multiple V beta T cell receptor genes. J Immunol 1993;150:5144.
97. Holtmeier W, Chowers Y, Lumeng A, et al. The delta T cell receptor repertoire in human colon and peripheral blood is oligoclonal irrespective of V region usage. J Clin Invest 1995;96:1108.
98. Balk SP, Ebert EC, Blumenthal RL, et al. Oligoclonal expansion and CD1 recognition by human intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes. Science 1991;253:1411.
99. Gross GG, Schwartz VL, Stevens C, et al. Distribution of dominant T cell receptor beta chains in human intestinal mucosa. J Exp Med 1994;180:1337.
100. Strater J, Wellisch I, Riedl S, et al. CD95 (APO-1/Fas)-mediated apoptosis in colon epithelial cells: a possible role in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1997;113:160.
101. Boismenu R, Havran WL. Modulation of epithelial cell growth by intraepithelial gamma delta T cells. Science 1994;266:1253.
102. Medzhitov R, Janeway C Jr. Innate immunity. N Engl J Med 2000;343:338.
103. von Boehmer H. Positive selection of lymphocytes. Cell 1994; 76:219.
104. Nossal GJ. Negative selection of lymphocytes. Cell 1994;76:229. 105. Barrett TA, Delvy ML, Kennedy DM, et al. Mechanism of self-
tolerance of gamma/delta T cells in epithelial tissue. J Exp Med 1992;175:65. 106. Kroemer G, Martinez C. Mechanisms of self tolerance. Immunol Today 1992;13:401. 107. Kuhn R, Lohler J, Rennick D, et al. Interleukin-10-deficient mice develop chronic enterocolitis. Cell 1993;75:263. 108. Sadlack B, Merz H, Schorle H, et al. Ulcerative colitis-like disease in mice with a disrupted interleukin-2 gene. Cell 1993;75:253. 109. Strober W, Ehrhardt RO. Chronic intestinal inflammation: an unexpected outcome in cytokine or T cell receptor mutant mice. Cell 1993;75:203. 110. Rath HC, Herfarth HH, Ikeda JS, et al. Normal luminal bacteria, especially Bacteroides species, mediate chronic colitis, gastritis, and arthritis in HLA-B27/human beta2 microglobulin transgenic rats. J Clin Invest 1996;98:945. 111. Schuppan D. Current concepts of celiac disease pathogenesis. Gastroenterology 2000;119:234.

164

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

112. D'Elios MM, Bergman MP, Azzurri A, et al. H(+),K(+)-ATPase (proton pump) is the target autoantigen of Th1-type cytotoxic T cells in autoimmune gastritis. Gastroenterology 2001;120:377.
113. Kagnoff MF. Oral tolerance. Monogr Allergy 1988;24:222. 114. Dubois B, Goubier A, Joubert G, Kaiserlian D. Oral tolerance
and regulation of mucosal immunity. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005;62: 1322. 115. Challacombe SJ, Tomasi TB Jr. Systemic tolerance and secretory immunity after oral immunization. J Exp Med 1980;152:1459. 116. Collins SM. The immunomodulation of enteric neuromuscular function: implications for motility and inflammatory disorders. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1683. 117. Hodges K, Viswanathan VK, Hecht G. Physiology of host­pathogen interactions. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gatrointestinal Tract, Vol. 2, 4th edn. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic Press, 2006:1163. 118. Henson PM, Henson JE, Fittschen C. Degranulation and secretion of phagocytic cells. In: Gallin J, Goldstein I, Snyderman R (eds). Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1992:511. 119. Van Furth R. Development and distribution of mononuclear phagocytes. In: Gallin J, Goldstein I, Synderman R (eds). Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1992:325. 120. Pavli P, Doe WF. Intestinal macrophages. In: MacDermott RP, Stenson WF (eds). Inflammatory Bowel Disease. New York: Elsevier, 1992:177. 121. Saverymuttu SH, Camilleri M, Rees H, et al. Indium 111-granulocyte scanning in the assessment of disease extent and disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease. A comparison with colonoscopy, histology, and fecal indium 111-granulocyte excretion. Gastroenterology 1986;90:1121. 122. Springer TA. Adhesion receptors of the immune system. Nature 1990;346:425. 123. Muller WA. Leukocyte­endothelial-cell interactions in leukocyte transmigration and the inflammatory response. Trends Immunol 2003;24:327. 124. Patel KD, Cuvelier SL, Wiehler S. Selectins: critical mediators of leukocyte recruitment. Semin Immunol 2002;14:73. 125. Berman AE, Kozlova NI, Morozevich GE. Integrins: structure and signaling. Biochemistry (Mosc) 2003;68:1284. 126. Van Assche G, Rutgeerts P. Physiological basis for novel drug therapies used to treat the inflammatory bowel diseases. I. Immunology and therapeutic potential of antiadhesion molecule therapy in inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G169. 127. Nash S, Stafford J, Madara JL. The selective and superoxideindependent disruption of intestinal epithelial tight junctions during leukocyte transmigration. Lab Invest 1988;59:531. 128. Nash S, Stafford J, Madara JL. Effects of polymorphonuclear leukocyte transmigration on the barrier function of cultured intestinal epithelial monolayers. J Clin Invest 1987;80:1104. 129. Zabel BA, Agace WW, Campbell JJ, et al. Human G protein-coupled receptor GPR-9-6/CC chemokine receptor 9 is selectively expressed on intestinal homing T lymphocytes, mucosal lymphocytes, and thymocytes and is required for thymus-expressed chemokinemediated chemotaxis. J Exp Med 1999;190:1241. 130. Burns RC, Rivera-Nieves J, Moskaluk CA, et al. Antibody blockade of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 ameliorates inflammation in the SAMP1/Yit adoptive transfer model of Crohn's disease in mice. Gastroenterology 2001;121:1428. 131. Hamamoto N, Maemura K, Hirata I, et al. Inhibition of dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice by intracolonically administered antibodies against adhesion molecules (endothelial leucocyte adhesion molecule-1 (ELAM-1) or intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1)). Clin Exp Immunol 1999;117:462. 132. Yacyshyn BR, Barish C, Goff J, et al. Dose ranging pharmacokinetic trial of high-dose alicaforsen (intercellular adhesion molecule-1

antisense oligodeoxynucleotide) (ISIS 2302) in active Crohn's disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2002;16:1761. 133. Yacyshyn BR, Chey WY, Goff J, et al. Double blind, placebo controlled trial of the remission inducing and steroid sparing properties of an ICAM-1 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide, alicaforsen (ISIS 2302), in active steroid dependent Crohn's disease. Gut 2002;51:30. 134. Yacyshyn BR, Bowen-Yacyshyn MB, Jewell L, et al. A placebocontrolled trial of ICAM-1 antisense oligonucleotide in the treatment of Crohn's disease. Gastroenterology 1998;114:1133. 135. Schreiber S, Nikolaus S, Malchow H, et al. Absence of efficacy of subcutaneous antisense ICAM-1 treatment of chronic active Crohn's disease. Gastroenterology 2001;120:1339. 136. Sandborn WJ, Colombel JF, Enns R, et al. Natalizumab induction and maintenance therapy for Crohn's disease. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1912. 137. Lanzarotto F, Carpani M, Chaudhary R, Ghosh S. Novel treatment options for inflammatory bowel disease: targeting alpha4 integrin. Drugs 2006;66:1179. 138. Feagan BG, Greenberg GR, Wild G, et al. Treatment of ulcerative colitis with a humanized antibody to the alpha4beta7 integrin. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2499. 139. Rivera-Nieves J, Ho J, Bamias G, et al. Antibody blockade of CCL25/CCR9 ameliorates early but not late chronic murine ileitis. Gastroenterology 2006;131:1518. 140. Furfaro S, Berman JS. The relation between cell migration and activation in inflammation: beyond adherence. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1992;7:248. 141. Grisham MB, Granger DN. Neutrophil-mediated mucosal injury. Role of reactive oxygen metabolites. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33:6S. 142. von Ritter C, Sekizuka E, Grisham MB, Granger DN. The chemotactic peptide N-formyl methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine increases mucosal permeability in the distal ileum of the rat. Gastroenterology 1988;95:651. 143. Eckmann L, Kagnoff MF, Fierer J. Epithelial cells secrete the chemokine interleukin-8 in response to bacterial entry. Infect Immun 1993;61:4569. 144. Morgan EL, Ember JA, Sanderson SD, et al. Anti-C5a receptor antibodies. Characterization of neutralizing antibodies specific for a peptide, C5aR-(9-29), derived from the predicted amino-terminal sequence of the human C5a receptor. J Immunol 1993;151:377. 145. Fradin A, Zirrolli JA, Maclouf J, et al. Platelet-activating factor and leukotriene biosynthesis in whole blood. A model for the study of transcellular arachidonate metabolism. J Immunol 1989;143:3680. 146. Terry K, Williams SM, Connolly L, Ottemann KM. Chemotaxis plays multiple roles during Helicobacter pylori animal infection. Infect Immun 2005;73:803. 147. Amedei A, Cappon A, Codolo G, et al. The neutrophil-activating protein of Helicobacter pylori promotes Th1 immune responses. J Clin Invest 2006;116:1092. 148. Harbord MW, Marks DJ, Forbes A, et al. Impaired neutrophil chemotaxis in Crohn's disease relates to reduced production of chemokines and can be augmented by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;24:651. 149. Yang SK, Choi MS, Kim OH, et al. The increased expression of an array of C-X-C and C-C chemokines in the colonic mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis: regulation by corticosteroids. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:126. 150. Cole AT, Pilkington BJ, McLaughlan J, et al. Mucosal factors inducing neutrophil movement in ulcerative colitis: the role of interleukin 8 and leukotriene B4. Gut 1996;39:248. 151. Roberts WG, Simon TJ, Berlin RG, et al. Leukotrienes in ulcerative colitis: results of a multicenter trial of a leukotriene biosynthesis inhibitor, MK-591. Gastroenterology 1997;112:725. 152. Roncarolo MG, Levings MK, Traversari C. Differentiation of T regulatory cells by immature dendritic cells. J Exp Med 2001;193:F5. 153. Barrett KE. Cytokines: sources, receptors and signalling. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol 1996;10:1. 154. Nagata S, Golstein P. The Fas death factor. Science 1995;267:1449.

165

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

155. El-Omar EM, Carrington M, Chow WH, et al. Interleukin-1 polymorphisms associated with increased risk of gastric cancer. Nature 2000;404:398.
156. Rutgeerts P, Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, et al. Infliximab for induction and maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2462.
157. Targan SR, Hanauer SB, van Deventer SJ, et al. A short-term study of chimeric monoclonal antibody cA2 to tumor necrosis factor alpha for Crohn's disease. Crohn's Disease cA2 Study Group. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1029.
158. Present DH, Rutgeerts P, Targan S, et al. Infliximab for the treatment of fistulas in patients with Crohn's disease. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1398.
159. Eberhart CE, Dubois RN. Eicosanoids and the gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 1995;109:285.
160. Wang D, Mann JR, DuBois RN. The role of prostaglandins and other eicosanoids in the gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 2005; 128:1445.
161. Gupta RA, Dubois RN. Colorectal cancer prevention and treatment by inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2. Nat Rev Cancer 2001;1:11.
162. Arber N, Eagle CJ, Spicak J, et al. Celecoxib for the prevention of colorectal adenomatous polyps. N Engl J Med 2006;355:885.
163. Bertagnolli MM, Eagle CJ, Zauber AG, et al. Celecoxib for the prevention of sporadic colorectal adenomas. N Engl J Med 2006; 355:873.
164. Bresalier RS, Sandler RS, Quan H, et al. Cardiovascular events associated with rofecoxib in a colorectal adenoma chemoprevention trial. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1092.
165. Sharon P, Stenson WF. Enhanced synthesis of leukotriene B4 by colonic mucosa in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 1984;86:453.
166. Singer, II, Kawka DW, Schloemann S, et al. Cyclooxygenase 2 is induced in colonic epithelial cells in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 1998;115:297.
167. Riehl TE, Stenson WF. Platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolases in Caco-2 cells and epithelium of normal and ulcerative colitis patients. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1826.
168. Ewer AK, Al-Salti W, Coney AM, et al. The role of platelet activating factor in a neonatal piglet model of necrotising enterocolitis. Gut 2004;53:207.
169. Salzman AL. Nitric oxide in the gut. New Horiz 1995;3:33. 170. Nathan C, Xie QW. Nitric oxide synthases: roles, tolls, and controls.
Cell 1994;78:915. 171. Bredt DS, Hwang PM, Snyder SH. Localization of nitric oxide syn-
thase indicating a neural role for nitric oxide. Nature 1990;347:768. 172. Takahashi T. Pathophysiological significance of neuronal nitric
oxide synthase in the gastrointestinal tract. J Gastroenterol 2003; 38:421. 173. Drapier JC, Hibbs JB Jr. Differentiation of murine macrophages to express nonspecific cytotoxicity for tumor cells results in Larginine-dependent inhibition of mitochondrial iron-sulfur enzymes in the macrophage effector cells. J Immunol 1988;140:2829. 174. Singer, II, Kawka DW, Scott S, et al. Expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and nitrotyrosine in colonic epithelium in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 1996;111:871. 175. Kolios G, Rooney N, Murphy CT, et al. Expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase activity in human colon epithelial cells: modulation by T lymphocyte derived cytokines. Gut 1998;43:56. 176. Kolios G, Valatas V, Ward SG. Nitric oxide in inflammatory bowel disease: a universal messenger in an unsolved puzzle. Immunology 2004;113:427. 177. Miller MJ, Sadowska-Krowicka H, Chotinaruemol S, et al. Amelioration of chronic ileitis by nitric oxide synthase inhibition. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1993;264:11. 178. Hogaboam CM, Jacobson K, Collins SM, Blennerhassett MG. The selective beneficial effects of nitric oxide inhibition in experimental colitis. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G673.

179. Rachmilewitz D, Karmeli F, Okon E, Bursztyn M. Experimental colitis is ameliorated by inhibition of nitric oxide synthase activity. Gut 1995;37:247.
180. Armstrong AM, Campbell GR, Gannon C, et al. Oral administration of inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitors reduces nitric oxide synthesis but has no effect on the severity of experimental colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol 2000;35:832.
181. Yoshida Y, Iwai A, Itoh K, et al. Role of inducible nitric oxide synthase in dextran sulphate sodium-induced colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2000;14(Suppl1):26.
182. Hosoi T, Goto H, Arisawa T, et al. Role of nitric oxide synthase inhibitor in experimental colitis induced by 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid in rats. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2001;28:9.
183. Laszlo F, Whittle BJ, Moncada S. Time-dependent enhancement or inhibition of endotoxin-induced vascular injury in rat intestine by nitric oxide synthase inhibitors. Br J Pharmacol 1994;111:1309.
184. Vallance BA, Dijkstra G, Qiu B, et al. Relative contributions of NOS isoforms during experimental colitis: endothelial-derived NOS maintains mucosal integrity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G865.
185. Beck PL, Xavier R, Wong J, et al. Paradoxical roles of different nitric oxide synthase isoforms in colonic injury. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G137.
186. Holtug K, Hansen MB, Skadhauge E. Experimental studies of intestinal ion and water transport. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1996;216:95.
187. Kuwahara A, Cooke HJ. Tachykinin-induced anion secretion in guinea pig distal colon: role of neural and inflammatory mediators. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1990;252:1.
188. Crowe SE, Sestini P, Perdue MH. Allergic reactions of rat jejunal mucosa. Ion transport responses to luminal antigen and inflammatory mediators. Gastroenterology 1990;99:74.
189. Zhang S, Myers S, Castro GA. Inhibition of anaphylaxis-evoked intestinal fluid secretion by the dual application of an H1 antagonist and cyclooxygenase inhibitor. Gastroenterology 1991;100:922.
190. Resta-Lenert S, Barrett KE. Probiotics and commensals reverse TNF-alpha- and IFN-gamma-induced dysfunction in human intestinal epithelial cells. Gastroenterology 2006;130:731.
191. Fasano A, Shea-Donohue T. Mechanisms of disease: the role of intestinal barrier function in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal autoimmune diseases. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005; 2:416.
192. Clayburgh DR, Shen L, Turner JR. A porous defense: the leaky epithelial barrier in intestinal disease. Lab Invest 2004;84:282.
193. Scott KG, Meddings JB, Kirk DR, et al. Intestinal infection with Giardia spp. reduces epithelial barrier function in a myosin light chain kinase-dependent fashion. Gastroenterology 2002;123:1179.
194. Yuhan R, Koutsouris A, Savkovic SD, Hecht G. Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli-induced myosin light chain phosphorylation alters intestinal epithelial permeability. Gastroenterology 1997;113:1873.
195. Olson TS, Reuter BK, Scott KG, et al. The primary defect in experimental ileitis originates from a nonhematopoietic source. J Exp Med 2006;203:541.
196. Scott H, Sollid LM, Fausa O, et al. Expression of major histocompatibility complex class II subregion products by jejunal epithelium in patients with coeliac disease. Scand J Immunol 1987;26:563.
197. Sollid LM, Gaudernack G, Markussen G, et al. Induction of various HLA class II molecules in a human colonic adenocarcinoma cell line. Scand J Immunol 1987;25:175.
198. Hershberg RM, Framson PE, Cho DH, et al. Intestinal epithelial cells use two distinct pathways for HLA class II antigen processing. J Clin Invest 1997;100:204.
199. Bland PW, Warren LG. Antigen presentation by epithelial cells of the rat small intestine. II. Selective induction of suppressor T cells. Immunology 1986;58:9.
200. Mayer L, Shlien R. Evidence for function of Ia molecules on gut epithelial cells in man. J Exp Med 1987;166:1471.

166

The mucosal immune system and gastrointestinal inflammation CHAPTER 7

201. Eckmann L, Stenson WF, Savidge TC, et al. Role of intestinal epithelial cells in the host secretory response to infection by invasive bacteria. Bacterial entry induces epithelial prostaglandin h synthase-2 expression and prostaglandin E2 and F2alpha production. J Clin Invest 1997;100:296.
202. Salzman AL, Eaves-Pyles T, Linn SC, et al. Bacterial induction of inducible nitric oxide synthase in cultured human intestinal epithelial cells. Gastroenterology 1998;114:93.
203. Lenardo MJ, Baltimore D. NF-kappa B: a pleiotropic mediator of inducible and tissue-specific gene control. Cell 1989;58:227.
204. Sha WC, Liou HC, Tuomanen EI, Baltimore D. Targeted disruption of the p50 subunit of NF-kappa B leads to multifocal defects in immune responses. Cell 1995;80:321.
205. Fraser CC. Exploring the positive and negative consequences of NFkappaB inhibition for the treatment of human disease. Cell Cycle 2006;5:1160.
206. Harris G, KuoLee R, Chen W. Role of Toll-like receptors in health and diseases of gastrointestinal tract. World J Gastroenterol 2006;12:2149.
207. Tohno M, Shimosato T, Kitazawa H, et al. Toll-like receptor 2 is expressed on the intestinal M cells in swine. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;330:547.
208. Cario E, Brown D, McKee M, et al. Commensal-associated molecular patterns induce selective toll-like receptor-trafficking from apical membrane to cytoplasmic compartments in polarized intestinal epithelium. Am J Pathol 2002;160:165.
209. Hornef MW, Frisan T, Vandewalle A, et al. Toll-like receptor 4 resides in the Golgi apparatus and colocalizes with internalized lipopolysaccharide in intestinal epithelial cells. J Exp Med 2002; 195:559.
210. Hornef MW, Normark BH, Vandewalle A, Normark S. Intracellular recognition of lipopolysaccharide by toll-like receptor 4 in intestinal epithelial cells. J Exp Med 2003;198:1225.
211. Furrie E, Macfarlane S, Thomson G, Macfarlane GT. Toll-like receptors-2, -3 and -4 expression patterns on human colon and their regulation by mucosal-associated bacteria. Immunology 2005;115:565.
212. Liew FY, Xu D, Brint EK, O'Neill LA. Negative regulation of tolllike receptor-mediated immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol 2005;5:446.
213. Reuter BK, Pizarro TT. Commentary: the role of the IL-18 system and other members of the IL-1R/TLR superfamily in innate mucosal immunity and the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease: friend or foe? Eur J Immunol 2004;34:2347.
214. Cario E, Podolsky DK. Differential alteration in intestinal epithelial cell expression of toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and TLR4 in inflammatory bowel disease. Infect Immun 2000;68:7010.
215. Franchimont D, Vermeire S, El Housni H, et al. Deficient hostbacteria interactions in inflammatory bowel disease? The toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 Asp299Gly polymorphism is associated with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Gut 2004;53:987.
216. Torok HP, Glas J, Tonenchi L, et al. Polymorphisms of the lipopolysaccharide-signaling complex in inflammatory bowel disease: association of a mutation in the Toll-like receptor 4 gene with ulcerative colitis. Clin Immunol 2004;112:85.
217. Dubuquoy L, Jansson EA, Deeb S, et al. Impaired expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2003;124:1265.
218. Singh JC, Cruickshank SM, Newton DJ, et al. Toll-like receptormediated responses of primary intestinal epithelial cells during the development of colitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G514.
219. Metcalfe DD, Costa JJ, Burd PR. Mast cells and basophils. In: Gallin J, Goldstein I, Snyderman R (eds). Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1992:709.
220. Perdue MH, Masson S, Wershil BK, Galli SJ. Role of mast cells in ion transport abnormalities associated with intestinal anaphylaxis.

Correction of the diminished secretory response in genetically mast cell-deficient W/Wv mice by bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Invest 1991;87:687. 221. Blanchard C, Wang N, Rothenberg ME. Eosinophilic esophagitis: pathogenesis, genetics, and therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118:1054. 222. Mishra A, Hogan SP, Brandt EB, Rothenberg ME. IL-5 promotes eosinophil trafficking to the esophagus. J Immunol 2002;168:2464. 223. Mishra A, Hogan SP, Brandt EB, Rothenberg ME. An etiological role for aeroallergens and eosinophils in experimental esophagitis. J Clin Invest 2001;107:83. 224. Fogg MI, Ruchelli E, Spergel JM. Pollen and eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:796. 225. Onbasi K, Sin AZ, Doganavsargil B, et al. Eosinophil infiltration of the oesophageal mucosa in patients with pollen allergy during the season. Clin Exp Allergy 2005;35:1423. 226. Liacouras CA, Spergel JM, Ruchelli E, et al. Eosinophilic esophagitis: a 10-year experience in 381 children. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;3:1198. 227. Garrett JK, Jameson SC, Thomson B, et al. Anti-interleukin-5 (mepolizumab) therapy for hypereosinophilic syndromes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113:115. 228. Stein ML, Collins MH, Villanueva JM, et al. Anti-IL-5 (mepolizumab) therapy for eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118:1312. 229. Blanchard C, Wang N, Stringer KF, et al. Eotaxin-3 and a uniquely conserved gene-expression profile in eosinophilic esophagitis. J Clin Invest 2006;116:536. 230. Suarez G, Reyes VE, Beswick EJ. Immune response to H. pylori. World J Gastroenterol 2006;12:5593. 231. Fischer W, Puls J, Buhrdorf R, et al. Systematic mutagenesis of the Helicobacter pylori cag pathogenicity island: essential genes for CagA translocation in host cells and induction of interleukin-8. Mol Microbiol 2001;42:1337. 232. Mattsson A, Tinnert A, Hamlet A, et al. Specific antibodies in sera and gastric aspirates of symptomatic and asymptomatic Helicobacter pylori-infected subjects. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 1998;5:288. 233. Mattsson A, Quiding-Jarbrink M, Lonroth H, et al. Antibody-secreting cells in the stomachs of symptomatic and asymptomatic Helicobacter pylori-infected subjects. Infect Immun 1998;66:2705. 234. Bamias G, Nyce MR, De La Rue SA, Cominelli F. New concepts in the pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease. Ann Intern Med 2005;143:895. 235. Bamias G, Martin C, Mishina M, et al. Proinflammatory effects of TH2 cytokines in a murine model of chronic small intestinal inflammation. Gastroenterology 2005;128:654. 236. Hugot JP, Chamaillard M, Zouali H, et al. Association of NOD2 leucine-rich repeat variants with susceptibility to Crohn's disease. Nature 2001;411:599. 237. Ogura Y, Bonen DK, Inohara N, et al. A frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease. Nature 2001;411:603. 238. Matsumoto S, Okabe Y, Setoyama H, et al. Inflammatory bowel disease-like enteritis and caecitis in a senescence accelerated mouse P1/Yit strain. Gut 1998;43:71. 239. Schultz M, Tonkonogy SL, Sellon RK, et al. IL-2-deficient mice raised under germfree conditions develop delayed mild focal intestinal inflammation. Am J Physiol 1999;276:G1461. 240. Rath HC. Role of commensal bacteria in chronic experimental colitis: lessons from the HLA-B27 transgenic rat. Pathobiology 2002;70:131. 241. Zocco MA, dal Verme LZ, Cremonini F, et al. Efficacy of Lactobacillus GG in maintaining remission of ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;23:1567. 242. Bibiloni R, Fedorak RN, Tannock GW, et al. VSL#3 probioticmixture induces remission in patients with active ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2005;100:1539.

167

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

243. Tursi A, Brandimarte G, Giorgetti GM, et al. Low-dose balsalazide plus a high-potency probiotic preparation is more effective than balsalazide alone or mesalazine in the treatment of acute mild-tomoderate ulcerative colitis. Med Sci Monit 2004;10:PI126.
244. Kagnoff MF. Celiac disease: pathogenesis of a model immunogenetic disease. J Clin Invest 2007;117:41.
245. Monteleone I, Monteleone G, Del Vecchio Blanco G, et al. Regulation of the T helper cell type 1 transcription factor T-bet in coeliac disease mucosa. Gut 2004;53:1090.
246. Louka AS, Sollid LM. HLA in coeliac disease: unravelling the complex genetics of a complex disorder. Tissue Antigens 2003;61:105.
247. Kagnoff MF. HLA genes in ceoliac disease. In: Auricchio S, Greco L, Maiuri L, Troncone R (eds). Coeliac Disease. Naples, Italy: JCG Editions, 2000:5.
248. Kim CY, Quarsten H, Bergseng E, et al. Structural basis for HLADQ2-mediated presentation of gluten epitopes in celiac disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:4175.
249. Molberg O, McAdam SN, Korner R, et al. Tissue transglutaminase selectively modifies gliadin peptides that are recognized by gutderived T cells in celiac disease. Nat Med 1998;4:713.
250. van de Wal Y, Kooy Y, van Veelen P, et al. Selective deamidation by tissue transglutaminase strongly enhances gliadin-specific T cell reactivity. J Immunol 1998;161:1585.
251. Klöppel G, Lüttges J, Löhr M, et al. Autoimmune pancreatitis: pathological, clinical, and immunological features. Pancreas 2003; 27:14.
252. Uchida K, Okazaki K, Konishi Y, et al. Clinical analysis of autoimmune-related pancreatitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2000;95:2788.
253. Okazaki K, Uchida K, Ohana M, et al. Autoimmune-related pancreatitis is associated with autoantibodies and a Th1/Th2-type cellular immune response. Gastroenterology 2000;118:573.
254. Kawa S, Ota M, Yoshizawa K, et al. HLA DRB10405-DQB10401 haplotype is associated with autoimmune pancreatitis in the Japanese population. Gastroenterology 2002;122:1264.
255. Ichiki Y, Aoki CA, Bowlus CL, et al. T cell immunity in autoimmune hepatitis. Autoimmun Rev 2005;4:315.
256. Hoshino Y, Enomoto N, Izumi N, et al. Limited usage of T-cell receptor beta chains and sequences of the complementarity determining region 3 of lymphocytes infiltrating in the liver of autoimmune hepatitis. Hepatology 1995;22:142.
257. Martins EB, Graham AK, Chapman RW, Fleming KA. Elevation of gamma delta T lymphocytes in peripheral blood and livers of patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis and other autoimmune liver diseases. Hepatology 1996;23:988.

258. Ogawa S, Sakaguchi K, Takaki A, et al. Increase in CD95 (Fas/APO1)-positive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood derived from patients with autoimmune hepatitis or chronic hepatitis C with autoimmune phenomena. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2000;15:69.
259. Yachida M, Kurokohchi K, Arima K, Nishioka M. Increased bcl-2 expression in lymphocytes and its association with hepatocellular damage in patients with autoimmune hepatitis. Clin Exp Immunol 1999;116:140.
260. Kammer AR, van der Burg SH, Grabscheid B, et al. Molecular mimicry of human cytochrome P450 by hepatitis C virus at the level of cytotoxic T cell recognition. J Exp Med 1999;190:169.
261. Aoki CA, Bowlus CL, Gershwin ME. The immunobiology of primary sclerosing cholangitis. Autoimmun Rev 2005;4:137.
262. Wiencke K, Spurkland A, Schrumpf E, Boberg KM. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is associated to an extended B8-DR3 haplotype including particular MICA and MICB alleles. Hepatology 2001;34:625.
263. Olsson R, Bjornsson E, Backman L, et al. Bile duct bacterial isolates in primary sclerosing cholangitis: a study of explanted livers. J Hepatol 1998;28:426.
264. Orth T, Kellner R, Diekmann O, et al. Identification and characterization of autoantibodies against catalase and alpha-enolase in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Clin Exp Immunol 1998;112:507.
265. Xu B, Broome U, Ericzon BG, Sumitran-Holgersson S. High frequency of autoantibodies in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis that bind biliary epithelial cells and induce expression of CD44 and production of interleukin 6. Gut 2002;51:120.
266. Grant AJ, Lalor PF, Salmi M, et al. Homing of mucosal lymphocytes to the liver in the pathogenesis of hepatic complications of inflammatory bowel disease. Lancet 2002;359:150.
267. Palmer JM, Kirby JA, Jones DE. The immunology of primary biliary cirrhosis: the end of the beginning? Clin Exp Immunol 2002; 129:191.
268. Kouroumalis E, Notas G. Pathogenesis of primary biliary cirrhosis: a unifying model. World J Gastroenterol 2006;12:2320.
269. Jones DE, Donaldson PT. Genetic factors in the pathogenesis of primary biliary cirrhosis. Clin Liver Dis 2003;7:841.
270. Selmi C, Invernizzi P, Zuin M, et al. Genetics and geoepidemiology of primary biliary cirrhosis: following the footprints to disease etiology. Semin Liver Dis 2005;25:265.

168

A COMPONENTS
8 Epithelia: biological principles
of organization
Jerrold R. Turner, James L. Madara

Organization of the gut wall, 169 Organization of epithelial cells and sheets, 170 Epithelial barriers, 175

Epithelial homeostasis and responses to disease and injury, 179 Integration of mucosal function, 181

All cavities within the alimentary tract, from the small ducts and acini of the pancreas to the gastric lumen, are lined by sheets of polarized epithelial cells. Common to all of these epithelia is the ability to create selective barriers that separate lumenal and tissue spaces. Most epithelia are also able to direct vectorial transport of solutes and solvents. These essential functions are based on the structural polarity of individual cells, the complex organization of membrane domains, cell­cell and cell­substrate interactions, and integration with other cell types. This chapter reviews intestinal wall structure and examines how mucosal functions are supported by the organization of the gut and the biological properties of the epithelial barrier and epithelial transport. More detailed discussions of epithelial transport and nutrient processing can be found in Chapters 13­21.
Organization of the gut wall
The relation of the epithelial layer to other components of the gut wall is shown in Fig. 8.1. Four principal layers exist: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa or adventitia. The mucosa consists of the epithelium, an underlying layer of loose connective tissue carrying nerves and vessels (i.e., lamina propria), and a thin layer of smooth muscle (i.e., muscularis mucosa). The mucosa also contains an array of lymphocytes, mast cells, macrophages, and, in disease states, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, all of which are capable of modulating epithelial function.
An underlying layer of fibroconnective tissue called the submucosa, which contains nerves, vessels, and lymphatics, supports the mucosa. The submucosa rests on the muscularis
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

propria, which is composed of two or three layers of smooth muscle and is home to the myenteric plexus (see Chapters 2 and 6). In most instances, gastrointestinal organs are encased by an outermost delicate layer of fibrofatty tissue, the serosa, encircled by a continuous layer of mesothelial cells. In areas where no serosa exists, as in portions of the esophagus and in the distal colorectum, fibrofatty tissues interface with the external portion of the muscularis propria. These organs are said to have an adventitial, rather than a serosal, encasement.
Forceps biopsies retrieved endoscopically usually go no deeper than the muscularis mucosae, although thin wisps of submucosal tissue may occasionally be present. Suction biopsies more consistently penetrate the submucosa, although only the most superficial portion of the submucosa is obtained. Deeper portions of the wall appear in endoscopic samples by accident, such as in an aggressive snare of a sessile mucosal lesion, or by intention, as in endoscopic mucosal resection (see Chapter 137).
Similar to the gross anatomy, the microscopic anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract varies along its length. A simple columnar epithelium lines the stomach, small intestine, colon, pancreatobiliary ducts, and exocrine pancreas. In contrast, the oral cavity, esophagus, and anus are lined by a nonkeratinizing, stratified squamous epithelium that is capable of withstanding the mechanical stresses of swallowing and defecation but plays no role in transepithelial transport. The three-dimensional structure of epithelia also exhibits significant variation within the gastrointestinal tract, such as the prominent mucosal folds and villi in the small intestine (Fig. 8.1), the lobular organization of the exocrine pancreatic acini (Chapter 67), and the deep epithelial extensions into salivary and Brunner glands in the esophagus and duodenum, respectively. The liver, which lacks a single large lumen, is composed primarily of hepatocytes. These possess only a small apical (canalicular) surface and lack complex, deeper cell layers; capillaries and hepatocytes are separated by a thin basement membrane in the space of Dissé (see Chapter 79).

169

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Epithelium Lamina propria Muscularis mucosa Lymphoid follicle
Brunner's glands

Submucosa Vessels
Muscularis propria
Myenteric plexus

Figure 8.1 Organization of the intestinal wall. This transmural section of normal human duodenum exemplifies many of the structural features that are common throughout the gastrointestinal tract. The corresponding line diagram delineates specific structures.

Despite these complexities of regional specialization, central structural features critical to epithelial function are present throughout the gastrointestinal tract.

Organization of epithelial cells and sheets

To function properly as a barrier, epithelial cells must assemble into a multicellular sheet. This is a complex task that requires individual cells to establish a uniformly oriented polarity; to form intercellular junctions; and to develop stable interactions with the basement membrane (Fig. 8.2).

The need for cell polarity A central function of many gastrointestinal epithelia is the vectorial transport of solutes and solvents. For example,

Tight junction
Adherens junction

Microvilli with actin core Perijunctional actomyosin ring
Microtubule

Gap junction

Cortical actin

Keratin filament

Golgi stack

Desmosome

Nucleus
Rough endoplasmic reticulum
Basement membrane

Figure 8.2 Organization of a typical gastrointestinal columnar epithelial cell. The precisely orchestrated architecture of polarized epithelia includes numerous specialized structures, such as cytoskeletal elements, transport vesicles, and intercellular junctions.

parietal cells are polarized to effect acid secretion into the lumen (see Chapter 13). Imagine the ensuing havoc if acid were inadvertently secreted into the interstitium. Absorptive villous enterocytes of the small intestine are specialized to accomplish vectorial transport of ions, nutrients, and water from the lumen to the interstitium (Fig. 8.3) by expressing specific transporters within the apical (lumenal), but not basolateral, membrane domain [1­3]. These transporters often rely on a lumenal Na+ concentration that is much higher than the intracellular Na+ concentration required for cotransport of sugars, amino acids, ions, bile salt, and xenobiotics. In general, the absorbed solutes exit the cytosol by way of Na+-independent facilitated transporters present in basolateral, but not apical, membranes, resulting in efficient transcellular transport. The high extracellular and low intracellular Na+ concentrations that provide energy for this system are maintained by the exclusively basolateral Na+,K+ATPase that pumps Na+ out of the cell in exchange for K+. Thus, the net result of apical Na+-coupled transport is vectorial transport of both the specific solute and Na+ from the lumen to the interstitium. The polarized distribution of these three classes of transport proteins ­ apical Na+-coupled transporters, basolateral Na+-independent transporters, and the basolateral Na+,K+-ATPase ­ is critical for active transepithelial transport. Note that the deposition of osmotically active molecules in the subepithelial interstitial space provides the driving force for passive water absorption. This integration of active transcellular and passive, primarily paracellular, transport explains the improved efficacy of oral rehydration solutions supplemented with Na+ and carbohydrates [4,5]. Although details of these transport processes will be addressed in further detail, this outline of vectorial transport should emphasize that polarized distribution of surface membrane components within individual cells is essential to epithelial function. It should also be obvious that were the entire epithelial sheet not polarized uniformly, i.e., with all cells polarized in the same orientation, adjacent cells could

170

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

Na+ Glucose SGLT1

Na+ H2O Solutes

NHE3 H+

P MLC

MLCK

P

Tight junction

Na+

Glucose

GLUT2 Glucose

Na+ Na+/K+ ATPase

K+

Na+ H2O Glucose

Na+ glucose

Figure 8.3 Coordination of transcellular and paracellular absorption of water, nutrients, and ions. The polarized delivery of SGLT1, GLUT2, and Na+,K+-ATPase to the appropriate apical (SGLT1) and basolateral (GLUT2 and Na+,K+-ATPase) membranes is essential for efficient vectorial glucose absorption. Research has shown that SGLT1 activation also stimulates apical NHE3-mediated Na+ absorption, thereby linking these absorptive processes. Incompletely defined downstream signaling events subsequently activate myosin light chain kinase (MLCK). This, in turn, phosphorylates MLC and increases paracellular permeability, thereby linking transcellular and paracellular absorption.

negate one another's contributions, making net transport impossible. Thus, in addition to polarization of individual cells, it is critical that all cells within an epithelium respond to common cues to generate a unified, polarized epithelial sheet.
Cues to trigger polarization The spatial cues that induce initial cell polarization and maintain it have generally been thought to require contact with the extracellular matrix and with other cells. For example, the interaction between the epithelial Ca2+-dependent adherens junction protein, E-cadherin, on adjacent cells is a critical trigger for polarization. E-cadherin is concentrated at the adherens junction, the basal-most aspect of the apical junction complex (Fig. 8.2), where, through cytoplasmic linker proteins (e.g., -actinin and - and -catenins), it is coupled to a perijunctional ring of actin and myosin filaments [6,7]. In addition to E-cadherin-mediated intercellular adhesion, interactions with matrix components through integrins, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and other

membrane proteins are also important in inducing polarization and maintaining differentiation [8­10].
The discovery of polarity genes encoding Par proteins in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila has facilitated the identification of mammalian homologues, complexes of which define epithelial apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains [11,12]. Not surprisingly, Par protein mutations have been linked to disease. For example, many individuals with Peutz­Jeghers syndrome exhibit mutation of LKB1, the mammalian homologue of the C. elegans protein Par-4 [13]. LKB1 is a serine/threonine kinase that is activated by the STRAD adapter protein, which may also be mutated in Peutz­Jeghers syndrome [14]. STRAD-mediated LKB1 activation triggers early cell polarization in epithelial cells despite the absence of intercellular junctions [15]. One mediator of LKB1-initiated epithelial polarization may be AMP-activated protein kinase, which is activated by LKB1 and plays an important role in maintaining cellular energy balance [16].
The mutation of -catenin that is often observed in human colorectal cancers and the increased risk of malignancy associated with Peutz­Jeghers syndrome suggest that disrupted cell polarization may contribute to neoplasia. The association of transcription factor-dependent E-cadherin repression with the epithelial­mesenchymal transition that is typical of invasive cancer [17] and the strong correlation between the loss of E-cadherin expression and the invasive phenotype of many human gastrointestinal neoplasms [18,19] further support this concept. Conversely, loss of E-cadherin allows unbound -catenin to activate gene transcription. Cytosolic -catenin activity is normally down-regulated by the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, explaining why mutations in APC lead to enhanced -catenin activity and growth of adenomas in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, as well as in those with spontaneous somatic APC mutations [20,21]. Clearly many functional connections exist between cell adhesion, polarity, growth, and tumor invasion (see detailed discussions in Chapter 24).
Structure of intercellular junctions All polarized epithelia share a set of distinct intercellular junctions. These include, from the lumenal aspect, the tight and adherens junctions, which form continuous circumferential contacts, and, below these, desmosomes and gap junctions, which form macular or spot contacts. Together these junctions maintain polarity, seal the paracellular space, provide intercellular communication, and stabilize the monolayer.
A critical event in the generation and maintenance of cell polarity is the assembly of the apical junctional complex, which is composed of the adherens junction and the tight junction. The latter defines the boundary between apical and basolateral membrane domains; it prevents the mixing of transmembrane proteins and outer leaflet membrane

171

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Figure 8.4 Tight junction ultrastructure. Electron microscopic appearance of the tight junction of a small intestinal absorptive epithelial cell. The transmission electron micrograph (left) shows that the tight junction is a zone of closely apposed cell membranes. Freeze-fracture electron microscopy (right) reveals the dense interconnecting network of strands that define the tight junction.
lipids between these domains. When examined by electron microscopy, tight junctions appear as 100- to 300-nm-deep zones where adjacent cells closely abut (Fig. 8.4). Series of punctate fusions or "kisses" between these plasma membranes form a seal between adjacent cells. These fusion sites are arrayed in a linear anastomosing fashion around the cell and correspond to the net-like series of grooves and strands seen in freeze-fracture replicas of epithelial cells (Fig. 8.4). The strands are formed by members of the claudin family of tetraspanning cell­cell adhesion proteins [22], which make contact in the intercellular space and define the ion selectivity of flow across the tight junction [23­25].
Another tetraspanning membrane protein, occludin, is present in tight junction strands, in intracellular vesicles, and, in some cell types, along the lateral membranes. Although occludin knockout mice are viable and appear to have intact tight junctions [26], abundant in vitro and in vivo data suggest that occludin plays a critical role in the organization and regulation of tight junctions [27­32] and, potentially, in the maintenance of the differentiated epithelial phenotype [33]. Like occludin, several members of the junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) family of proteins localize to tight junctions and along lateral membranes. JAM proteins appear to be necessary for the transepithelial migration of inflammatory cells [34­36]. A variety of other transmembrane proteins, including the coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor [37,38], are also sequestered within tight junctions.
The cytoplasmic face of tight junctions contains a large number of peripheral membrane proteins that fall into different categories. Various peripheral membrane proteins link transmembrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton, help to establish cell polarity, define specialized zones for

vesicle targeting, or regulate gene transcription. An extensive review of these proteins is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Of special interest are the numerous proteins, such as ZO-1, with multiple protein interaction (PDZ) domains [39]. Although incompletely understood, ZO-1 appears to play a unique role in tight junction assembly and regulation. Initially recruited to nascent adherens junctions through interactions with -catenin, ZO-1 is present from the earliest stages of tight junction assembly, prompting the suggestion that ZO-1 defines the site of tight junction assembly. A report that tight junction assembly is delayed in ZO-1 knockout epithelial cells gives credence to this idea [40]. ZO-1 may also serve as a scaffold for the assembly of multiprotein complexes. For example, ZO-1 interacts with claudin proteins, occludin, and actin filaments [41­43] and binds to other peripheral membrane proteins, such as the myosin-binding protein cingulin [44]. Most striking, ZO-1 and the related protein ZO-2 can each determine whether and where claudin polymerization occurs [45]. This multitude of protein­protein interactions has led to the hypothesis that the tight junction itself is composed of a stable multiprotein complex. However, measurement of unique rates of protein exchange within the tight junction, as well as between junctional and cytoplasmic pools, contradicts this appealing concept [46].
Directly below the tight junction lies the adherens (or intermediate) junction, in which the lateral membranes of adjacent cells lie parallel to each other and adhere by means of E-cadherin. At this site, the perijunctional ring of actin and myosin interacts with E-cadherin through -actinin, vinculin, and - and -catenin. This perijunctional actomyosin ring is also essential to the maintenance of the tight junction [29,47]. Directly below the adherens junctions are desmosomes (Fig. 8.2). Distant relatives of the cadherin family, desmogelins and desmocollins, form cell contacts at desmosomes. These transmembrane glycoproteins associate with intermediate filaments rather than with actin filaments. Consequently, they anchor the cytokeratin-based cytoskeleton between neighboring cells and provide resistance to mechanical stress. Keratin gene mutations in some patients with inflammatory bowel disease and the spontaneous chronic colitis that develops in keratin-8 knockout mice emphasize the importance of keratin proteins in epithelial function [48,49].
To varying degrees, all epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract express gap junctions. At the site of the gap junction the cytoplasm of adjacent cells is in physical continuity through transmembrane channels formed by members of the connexin protein family [50]. Six connexin molecules assemble on each membrane to form a channel and, by adhering across the paracellular space, they create a lumen isolated from the extracellular space. Signaling molecules up to about 1500 Da (e.g., Ca2+, inositol triphosphate) and small nucleotides can diffuse freely between cells and coordinate

172

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

physiological responses. There are numerous connexin genes in humans and each shows organ-specific diversity, which allows for organ-specific regulation of communication. Gap junctions coordinate epithelial function by allowing sheets of cells to behave as syncytia, for example coordinating exocytosis of zymogen granules from the pancreas (see Chapter 15). Gap junction communication in the liver, working through intracellular Ca2+ waves, modifies bile secretion in response to glucagon and vasopressin. Gap junctions are often mutated or down-regulated in gastrointestinal cancers [51], probably reflecting the aberrant intercellular communication that is characteristic of the neoplastic phenotype.
Polarized protein delivery Plasma membrane proteins and secreted proteins pass through a series of distinct vesicular compartments as they are sorted to either the apical or basolateral surface. They share a common site of synthesis on ribosomes bound to the rough endoplasmic reticulum and undergo posttranslational modification (e.g., glycosylation) in the Golgi apparatus. Membrane proteins and secreted proteins are then sorted into distinct vesicles in the trans-Golgi network (Fig. 8.2). In most cells, proteins destined for the basolateral surface are delivered directly to that domain; studies using live cell imaging have suggested that this basolateral delivery may even be targeted to specific sites along the lateral membrane [52]. Detailed analysis of basolaterally targeted proteins has shown that specific amino acid sequences located within the cytoplasmic tail are sufficient to direct basolateral delivery [53]. Several of these sequences, including those with conserved tyrosine residues, are sorted by the epithelial adapter protein AP-1B [54]. This protein selects cargo destined for the basolateral membrane and also coordinates the assembly of the exocytic machinery necessary for fusion of transport vesicles with the plasma membrane. The exocytic machinery includes members of the Rab family of small guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins and SNARE proteins that target delivery of transport vesicles to specific membrane domains [55,56]. Although not yet identified, other adapter proteins must also exist, because the sorting of E-cadherin, Na+,K+ATPase, and proteins with dileucine-containing basolateral targeting motifs is AP-1B independent.
In contrast to basolateral proteins, apically targeted proteins are transported by both direct and indirect pathways [57,58]. Proteins that traffic directly to the apical membrane include those that associate with glycolipid- and cholesterolrich membrane domains, such as the brush border hydrolase sucrose-isomaltase, as well as proteins that are targeted independently of these membrane domains, such as lactase­ phlorizin hydrolase. Dependence on actin also differentiates these two direct transport pathways, as transport of sucroseisomaltase occurs along actin tracks and is inhibited by actin depolymerization, whereas lactase­phlorizin hydrolase transport is actin independent. The targeting motifs that direct

apical delivery have been more difficult to identify than their basolateral counterparts. Thus far, ectodomain glycosylation sites and transmembrane protein domains, including those that allow association with glycolipid- and cholesterol-rich membranes, have been implicated in apical targeting [59].
Direct trafficking to the apical membrane is not used by all proteins nor in all cell types. In hepatocytes, for example, all membrane proteins are first delivered to the basolateral surface. The apically destined proteins are then transcytosed to the apical, or canalicular, surface. A simple example of this type of sorting in hepatocytes and intestinal epithelia is provided by the polyimmunoglobulin (IgA) receptor, which binds IgA on the basal surface and is then transcytosed and released as secretory component into bile or the intestinal lumen [60]. In addition to specific targeting sequences that direct basolateral and then apical delivery, transcytosis also requires microtubules, which serve as tracks for the movement of transport vesicles from basolateral to apical surfaces. Why apical proteins without specific basolateral duties take this indirect pathway remains unclear. However, this mechanism is useful for the redistribution of apical proteins errantly targeted to the basolateral membrane, as well as for the sorting of membrane proteins during the initial stages of epithelial polarization.
Maintenance of membrane domains Once delivered to the correct plasma membrane domain, proteins can be retained through interactions with actinbased cytoskeletal proteins. For example, the Na+,K+-ATPase is stabilized on the basolateral membrane domain by attachment to the cytoskeleton through the linker proteins ankyrin and spectrin. The complex functions of the apical membrane require intricate structures, such as parietal cell secretory canaliculi (see Chapter 13) and enterocyte microvilli. Assembly and maintenance of these membrane domains depends, in part, on ezrin­radixin­moesin (ERM) proteins, which play a critical role in the organization of apical, or free, membrane domains in species as diverse as C. elegans, Drosophila, and mammals, and in multiple cell types from epithelia to lymphocytes [61]. These highly conserved cytoskeletal proteins link membrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton by way of an amino-terminal cargo-binding domain and a carboxyterminal actin-binding domain. The cargo-binding domain can interact with transmembrane proteins either directly or through accessory proteins, such as NHERF-1, NHERF-2, and PDZK1 [62­67]. These accessory proteins can also anchor protein kinases (e.g., protein kinase A), thus serving as a scaffold for the organization of signaling complexes [66,68,69]. For example, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) is bound to PDZ domains in NHERF-1 or NHERF-2. These interactions stabilize CFTR at the apical membrane and tether CFTR to protein kinase A, thereby enhancing the ability of protein kinase A to activate CFTR [68,70]. Ezrin-dependent mechanisms have also been implicated in

173

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

stimulated apical delivery of the apical Na+/H+ exchanger NHE3, after the initiation of Na+/glucose cotransport in enterocytes, and in the acute surface delivery of the H+,K+-ATPase in histamine-stimulated parietal cells [71,72]. Studies in knockout mice lacking ezrin, the only ERM protein expressed in enterocytes, confirm the central role of this protein in organizing the apical membrane [73]. Enterocytes in these mice develop only primitive microvilli and fail to correctly target some proteins to the apical membrane. Moreover, the villi are irregularly shaped, with intravillous lumens and fused profiles. Not surprisingly, these mice fail to wean and die in the early postnatal period.
Organization of the cytoskeleton The cytoskeleton is considered here in the context of the villous absorptive enterocyte, a cell type that has become an important model for studies of cytoskeletal structure and function in nonmuscle cells. The cytoskeletal organization of columnar epithelia throughout the gastrointestinal tract exhibits only relatively minor differences. The stabilization of epithelial cell structure first requires support for the tall columnar shape; in the absence of the cytoskeleton, a sphere would have the most thermodynamically favorable properties. Maintenance of cell shape is primarily a function of the actin microfilaments that form a network beneath the entire plasma membrane (Fig. 8.2). Bundles of 20­30 actin filaments also form the submembranous cores responsible for microvillous architecture. Within these cores, individual microfilaments are cross-linked to each other by actin-bundling proteins and to the microvillous membrane by a member of the myosin family, myosin IA. The microvillous actin bundles jut into the apical pole of the cell and associate with a terminal web composed of actin and type II myosin that interfaces with the apical junctional complex. The tension of this perijunctional actomyosin ring can be adjusted in response to physiological and pathophysiological stimuli, allowing modulation of epithelial barrier function (see Regulation of barrier function by physiological stimuli and Dysregulation of barrier function in intact epithelium).
Cables composed of intermediate filaments course through the cells and function as support cables for structural buttressing. Such tonofilament cables associate with plasma membranes and insert into the desmosomes. This network of intercellular junctions and intermediate filaments is required for the intestinal epithelia to interface with the turbulent environment of the gut lumen.
Microtubules also form a unique array in polarized epithelial cells. In contrast to nonpolarized cells in which microtubules radiate from a single microtubule organizing center adjacent to the nucleus, microtubules in polarized epithelia are aligned apicobasally. With the assistance of microtubuledependent motor proteins, kinesins and dyneins, which can transport vesicles along microtubule arrays, membranebound structures are trafficked throughout the cell. This

microtubule network is particularly important in transcytosis; microtubule disruption markedly slows this process.
Basement membrane In addition to its important structural and supportive roles, the basement membrane serves as a source of signals for inducing epithelial cell polarity. All alimentary epithelia reside on a basement membrane that is 20­40 nm deep, consists of a fibrillar network, and rests on an underlying extracellular matrix (Fig. 8.1). The basement membrane in the alimentary tract, similar to basement membranes in other tissues, is composed primarily of laminin, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and type IV collagen. Minor constituents that may be functionally important include thrombospondin and entactin/nidogen-1.
Laminin exhibits specific binding sites for type IV collagen, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, cell surface laminin receptors, and entactin. Other matrix components also possess binding sites for additional components, adding to the complexity of interactions between the epithelial cell and its surrounding environment. The major proteoglycans of the basement membrane, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, consist of long chains of glycosaminoglycans linked to a protein core. The structure of these massive molecules is often likened to a testtube brush, with the bristles representing the glycosaminoglycan extensions. Proteoglycans probably organize water within the basement membrane, hydrating this environment through their capacity to bind water, and possibly imparting solute-sieving characteristics under conditions of bulk water flow. Although a controversial concept, impaired water and electrolyte absorption may cause the watery diarrhea seen in collagenous colitis, a disease that manifests thickening of the basement membrane [74,75].
Type IV collagen originates as a triple-stranded helical molecule, which, unlike other collagens, does not have its propeptides sheared from it after deposition in the extracellular space. Partially as a result of this, collagen IV does not cross-link into dense fibrils; instead it assumes a loose, netlike structure by associating with other collagen IV molecules. This mesh-like structure of collagen IV may provide the basic structure to the basement membrane.
Basement membrane components can exert significant effects on epithelia, including modulation of proliferation, adhesion, migration, differentiation, and even barrier function. In the intestine, type IV collagen is produced primarily by mesenchymal cells, heparan sulfate proteoglycans by epithelial cells, and laminin by both mesenchymal and epithelial cells. Many basement membrane components bind to a family of epithelial cell surface molecules, the integrins, which are connected to the actin cytoskeleton through linker proteins. Through such associations, structural elements within the cell are able to connect with, and potentially be influenced by, events occurring within the basement membrane and more deeply within the extracellular matrix.

174

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

Epithelial barriers
Various sites in the alimentary tract are threatened by the presence of acid, bile, undigested potentially antigenic proteins, bacterial proteins, and live bacteria. It is not surprising, therefore, that the epithelial barrier consists of numerous components that prevent injury from these varying insults. Some of these components are site specific and others are universally present. To discuss these barriers, we arbitrarily divide them into two major categories: those that are extrinsic to the epithelium (although in some instances produced by the epithelium) and those provided by the physical presence of the epithelium, which we describe as intrinsic barriers.
Extrinsic barriers Extrinsic barriers confront the microenvironment overlying the epithelia.
Mucus All alimentary epithelia are coated with a layer of mucus that protects against bacteria and surface shear forces (Fig. 8.5). Most surfaces, including those of the stomach, the intestine, the pancreatobiliary ducts, and the gallbladder, contain specialized cell types that synthesize, package, and secrete mucin. In the esophagus, mucin is derived from small glands that lie under the epithelium and connect to the lumen by way of delicate ducts. Although the precise chemical nature of mucus varies throughout the alimentary tract, the various mucin molecules share common features. They are viscous, polydispersed glycoproteins (250­20 000 kDa) of which about 80% of the mass is carbohydrate. At least eight human mucin-producing genes (MUC) have been identified. MUC2 is the predominant form in intestinal and colonic surfaces. Esophageal MUC2 expression can be a marker of Barrett

esophagus: In inflammatory bowel disease and cancer, altered MUC2 expression may occur.
Mucins act as a barrier by behaving as a viscous hydrated gel which undoubtedly attenuates shear forces that the epithelium would otherwise experience from lumenal particulates that are driven down the alimentary tract by peristaltic propulsion. In addition, carbohydrate groups on mucin molecules may bind to bacterial surfaces, thereby inhibiting surface adhesion and colonization. In some instances, mucin carbohydrates replicate epithelial carbohydrate binding sites to which bacteria can attach, presumably preventing colonization by acting as a molecular decoy. Given their extensive glycosylation, mucins can cross-link and aggregate bacteria. Such aggregation presumably aids in bacterial clearance. Exposure of epithelial surfaces to threats such as bacterial toxins and noxious chemicals often results in a reflexive secretory release of mucins, further augmenting their protective effects. Mucin depletion is a nonspecific histological indicator of ongoing injury often noted in biopsy specimens. The expression of mucin genes and the secretion of mucin by goblet cells respond to intestinal microbes and host-derived inflammatory mediators and are altered by infections, such as Helicobacter pylori in the stomach. Consistent with the essential protective role ascribed to mucins, mice deficient in Muc2, which is down-regulated in human inflammatory bowel disease, develop spontaneous colitis [76].
It has been observed that the diffusion coefficients of hydrophilic molecules are substantially lower in mucin than in free solution. Some researchers have suggested that this alteration would diminish contact between the epithelial surface and lumenal threats such as acid. Given the depth of the mucin layer and the duration that lumenal contents are in contact with the epithelium, however, small molecules probably have sufficient time to equilibrate within the mucous gel.

IgA

Figure 8.5 Epithelial barriers. The intestinal epithelium is the focal point around which the interaction of lumenal material and subepithelial cells, including those of the immune system, is organized. In addition to conducting vectorial transport and maintaining a cellular barrier, epithelia also contribute to host defense by elaborating mucus and transporting immunoglubulins.

Dendritic cell

IgG Unstirred layer Mucus layer

Intraepithelial lymphocyte

M cell

Macrophage

Goblet cell

Basement membrane Lymphocyte

175

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Unstirred layer Peristalsis creates a rather turbulent environment in the gastrointestinal lumen. This turbulence or convective force does not extend to the epithelial surface. The best estimate is that an aqueous layer with a thickness of 300­800 µm lies above the epithelia. This apical microenvironment is still, that is, it is unstirred. Convective forces then increase rapidly with increasing distance from the mucosal surface. Although not fully determined, the physiological impact of the unstirred layer on the immediate environment to which epithelial cells are exposed must be profound.
The presence and volume of the unstirred layer may significantly affect nutrient absorption. For example, if the epithelial transport system can transport a given nutrient more rapidly than the nutrient can diffuse into the unstirred layer, diffusion becomes the rate-limiting step in absorption. In contrast, polymeric nutrients that are broken down into monomers at the brush border (e.g., carbohydrates) may be formed at very high rates within the unstirred layer. Should local nutrient concentrations exceed transporter capacity, this in itself represents the rate-limiting step in absorption. Because the concentration of a molecule at the epithelial surface is unlikely to be equivalent to the concentration of that molecule in the center of the lumen, the challenge of measuring solute concentrations within the unstirred layer obscures the biophysics of many transport reactions within the intact intestine. Thus, the confounding issue of the unstirred layer must be confronted when analyzing molecular transport kinetics.
Secreted immunoglobulins The epithelial surfaces in the alimentary tract are for the most part bathed by secretory IgA and IgG (Fig. 8.5). Secretory IgA is produced as a dimer by lamina propria plasma cells, transcytosed by the polyimmunoglublin receptor, and released into the lumen as a consequence of proteolytic clipping of the receptor. IgG is transcytosed by the neonatal Fc receptor [77]. By binding to lumenal threats such as pathogenic bacteria or toxins, secretory IgA and IgG act as barriers to antigenic material [78]. Although of extreme importance in host defense, this barrier is highly specific and dependent on prior antigenic sensitization [79]. Secretory IgA binding to the surfaces of pathogens may not only impede pathogen­epithelial interactions over most of the epithelial surface but also actually enhance pathogen­epithelial interactions at selected sites such as the M cells [80], a cell type responsible for the afferent limb of intestinal immunity.
Secreted bicarbonate In contrast to the extrinsic barriers discussed previously, some extrinsic barriers have regional variation. One welldescribed example is the net bicarbonate (HCO3-) secretion by epithelia that interface with the acidic lumenal environment

of the stomach. The proximal duodenum also must protect itself from gastric acid, as pancreatic bicarbonate secretions enter the gut lumen further downstream. The effects of epithelial bicarbonate secretion on the stomach and the duodenum are of central interest [81]. Clearly the first line of defense is the neutralization of intralumenal acid before it reaches the epithelium. As a result, the unstirred layer overlying the epithelium has a pH much closer to neutral than layers more distant from the mucosal surface [82­85]. In vivo confocal imaging of the gastric juxtamucosal alkaline layer in anesthetized mice shows that the pH set point of this layer is determined by the balance between epithelial H+ and HCO3- secretion and not by the thickness of the unstirred layer [86]. Further, the presence or absence of the gastric mucus layer appears to have no effect on surface pH. Thus, apical HCO3- secretion by gastric surface foveolar cells and duodenal villous absorptive cells is an important example of a highly specific and regionally localized extrinsic epithelial barrier. Intracellular HCO3- may also play an important role in cytoprotection of the duodenal epithelium [87], providing further evidence of the complex interactions between multiple ion transporters [85].
Antimicrobial peptides Gut epithelial cells produce and secrete peptides with antimicrobial functions. Several classes of peptides have been isolated from humans, including members of the defensin, cathelicidin, and histatin families. Paneth cells at the base of the crypts in the small intestine and ascending colon release certain enzymes with antimicrobial activity, including lysozyme and type II phospholipase A2. Paneth cells also produce defensin peptides [88], of which some are released specifically in response to bacteria [89,90]. Some defensins not only exert direct antibacterial activity [91] but also orchestrate a protective host response by signaling to immune cells and by stimulating apical Cl- and water secretion to flush the lumen [92,93]. The observations that the susceptibility gene NOD2 for Crohn's disease is required for expression of some defensins [94] and that decreased defensin gene copy number may be related to colonic Crohn's disease [95] suggest that disruption of essential protective defensin functions may contribute to the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease [96].
Intrinsic barriers The contribution and presence of specific extrinsic barriers vary in different regions of the gastrointestinal tract. In contrast, the intrinsic barrier is formed by the continuous sheet of epithelial cells that lines the entire gastrointestinal tract. This uninterrupted epithelial layer separates lumenal material from the subepithelial space.
Classically, discussions of epithelial barrier function consider two routes by which material may traverse the barrier;

176

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

the transcellular and paracellular pathways (Fig. 8.3). The exact physical site where solutes cross the epithelium was a topic of considerable controversy until it was recognized that proteins insert into and form channels across lipid bilayers. Similarly, the paracellular pathway was thought to be impermeable and unregulated, a misconception perpetuated well into the 20th century because of the static appearance of intercellular contacts seen in early electron micrographs. Indeed, even the term "tight" junction is a misnomer, as tight junctions form a transcellular barrier that selectively allows paracellular flux of ions and small molecules. Our present understanding of transcellular and paracellular transport emerged along with the recognition that both are physiologically regulated and vary widely in different tissues. Transepithelial transport of hydrophilic solutes along these two pathways will be discussed below. The movement of water and hydrophobic molecules across the epithelium poses unique challenges. Hydrophobic compounds can cross epithelial cells directly by virtue of their solubility in the lipid bilayer. For example, saturated fatty acids cross jejunal epithelial cell microvillous membranes at rates more than 1011-fold faster than they diffuse in aqueous solution. Fat absorption, the most physiologically important transepithelial movement of hydrophobic compounds, is considered separately (see Chapter 18). Transmucosal water movement, although incompletely understood, is discussed later in this chapter (see Water movement across the epithelial barrier).
Transcellular pathway The transcellular pathway is highly restrictive to the passive flow of hydrophilic solutes. To traverse an epithelial cell, an ion or other hydrophilic solute must interact with three barriers in series: the apical membrane, the cytosol, and the basolateral membrane (Fig. 8.3). Although the cytosol has the potential to limit transcellular molecular flux, the two plasma membranes are the key barriers that restrict the passive movement of hydrophilic solutes across epithelial cells.
The lipid bilayers of the apical and basolateral membranes prevent massive flux of hydrophilic solutes and preserve transmembrane electrochemical gradients; the high resistance to passive ion flow across model lipid bilayers approaches impermeability. Biological membranes, which are composed of lipid bilayers and membrane proteins, are slightly less impermeable, but still capable of considerable resistances to passive ion flow that are several orders of magnitude greater than those of intact alimentary epithelial cell membranes. Integral membrane proteins such as transporters, pumps, and channels contribute to the relative permeability of alimentary epithelia. These proteins serve a critical need as the transmembrane movement of ions is essential for cellular homeostasis.
As discussed previously, vectorial transport relies on the polarized delivery of transporters, pumps, and channels to

the apical and basolateral membranes. The specific example of glucose absorption in the small intestine will be considered here (Fig. 8.3). For detailed discussions of absorption and secretion see Chapters 13­20. Glucose is actively transported across the apical plasma membrane by the Na+/glucose cotransporter SGLT1 [1]. The absence of this critical transporter results in glucose­galactose malabsorption, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by the failure to absorb these carbohydrates from the diet [97]. The energy source that allows efficient uptake of lumenal glucose by SGLT1 is the high extracellular, and low intracellular, Na+ concentration; two Na+ ions are absorbed along with each glucose molecule. The apical positioning of SGLT1 ensures that glucose is never secreted into the lumen, as the Na+ gradient makes this thermodynamically unfavorable. The necessity for this apical SGLT1 targeting was clearly shown by defects in transepithelial Na+ and glucose transport when an SGLT1 molecule engineered to include a basolateral targeting sequence was transgenically expressed in intestinal epithelial cells [2]. Once within the cytosol, Na+ and glucose diffuse to the basolateral membrane. Here, Na+ ions are pumped out of the cell and into the subepithelial and basolateral interstitium by the Na+,K+-ATPase, and glucose molecules diffuse across the membrane in a concentration-dependent manner facilitated by the glucose transporter GLUT2. The basolateral positioning of GLUT2 allows it to operate in the reverse direction, bringing glucose into the epithelial cell from the subepithelial interstitium, in the absence of lumenal nutrients. SGLT1 and GLUT2 are specific transporters for sugars; other transporters with similar properties manage the transport of amino acids and other nutrients. It should be apparent that the subepithelial deposition of Na+ and glucose results in an osmotic gradient that drives water absorption (Fig. 8.3). This is exemplified by the severe diarrhea and dehydration that are usually fatal in patients with glucose­galactose malabsorption unless these sugars are eliminated from the diet (see Chapter 51).
Paracellular pathway The paracellular pathway is a major pathway for passive solute permeation. Although plasma membranes tend toward high resistance, alimentary epithelia, with the exception of the esophageal epithelium, have low net resistance, meaning that they are relatively leaky. Detailed molecular, biophysical, and morphological analyses have shown that the paracellular pathway is largely responsible for the leakiness of these epithelia.
The paracellular pathway consists of the apical intercellular tight junction and the underlying paracellular space. Under most conditions the tight junctions are the ratelimiting barrier, restricting passive movement of hydrophilic solutes through the paracellular space. The permeability of tight junctions to ions and solutes varies between tissues and even between sites within tissues (e.g., crypt vs villus) and, in the resting physiological state, tight junctions may leak small

177

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

quantities of molecules the size of monosaccharides and disaccharides. The degree of this leakiness is regulated and, as will be described, greatly increased under some conditions [30,98,99].
The selective ionic permeability of the tight junction is largely defined by the expression of specific members of the claudin family of proteins [25,100,101]. Familial hypomagnesemia, a disease of deficient renal tubular Mg2+ reabsorption resulting from the loss of a single claudin isoform [23,102], is the best example of this selective mechanism. Although similar genetic losses of claudin family members have not been described in gastrointestinal disease, the unique claudin protein distributions along the length of the gastrointestinal tract, as well as along the crypt­villus axis, explain, at least in part, the variation in paracellular permeability at different sites [103]. Changes in the specific pattern of claudins expressed by intestinal epithelia may also contribute to disease. For example, inflammatory bowel disease is associated with increased claudin-2 expression and decreased claudin-5 and -8 expression [104­107]. In vitro studies suggest that claudin-2 expression increases tight junction permeability [101,108], which is consistent with the reported increased permeability in inflammatory bowel disease.
Water movement across the epithelial barrier Despite the obvious importance of fluid transport across gastrointestinal epithelia, controversy remains about the relative importance of the transcellular vs paracellular routes. One route for transcellular water movement is through transmembrane channels created by members of the aquaporin protein family [109]. These small integral membrane proteins are well studied in tissues specialized for regulated water transport, such as the collecting duct of the kidney. Although aquaporins are expressed in gastrointestinal epithelia, and expression may be reduced in colitis [110], their contribution to water movement in the gastrointestinal tract remains unknown. Numerous mouse models deficient in specific aquaporins have shown defective water movement in salivary glands, pancreas, and liver, but only minor difficulty in handling water in the intestine [109,111,112]. Other models have suggested that the apical Na+/glucose cotransporter SGLT1 serves as a molecular water pump, carrying a large number of water molecules with each glucose molecule transported [113]. However, the osmotic gradient discussed previously can completely explain the enhanced water absorption induced by Na+/glucose cotransport, thereby raising some doubt as to the quantitative contribution of this pathway [114,115]. Transcellular water movement may also occur across lipid membranes; water movement is much less restricted than that of hydrophilic solutes. However, the mechanism by which water permeates biological membranes in the absence of specific channels is uncertain.
Although there is general agreement that water flux requires both transcellular and paracellular routes, the relat-

ive contribution of each is controversial. Some data suggest that about 50% of the water absorption stimulated by Na+/glucose absorption is paracellular. Data from a variety of other epithelia show that interepithelial differences in hydraulic conductivity, a measure of force-induced water flux, correlate reasonably well with transepithelial electrical resistance. Finally, data suggest that a leaky paracellular pathway is necessary to support the massive water secretion that accompanies acute immune-mediated diarrhea [30]. These observations suggest that the paracellular pathway is a major route for water flow across intestinal epithelia whether such flow is driven by hydrostatic or osmotic pressures [116­118].
Transport of xenobiotics The gastrointestinal tract, particularly the small intestine, is actively involved in the transport and metabolism of foreign chemical compounds, including environmental toxins and therapeutic agents. Many of these so-called xenobiotics are absorbed transcellularly; some are lipophilic and dissolve easily in lipid membranes. Others take advantage of apical uptake pathways that are normally expressed, such as the apical Na+-dependent bile salt transporter or members of the organic anion transporting polypeptide family [3,119,120]. Basolateral transporters, such as multidrug resistance associated protein 3, ABCC3, may then allow xenobiotics to traverse the basolateral membrane [121]. A significant fraction of these compounds may never reach the basolateral membrane, as members of the cytochrome P450 system expressed in enterocytes may contribute a "first-pass" effect of their own [122]. Analogous to the effects of drugs metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome P450 system, enterocyte nuclear receptors can up-regulate expression of enterocyte drug transporters and cytochrome P450 enzymes [3,119]. These layers of regulation not only challenge the maintenance of steady-state drug levels but also increase the potential for drug interactions [123]. Dysregulation of xenobiotic metabolism and transporter activity may be a pathogenetic mechanism in inflammatory bowel disease [124]. Genetic polymorphisms in these transporter proteins may also lead to significant variation in clinical responses [125,126].
In addition to metabolic clearance, active secretion rapidly clears many xenobiotics from the intestine. This secretory activity, which is primarily mediated by MDR1, an apical multidrug resistance transporter family member [124,127], exhibits significant interindividual variability, similar to absorption and metabolism. Interestingly, MDR1 mutations have been associated with inflammatory bowel disease in some patient populations [128], and a knockout mouse lacking mdr1 spontaneously develops colitis [129,130]. MDR1 polymorphisms may also be related to disease behavior in ulcerative colitis [127,131], suggesting that defective export of an unidentified xenobiotic contributes to the pathophysiology of intestinal disease [132].

178

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

Epithelial homeostasis and responses to disease and injury
Commensal bacteria Bacteria normally colonize the entire human gastrointestinal tract, with the highest concentration and number of species in the colon. Although bacterial cells outnumber the cells of the human body by about 10-fold, most of these organisms belong to only three evolutionary divisions that are, at least in part, modified in a host-specific manner [133­135] (see Chapter 25). These nonpathogenic bacteria are termed commensal, to distinguish them from well-characterized pathogenic species such as Salmonella, Shigella, and Clostridium difficile. It appears that the commensal host­bacteria relationship is beneficial [136], as normal gut function is highly dependent on resident bacteria. Such probiotic effects take several forms, including competing with pathogens for attachment to the epithelial surface, triggering intracellular signal transduction events that limit disease, and inciting the epithelium to release antimicrobial compounds [137­139]. Studies in germ-free mice show that the normal development of immune cell lineages in the bone marrow and the lamina propria and local humoral defense depends on the presence of the commensal bacteria in the gut [140,141]. Inductive effects on epithelial cell gene transcription have also been observed [142]. For example, introducing commensal Bacteroides species into germ-free mice extensively alters the bacterial and epithelial transcription profiles toward gene products that enhance nutrient uptake and metabolism [143­145], revealing a possible association with obesity [146,147].
Although the molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood, published reports of the probiotic effects of commensal bacteria are increasing. For example, sterilization of the gut greatly enhances disease severity in some murine models of colitis [138,139,148]. This effect appears to be at least partially mediated by toll-like receptors (TLRs) that specifically recognize bacterial products [138,139,149­152]. Beneficial effects of probiotics have been reported in experimental disease as well as in ulcerative colitis and pouchitis [153­155]. The effects of bacteria on intestinal function are discussed in detail in Chapters 25, 48, 49, and 52.
Physiological epithelial injury Epithelial injury is most readily apparent when gaps within the epithelium such as erosions or ulcerations are present. However, because the gut has a remarkable ability for repair, many forms of focal acute injury do not result in functionally significant defects. One example is the rapid sealing of wounds that must occur during the physiologically normal turnover of gastrointestinal epithelia. Gut epithelial cells turn over, on average, once each week through coordinated proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and sloughing. For example,

small intestinal enterocytes arise from the stem cell compartment, i.e., the crypt, migrate upward through the proliferative zone, and undergo an ordered process of differentiation as their phenotype is modified from undifferentiated secretory cell to fully differentiated villous absorptive cell. They are then sloughed from the villous surface. Membrane proteins, with half-lives considerably shorter than that of the epithelial cell, also turn over. The composition of these proteins changes remarkably during the process of differentiation. Lipid turnover undoubtedly occurs as well but technical challenges hinder its documentation. Perhaps most remarkable in this continual process of renewal is that, at sites of epithelial cell detachment, the barrier remains intact [156,157]. In vivo imaging studies suggest that a presently undefined substance fills the "gap" left as the epithelial cell exits the villus, preventing diffusion of lumenal material into the subepithelial villous core [156,158]. The renewal process must then be completed by some form of wound closure, possibly involving cytoskeletal contraction [158­161].
Regulation of barrier function by physiological stimuli Intestinal permeability can be regulated by physiological processes. For example, it is well documented that Na+/nutrient cotransport enhances the permeability of absorptive tight junctions to molecules the size of amino acids and glucose [99,162,163]. Although the physiological significance of these Na+/nutrient cotransport-induced increases in tight junction permeability remains controversial, the process probably underlies the observations that, at high lumenal glucose concentrations, both glucose and amino acid absorption exceed the capacity of their respective transcellular transport systems [164­166]. The concept of "solvent drag" offers an explanation [167]. For example, as described previously, active transcellular Na+ and nutrient absorption result in the development of a transepithelial osmotic gradient that drives water absorption. Solvent drag is the mechanism by which water absorption across the tight junctions with increased permeability allows the solvent (i.e., water) to drag nutrient-sized molecules (i.e., free glucose within the unstirred layer) across the tight junction. In this manner, transcellular absorption is amplified by paracellular absorption [167]. The latter depends on generation of a suitable transepithelial osmotic gradient and increased permeability of tight junctions to small molecules. This mechanism can also enhance paracellular absorption of undegradable compounds, such as D-amino acid-substituted short peptides and creatinine [168,169]. Oral pharmaceutical delivery may benefit from use of this pathway.
Physiological tight junction regulation is initially triggered by the apical Na+/glucose cotransporter SGLT1 (Fig. 8.3). This initiation of Na+/glucose cotransport activates a signal transduction pathway that induces increased NHE3-mediated apical Na+/H+ exchange, resulting in mild cytoplasmic

179

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

alkalinization and enhance Na+ absorption [170,171]. These events are accompanied by the activation of myosin light chain kinase, which phosphorylates the myosin II regulatory light chain and triggers contraction of the perijunctional actomyosin ring [172]. Although the molecular details of the subsequent tight junction remodeling are not yet defined, it is clear that this myosin II regulatory light chain phosphorylation is required for Na+/glucose cotransport-induced increases in tight junction permeability.
Dysregulation of barrier function in intact epithelium Despite an intact epithelium, tight junction permeation to inert solutes is enhanced in many inflammatory, infectious, ischemic, and immune-mediated intestinal diseases [173,174]. For example, permeability defects in celiac sprue can be reversed by a gluten-free diet [175]. Similarly, in both graft-versus-host disease and HIV infection, increased serum lipopolysaccharide levels (reflecting leakage of lumenal contents) correlate with disease severity [176,177].
Permeability defects are also seen in Crohn's disease; increased permeability in patients with inactive disease can predict disease reactivation [178,179]. In addition, permeability defects are present in a subset of healthy first-degree relatives of patients with Crohn's disease [180,181]. This has led to speculation that a primary defect in tight junction barrier function may cause Crohn's disease [181­183]. Despite this, it is clear that the inflammation of Crohn's disease can also cause increased permeability, as barrier function can be restored by treatment with antibodies that neutralize tumor necrosis factor [184]. Conversely, tumor necrosis factor acutely reduces barrier function in cultured intestinal epithelial monolayers and jejunal epithelia of intact mice [116,185­187].
In a remarkable demonstration of how pathophysiological events can hijack physiological regulatory mechanisms, investigators have shown that tumor necrosis factor disrupts the intestinal epithelial tight junction by way of myosin II regulatory light chain phosphorylation [188]. In vitro studies have shown that this is due to both transcriptional and enzymatic activation of myosin light chain kinase [185,186,189,190], and that similar increases in myosin light chain kinase expression and enzymatic activity correlate with disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease [191]. Moreover, in vivo work has shown that myosin light chain kinase-driven loss of barrier function is required for the development of acute tumor necrosis factor-mediated diarrhea [30]. These data have led to the proposal of a disease model in which impaired mucosal barrier function leads to increased leakage of lumenal contents and inappropriate immune stimulation, subsequent interferon- and tumor necrosis factor release, and further loss of barrier function. The result is a self-amplifying cycle of barrier dysfunction and inappropriate immune activation [173]. Thus, compromised barrier function may be a critical event in the initial patho-

genesis and subsequent exacerbation of inflammatory bowel disease and other intestinal diseases.
Healing of epithelial wounds The destruction of gastrointestinal epithelial cells, as occurs in erosions and ulcers, leads to the loss of epithelial barrier function. Both the magnitude and duration of injury determine the epithelial response. Wounds representing loss of approximately 1­10 epithelial cells close extremely rapidly, within 30 min or less, by a purse-string closure mechanism [159­161,192]. This response depends on some of the same cytoskeletal mechanisms discussed previously, with small GTPases (e.g., Rho) directing the assembly of a ring of actin cables at the edge of the wound (Fig. 8.6) [159,193]. These cables, which are connected across adjacent cells by intercellular junctions, assemble within minutes of wounding and then begin to contract by a mechanism that requires myosin light chain kinase activity [159]. As noted, some data suggest that a similar purse-string mechanism maintains the epithelium after the extrusion of single apoptotic cells, which is a normal physiological process.
Larger epithelial wounds must also be sealed quickly. The initial rapid cell migration, termed restitution, involves a dramatic cytoskeletally directed modification of cell shape (Fig. 8.6) [194]. The columnar cells bordering a wound, normally tall, spread to become flattened, taking on an almost squamoid appearance and maximizing the basement membrane surface area covered by each cell [194]. Often seen in intestinal endoscopic biopsies, this flattened appearance is an easily recognized marker of ongoing epithelial restitution. Persistent injury also stimulates cell growth. The same stimuli often evoke both motogenic (migration-promoting) and mitogenic (proliferation-promoting) effects [195­199]. Thus, inflammatory mediators and growth factors may promote initial reepithelialization of wounds by initiating restitution, and support this process over extended periods by enhancing cell proliferation.
Interactions of epithelia with subepithelial cells Gut epithelial function may be modulated by a host of local factors derived from nonepithelial sources, such as growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines, which are discussed in detail in Chapters 4 and 7. Direct interactions between epithelial cells and the immune system also occur; an obvious example involves the M, or microfold, cell [200]. This specialized epithelial cell resides in the convex dome epithelium that overlies mucosal lymphoid follicles. Although indistinguishable from adjacent enterocytes by light microscopy, electron microscopic evaluation shows that the basal membrane of M cells is retracted from the basement membrane, forming a cleft into which lymphocytes and macrophages migrate (Fig. 8.5). M cells actively sample lumenal material by bulk endocytosis; the transport vesicles are then released into the cleft, permitting extremely rapid delivery of

180

0 min (a)

4 min

8 min

Epithelia CHAPTER 8
12 min

(b) (c)
Figure 8.6 Mechanisms of epithelial wound closure. (a) A time-lapse series of cultured intestinal epithelial cells expressing fluorescent actin shows that a ring of actin forms to surround a wound within minutes after injury. This ring then contracts in a purse-string manner, rapidly closing the wound and restoring barrier function. (b) Immunohistochemical analysis of a small wound present in a patient with Crohn's disease shows that, similar to in vitro experimental wounds, phosphorylated myosin II regulatory light

(d)
chain is concentrated at the closing edge of the injury site. (c) Larger wounds cannot heal by simple purse-string wound closure. This specimen from a patient with ulcerative colitis shows that intestinal epithelia flatten to spread and rapidly reseal the surface, a process called restitution. (d) Contrast the flattened shape of epithelia during restitution with the tall columnar shape of epithelial cells in an area of intact mucosa. Panels (a) and (b) are from Russo et al [159], with permission from Elsevier.

lumenal material to immune cells. Infectious organisms may exploit this pathway as a route of invasion. Other epithelial cells not confined to follicle-associated epithelium may also be capable of transporting antigens to mucosal immune cells [201], and a specialized population of dendritic cells within the ileal lamina propria actually extend slender processes across the tight junction to directly sample lumenal antigens and bacteria (Fig. 8.5) [202­204]. Finally, although not yet well described, additional cell types, beyond epithelial and immune cells, clearly regulate epithelial function [205­ 207].
Integration of mucosal function
The gastrointestinal mucosa is a complex structure that coordinates a variety of critical functions. These include balancing barrier function with the need for transepithelial movement of ions, nutrients, and antigens; rapid repair of mucosal injuries; and beneficial interactions with the array of mucosal immune cells. The precise integration of these functions centers on the epithelium, which is continuously repaired by

rapid wound closure, restitution, and other mechanisms. The gut epithelial barrier, which restricts passive movement of molecules, is complex and dynamic. Maintenance of this barrier depends on the integrity of cellular plasma membranes and intercellular tight junctions. The mucosal barrier also benefits from the contributions of mucus, epithelial secretory products, such as HCO3-, and secreted immunoglobulins. Potential threats within the lumen are continuously surveyed and managed by M cells, intraepithelial and lamina propria lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and macrophages. From the examples provided in this chapter, and other chapters in this textbook, it is evident that dysregulation of any of these functions can result in diseases with overlapping clinical presentations. Thus, future studies should aim to better understand the interplay between the intricate systems that comprise the gastrointestinal mucosa.
References
1. Turk E, Zabel B, Mundlos S, et al. Glucose/galactose malabsorption caused by a defect in the Na+/glucose cotransporter. Nature 1991;350:354.

181

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

2. Turner JR, Lencer WI, Carlson S, Madara JL. Carboxy-terminal vesicular stomatitis virus G protein-tagged intestinal Na+dependent glucose cotransporter (SGLT1): maintenance of surface expression and global transport function with selective perturbation of transport kinetics and polarized expression. J Biol Chem 1996;271:7738.
3. Jung D, Fantin AC, Scheurer U, et al. Human ileal bile acid transporter gene ASBT (SLC10A2) is transactivated by the glucocorticoid receptor. Gut 2004;53:78.
4. Duggan C, Fontaine O, Pierce NF, et al. Scientific rationale for a change in the composition of oral rehydration solution. JAMA 2004;291:2628.
5. Hunt JB, Elliott EJ, Fairclough PD, et al. Water and solute absorption from hypotonic glucose-electrolyte solutions in human jejunum. Gut 1992;33:479.
6. Drees F, Pokutta S, Yamada S, et al. Alpha-catenin is a molecular switch that binds E-cadherin-beta-catenin and regulates actinfilament assembly. Cell 2005;123:903.
7. Yamada S, Pokutta S, Drees F, et al. Deconstructing the cadherincatenin-actin complex. Cell 2005;123:889.
8. Murgia C, Blaikie P, Kim N, et al. Cell cycle and adhesion defects in mice carrying a targeted deletion of the integrin beta4 cytoplasmic domain. EMBO J 1998;17:3940.
9. Beaulieu JF. Differential expression of the VLA family of integrins along the crypt­villus axis in the human small intestine. J Cell Sci 1992;102:427.
10. Turck N, Lefebvre O, Gross I, et al. Effect of laminin-1 on intestinal cell differentiation involves inhibition of nuclear nucleolin. J Cell Physiol 2006;206:545.
11. Aranda V, Haire T, Nolan ME, et al. Par6-aPKC uncouples ErbB2 induced disruption of polarized epithelial organization from proliferation control. Nat Cell Biol 2006;8:1235.
12. Shin K, Straight S, Margolis B. PATJ regulates tight junction formation and polarity in mammalian epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 2005;168:705.
13. Hemminki A, Markie D, Tomlinson I, et al. A serine/threonine kinase gene defective in Peutz­Jeghers syndrome. Nature 1998; 391:184.
14. de Leng WW, Keller JJ, Luiten S, et al. STRAD in Peutz­Jeghers syndrome and sporadic cancers. J Clin Pathol 2005;58:1091.
15. Baas AF, Kuipers J, van der Wel NN, et al. Complete polarization of single intestinal epithelial cells upon activation of LKB1 by STRAD. Cell 2004;116:457.
16. Zheng B, Cantley LC. Regulation of epithelial tight junction assembly and disassembly by AMP-activated protein kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:819.
17. Moreno-Bueno G, Cubillo E, Sarrio D, et al. Genetic profiling of epithelial cells expressing e-cadherin repressors reveals a distinct role for snail, slug, and e47 factors in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Cancer Res 2006;66:9543.
18. Behrens J, Vakaet L, Friis R, et al. Loss of epithelial differentiation and gain of invasiveness correlates with tyrosine phosphorylation of the E-cadherin/-catenin complex in cell transformed with a temperature-sensitive v-SRC gene. J Cell Biol 1993;120:757.
19. Turner JR, Torres CM, Wang HH, et al. Preoperative chemoradiotherapy alters the expression and prognostic significance of adhesion molecules in Barrett's-associated adenocarcinoma. Hum Pathol 2000;31:347.
20. Malliri A, Rygiel TP, van der Kammen RA, et al. The rac activator Tiam1 is a Wnt-responsive gene that modifies intestinal tumour development. J Biol Chem 2006;281:543.
21. Kongkanuntn R, Bubb VJ, Sansom OJ, et al. Dysregulated expression of beta-catenin marks early neoplastic change in Apc mutant mice, but not all lesions arising in Msh2 deficient mice. Oncogene 1999;18:7219.
22. Furuse M, Fujita K, Hiiragi T, et al. Claudin-1 and -2: novel integral membrane proteins localizing at tight junctions with no sequence similarity to occludin. J Cell Biol 1998;141:1539.

23. Simon DB, Lu Y, Choate KA, et al. Paracellin-1, a renal tight junction protein required for paracellular Mg2+ resorption. Science 1999;285:103.
24. Van Itallie CM, Anderson JM. Claudins and epithelial paracellular transport. Annu Rev Physiol 2006;68:403.
25. Colegio OR, Van Itallie C, Rahner C, Anderson JM. Claudin extracellular domains determine paracellular charge selectivity and resistance but not tight junction fibril architecture. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2003;284:C1346.
26. Saitou M, Furuse M, Sasaki H, et al. Complex phenotype of mice lacking occludin, a component of tight junction strands. Mol Biol Cell 2000;11:4131.
27. Seth A, Sheth P, Elias BC, Rao R. Protein phosphatases 2A and 1 interact with occludin and negatively regulate the assembly of tight junctions in the CACO-2 cell monolayer. J Biol Chem 2007;282:11487.
28. Yu AS, McCarthy KM, Francis SA, et al. Knockdown of occludin expression leads to diverse phenotypic alterations in epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2005;288:C1231.
29. Shen L, Turner JR. Actin depolymerization disrupts tight junctions via caveolae-mediated endocytosis. Mol Biol Cell 2005;16:3919.
30. Clayburgh DR, Barrett TA, Tang Y, et al. Epithelial myosin light chain kinase-dependent barrier dysfunction mediates T cell activationinduced diarrhea in vivo. J Clin Invest 2005;115:2702.
31. Simonovic I, Rosenberg J, Koutsouris A, Hecht G. Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli dephosphorylates and dissociates occludin from intestinal epithelial tight junctions. Cell Microbiol 2000;2:305.
32. Rajasekaran SA, Barwe SP, Gopal J, et al. Na,K-ATPase regulates tight junction permeability through occludin phosphorylation in pancreatic epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007;292:G124.
33. Yang Z, Rayala S, Nguyen D, et al. Pak1 phosphorylation of snail, a master regulator of epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition, modulates snail's subcellular localization and functions. Cancer Res 2005;65:3179.
34. Martin-Padura I, Lostaglio S, Schneemann M, et al. Junctional adhesion molecule, a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that distributes at intercellular junctions and modulates monocyte transmigration. J Cell Biol 1998;142:117.
35. Mandicourt G, Iden S, Ebnet K, et al. JAM-C regulates tight junctions and integrin-mediated cell adhesion and migration. J Biol Chem 2007;282:1830.
36. Mandicourt G, Iden S, Ebnet K, et al. JAM-C regulates tight junctions and integrin-mediated cell adhesion and migration. J Biol Chem 2007;282:1830.
37. Cohen CJ, Shieh JT, Pickles RJ, et al. The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor is a transmembrane component of the tight junction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:15191.
38. Coyne CB, Bergelson JM. Virus-induced Abl and Fyn kinase signals permit coxsackievirus entry through epithelial tight junctions. Cell 2006;124:119.
39. Fanning AS, Little BP, Rahner C, et al. The unique-5 and -6 motifs of ZO-1 regulate tight junction strand localization and scaffolding properties. Mol Biol Cell 2007;18:721.
40. Umeda K, Matsui T, Nakayama M, et al. Establishment and characterization of cultured epithelial cells lacking expression of ZO-1. J Biol Chem 2004;279:44785.
41. Itoh M, Nagafuchi A, Moroi S, Tsukita S. Involvement of ZO-1 in cadherin-based cell adhesion through its direct binding to alpha catenin and actin filaments. J Cell Biol 1997;138:181.
42. Fanning AS, Jameson BJ, Jesaitis LA, Anderson JM. The tight junction protein ZO-1 establishes a link between the transmembrane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton. J Biol Chem 1998;273:29745.
43. Itoh M, Furuse M, Morita K, et al. Direct binding of three tight junction-associated MAGUKs, ZO-1, ZO-2, and ZO-3, with the COOH termini of claudins. J Cell Biol 1999;147:1351.
44. Cordenonsi M, D'Atri F, Hammar E, et al. Cingulin contains globular and coiled-coil domains and interacts with ZO-1, ZO-2, ZO-3, and myosin. J Cell Biol 1999;147:1569.

182

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

45. Umeda K, Ikenouchi J, Katahira-Tayama S, et al. ZO-1 and ZO-2 independently determine where claudins are polymerized in tightjunction strand formation. Cell 2006;126:741.
46. Shen L, Weber CR, Turner JR. The tight junction protein complex undergoes rapid and continuous molecular remodeling at a steady state. J Cell Biol 2008. doi/10.1083/jcb.200711165 .
47. Wang Q, Chen XW, Margolis B. PALS1 regulates E-cadherin trafficking in mammalian epithelial cells. Mol Biol Cell 2007;18:874.
48. Owens DW, Wilson NJ, Hill AJ, et al. Human keratin 8 mutations that disturb filament assembly observed in inflammatory bowel disease patients. J Cell Sci 2004;117:1989.
49. Habtezion A, Toivola DM, Butcher EC, Omary MB. Keratin-8deficient mice develop chronic spontaneous Th2 colitis amenable to antibiotic treatment. J Cell Sci 2005;118:1971.
50. Tran Van Nhieu G, Clair C, Bruzzone R, et al. Connexin-dependent inter-cellular communication increases invasion and dissemination of Shigella in epithelial cells. Nat Cell Biol 2003;5:720.
51. Dubina MV, Iatckii NA, Popov DE, et al. Connexin 43, but not connexin 32, is mutated at advanced stages of human sporadic colon cancer. Oncogene 2002;21:4992.
52. Keller P, Toomre D, Diaz E, et al. Multicolour imaging of post-Golgi sorting and trafficking in live cells. Nat Cell Biol 2001;3:140.
53. Nelson WJ, Yeaman C. Protein trafficking in the exocytic pathway of polarized epithelial cells. Trends Cell Biol 2001;11:483.
54. Sugimoto H, Sugahara M, Folsch H, et al. Differential recognition of tyrosine-based basolateral signals by AP-1B subunit mu1B in polarized epithelial cells. Mol Biol Cell 2002;13:2374.
55. Schuck S, Gerl MJ, Ang A, et al. Rab10 is involved in basolateral transport in polarized Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. Traffic 2007;8:47.
56. Lock JG, Stow JL. Rab11 in recycling endosomes regulates the sorting and basolateral transport of E-cadherin. Mol Biol Cell 2005;16:1744.
57. Polishchuk R, Di Pentima A, Lippincott-Schwartz J. Delivery of raftassociated, GPI-anchored proteins to the apical surface of polarized MDCK cells by a transcytotic pathway. Nat Cell Biol 2004;6:297.
58. Schuck S, Simons K. Polarized sorting in epithelial cells: raft clustering and the biogenesis of the apical membrane. J Cell Sci 2004;117:5955.
59. Breuza L, Garcia M, Delgrossi MH, Le Bivic A. Role of the membraneproximal O-glycosylation site in sorting of the human receptor for neurotrophins to the apical membrane of MDCK cells. Exp Cell Res 2002;273:178.
60. Casanova JE, Breitfeld PP, Ross SA, Mostov KE. Phosphorylation of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor required for its efficient transcytosis. Science 1990;248:742.
61. Hughes SC, Fehon RG. Phosphorylation and activity of the tumor suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin are coordinately regulated by the Slik kinase. J Cell Biol 2006;175:305.
62. Anzai N, Miyazaki H, Noshiro R, et al. The multivalent PDZ domain-containing protein PDZK1 regulates transport activity of renal urate-anion exchanger URAT1 via its C terminus. J Biol Chem 2004;279:45942.
63. Inoue J, Otsuki T, Hirasawa A, et al. Overexpression of PDZK1 within the 1q12-q22 amplicon is likely to be associated with drug-resistance phenotype in multiple myeloma. Am J Pathol 2004;165:71.
64. Kocher O, Comella N, Tognazzi K, Brown LF. Identification and partial characterization of PDZK1: a novel protein containing PDZ interaction domains. Lab Invest 1998;78:117.
65. Lee-Kwon W, Kawano K, Choi JW, et al. Lysophosphatidic acid stimulates brush border Na+/H+ exchanger 3 (NHE3) activity by increasing its exocytosis by an NHE3 kinase A regulatory proteindependent mechanism. J Biol Chem 2003;278:16494.
66. Sitaraman SV, Wang L, Wong M, et al. The adenosine 2b receptor is recruited to the plasma membrane and associates with E3KARP and Ezrin upon agonist stimulation. J Biol Chem 2002;277:33188.
67. Cao TT, Deacon HW, Reczek D, et al. A kinase-regulated PDZdomain interaction controls endocytic sorting of the beta2-adrenergic receptor. Nature 1999;401:286.

68. Naren AP, Cobb B, Li C, et al. A macromolecular complex of beta 2 adrenergic receptor, CFTR, and ezrin/radixin/moesin-binding phosphoprotein 50 is regulated by PKA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:342.
69. Capuano P, Bacic D, Stange G, et al. Expression and regulation of the renal Na/phosphate cotransporter NaPi-IIa in a mouse model deficient for the PDZ protein PDZK1. Pflugers Arch 2005;449:392.
70. Benharouga M, Sharma M, So J, et al. The role of the C terminus and Na+/H+ exchanger regulatory factor in the functional expression of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator in nonpolarized cells and epithelia. J Biol Chem 2003;278:22079.
71. Zhao H, Shiue H, Palkon S, et al. Ezrin regulates NHE3 translocation and activation after Na+-glucose cotransport. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:9485.
72. Zhou R, Cao X, Watson C, et al. Characterization of protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of ezrin in gastric parietal cell activation. J Biol Chem 2003;278:35651.
73. Saotome I, Curto M, McClatchey AI. Ezrin is essential for epithelial organization and villus morphogenesis in the developing intestine. Dev Cell 2004;6:855.
74. Wildt S, Madsen JL, Rumessen JJ. Small-bowel permeability in collagenous colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol 2006;41:1044.
75. Burgel N, Bojarski C, Mankertz J, et al. Mechanisms of diarrhea in collagenous colitis. Gastroenterology 2002;123:433.
76. Van der Sluis M, De Koning BA, De Bruijn AC, et al. Muc2-deficient mice spontaneously develop colitis, indicating that MUC2 is critical for colonic protection. Gastroenterology 2006;131:117.
77. Yoshida M, Claypool SM, Wagner JS, et al. Human neonatal Fc receptor mediates transport of IgG into luminal secretions for delivery of antigens to mucosal dendritic cells. Immunity 2004;20:769.
78. Yoshida M, Kobayashi K, Kuo TT, et al. Neonatal Fc receptor for IgG regulates mucosal immune responses to luminal bacteria. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2142.
79. Mora JR, Iwata M, Eksteen B, et al. Generation of gut-homing IgA-secreting B cells by intestinal dendritic cells. Science 2006;314: 1157.
80. Blanco LP, Dirita VJ. Antibodies enhance interaction of Vibrio cholerae with intestinal M-like cells. Infect Immun 2006;74:6957.
81. Akiba Y, Ghayouri S, Takeuchi T, et al. Carbonic anhydrases and mucosal vanilloid receptors help mediate the hyperemic response to luminal CO2 in rat duodenum. Gastroenterology 2006;131:142.
82. Kiviluoto T, Mustonen H, Salo J, Kivilaakso E. Regulation of intracellular pH in isolated Necturus gastric mucosa during short-term exposure to luminal acid. Gastroenterology 1995;108:999.
83. Paimela H, Kiviluoto T, Mustonen H, Kivilaakso E. Intracellular pH in isolated Necturus duodenal mucosa exposed to luminal acid. Gastroenterology 1992;102:862.
84. Montrose MH. Choosing sides in the battle against gastric acid. J Clin Invest 2001;108:1743.
85. Furukawa O, Hirokawa M, Zhang L, et al. Mechanism of augmented duodenal HCO(3)(-) secretion after elevation of luminal CO(2). Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G557.
86. Baumgartner HK, Montrose MH. Regulated alkali secretion acts in tandem with unstirred layers to regulate mouse gastric surface pH. Gastroenterology 2004;126:774.
87. Akiba Y, Furukawa O, Guth PH, et al. Cellular bicarbonate protects rat duodenal mucosa from acid-induced injury. J Clin Invest 2001;108:1807.
88. Ouellette AJ. Paneth cell alpha-defensin synthesis and function. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2006;306:1.
89. Vora P, Youdim A, Thomas LS, et al. Beta-defensin-2 expression is regulated by TLR signaling in intestinal epithelial cells. J Immunol 2004;173:5398.
90. Bevins CL. Paneth cell defensins: key effector molecules of innate immunity. Biochem Soc Trans 2006;34:263.
91. Pazgier M, Prahl A, Hoover DM, Lubkowski J. Studies of the biological properties of human beta-defensin 1. J Biol Chem 2007;282:1819.

183

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

92. Lin PW, Simon PO Jr, Gewirtz AT, et al. Paneth cell cryptdins act in vitro as apical paracrine regulators of the innate inflammatory response. J Biol Chem 2004;279:19902.
93. Lencer WI, Cheung G, Strohmeier GR, et al. Induction of epithelial chloride secretion by channel-forming cryptdins 2 and 3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:8585.
94. Kobayashi KS, Chamaillard M, Ogura Y, et al. Nod2-dependent regulation of innate and adaptive immunity in the intestinal tract. Science 2005;307:731.
95. Fellermann K, Stange DE, Schaeffeler E, et al. A chromosome 8 gene-cluster polymorphism with low human beta-defensin 2 gene copy number predisposes to Crohn disease of the colon. Am J Hum Genet 2006;79:439.
96. Bevins CL. Events at the host­microbial interface of the gastrointestinal tract. V. Paneth cell alpha-defensins in intestinal host defense. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G173.
97. Martin MG, Turk E, Lostao MP, et al. Defects in Na+/glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) trafficking and function cause glucosegalactose malabsorption. Nat Genet 1996;12:216.
98. Berglund JJ, Riegler M, Zolotarevsky Y, et al. Regulation of human jejunal transmucosal resistance and MLC phosphorylation by Na+-glucose cotransport. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;281:G1487.
99. Madara JL, Pappenheimer JR. Structural basis for physiological regulation of paracellular pathways in intestinal epithelia. J Membr Biol 1987;100:149.
100. Van Itallie CM, Anderson JM. The molecular physiology of tight junction pores. Physiology (Bethesda) 2004;19:331.
101. Van Itallie CM, Fanning AS, Anderson JM. Reversal of charge selectivity in cation or anion-selective epithelial lines by expression of different claudins. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2003;285:F1078.
102. Kausalya PJ, Amasheh S, Gunzel D, et al. Disease-associated mutations affect intracellular traffic and paracellular Mg2+ transport function of claudin-16. J Clin Invest 2006;116:878.
103. Rahner C, Mitic LL, Anderson JM. Heterogeneity in expression and subcellular localization of claudins 2, 3, 4, and 5 in the rat liver, pancreas, and gut. Gastroenterology 2001;120:411.
104. Prasad S, Mingrino R, Kaukinen K, et al. Inflammatory processes have differential effects on claudins 2, 3 and 4 in colonic epithelial cells. Lab Invest 2005;85:1139.
105. Heller F, Florian P, Bojarski C, et al. Interleukin-13 is the key effector Th2 cytokine in ulcerative colitis that affects epithelial tight junctions, apoptosis, and cell restitution. Gastroenterology 2005;129:550.
106. Zeissig S, Burgel N, Gunzel D, et al. Changes in expression and distribution of claudin 2, 5 and 8 lead to discontinuous tight junctions and barrier dysfunction in active Crohn's disease. Gut 2007;56:61.
107. Weber CR, Turner JR. Inflammatory bowel disease: is it really just another break in the wall? Gut 2007;56:6.
108. Amasheh S, Meiri N, Gitter AH, et al. Claudin-2 expression induces cation-selective channels in tight junctions of epithelial cells. J Cell Sci 2002;115:4969.
109. Verkman AS. Physiological importance of aquaporin water channels. Ann Med 2002;34:192.
110. Hardin JA, Wallace LE, Wong JF, et al. Aquaporin expression is downregulated in a murine model of colitis and in patients with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease and infectious colitis. Cell Tissue Res 2004;318:313.
111. Yang B, Song Y, Zhao D, Verkman AS. Phenotype analysis of aquaporin-8 null mice. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2005;288:C1161.
112. Verkman AS. Novel roles of aquaporins revealed by phenotype analysis of knockout mice. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 2005;155:31.
113. Meinild A, Klaerke DA, Loo DD, et al. The human Na+-glucose cotransporter is a molecular water pump. J Physiol (Lond) 1998; 508:15.
114. Gagnon MP, Bissonnette P, Deslandes LM, et al. Glucose accumulation can account for the initial water flux triggered by Na+/glucose cotransport. Biophys J 2004;86:125.

115. Duquette PP, Bissonnette P, Lapointe JY. Local osmotic gradients drive the water flux associated with Na+/glucose cotransport. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:3796.
116. Clayburgh DR, Musch MW, Leitges M, et al. Coordinated epithelial NHE3 inhibition and barrier dysfunction are required for TNFmediated diarrhea in vivo. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2682.
117. Turner JR, Clayburgh DR, Musch MW, et al. Response to field. J Clin Invest 2006;116:3088.
118. Field M. T cell activation alters intestinal structure and function. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2580.
119. Kullak-Ublick GA, Stieger B, Meier PJ. Enterohepatic bile salt transporters in normal physiology and liver disease. Gastroenterology 2004;126:322.
120. Kullak-Ublick GA, Becker MB. Regulation of drug and bile salt transporters in liver and intestine. Drug Metab Rev 2003;35:305.
121. Shoji T, Suzuki H, Kusuhara H, et al. ATP-dependent transport of organic anions into isolated basolateral membrane vesicles from rat intestine. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G749.
122. von Richter O, Burk O, Fromm MF, et al. Cytochrome P450 3A4 and P-glycoprotein expression in human small intestinal enterocytes and hepatocytes: a comparative analysis in paired tissue specimens. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;75:172.
123. Kunta JR, Sinko PJ. Intestinal drug transporters: in vivo function and clinical importance. Curr Drug Metab 2004;5:109.
124. Langmann T, Moehle C, Mauerer R, et al. Loss of detoxification in inflammatory bowel disease: dysregulation of pregnane X receptor target genes. Gastroenterology 2004;127:26.
125. Marzolini C, Tirona RG, Kim RB. Pharmacogenomics of the OATP and OAT families. Pharmacogenomics 2004;5:273.
126. Farrell RJ, Kelleher D. Glucocorticoid resistance in inflammatory bowel disease. J Endocrinol 2003;178:339.
127. Potocnik U, Ferkolj I, Glavac D, Dean M. Polymorphisms in multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene are associated with refractory Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis. Genes Immun 2004;5:530.
128. Brant SR, Panhuysen CI, Nicolae D, et al. MDR1 Ala893 polymorphism is associated with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Hum Genet 2003;73:1282.
129. Panwala CM, Jones JC, Viney JL. A novel model of inflammatory bowel disease: mice deficient for the multiple drug resistance gene, mdr1a, spontaneously develop colitis. J Immunol 1998;161:5733.
130. Resta-Lenert S, Smitham J, Barrett KE. Epithelial dysfunction associated with the development of colitis in conventionally housed mdr1a ­/­ mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289: G153.
131. Ho GT, Nimmo ER, Tenesa A, et al. Allelic variations of the multidrug resistance gene determine susceptibility and disease behavior in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2005;128:288.
132. Bilsborough J, Viney JL. Out, out darn toxin: the role of MDR in intestinal homeostasis. Gastroenterology 2004;127:339.
133. Backhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, et al. Host­bacterial mutualism in the human intestine. Science 2005;307:1915.
134. Rawls JF, Mahowald MA, Ley RE, Gordon JI. Reciprocal gut microbiota transplants from zebrafish and mice to germ-free recipients reveal host habitat selection. Cell 2006;127:423.
135. Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT, et al. Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science 2006;312:1355.
136. Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping microbial diversity in the human intestine. Cell 2006;124:837.
137. Neish AS, Gewirtz AT, Zeng H, et al. Prokaryotic regulation of epithelial responses by inhibition of IkappaB-alpha ubiquitination. Science 2000;289:1560.
138. Fukata M, Michelsen KS, Eri R, et al. Toll-like receptor-4 is required for intestinal response to epithelial injury and limiting bacterial translocation in a murine model of acute colitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G1055.
139. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, et al. Recognition of commensal microflora by toll-like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 2004;118:229.

184

Epithelia CHAPTER 8

140. Kim SC, Tonkonogy SL, Albright CA, et al. Variable phenotypes of enterocolitis in interleukin 10-deficient mice monoassociated with two different commensal bacteria. Gastroenterology 2005; 128:891.
141. Qian BF, Tonkonogy SL, Hoentjen F, et al. Dysregulated luminal bacterial antigen-specific T-cell responses and antigen-presenting cell function in HLA-B27 transgenic rats with chronic colitis. Immunology 2005;116:112.
142. McVay LD, Keilbaugh SA, Wong TM, et al. Absence of bacterially induced RELMbeta reduces injury in the dextran sodium sulfate model of colitis. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2914.
143. Sonnenburg JL, Chen CT, Gordon JI. Genomic and metabolic studies of the impact of probiotics on a model gut symbiont and host. PLoS Biol 2006;4:e413.
144. Sonnenburg JL, Xu J, Leip DD, et al. Glycan foraging in vivo by an intestine-adapted bacterial symbiont. Science 2005;307:1955.
145. Hooper LV, Wong MH, Thelin A, et al. Molecular analysis of commensal host­microbial relationships in the intestine. Science 2001;291:881.
146. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, et al. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature 2006;444:1027.
147. Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, Gordon JI. Microbial ecology: human gut microbes associated with obesity. Nature 2006;444: 1022.
148. Madsen KL. Inflammatory bowel disease: lessons from the IL-10 gene-deficient mouse. Clin Invest Med 2001;24:250.
149. Rachmilewitz D, Katakura K, Karmeli F, et al. Toll-like receptor 9 signaling mediates the anti-inflammatory effects of probiotics in murine experimental colitis. Gastroenterology 2004;126:520.
150. Lee J, Mo JH, Katakura K, et al. Maintenance of colonic homeostasis by distinctive apical TLR9 signalling in intestinal epithelial cells. Nat Cell Biol 2006;8:1327.
151. Fukata M, Chen A, Klepper A, et al. Cox-2 is regulated by Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) signaling: role in proliferation and apoptosis in the intestine. Gastroenterology 2006;131:862.
152. Sartor RB. Mechanisms of disease: pathogenesis of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006;3:390.
153. Resta-Lenert S, Barrett KE. Probiotics and commensals reverse TNF-alpha- and IFN-gamma-induced dysfunction in human intestinal epithelial cells. Gastroenterology 2006;130:731.
154. Fedorak RN, Madsen KL. Probiotics and prebiotics in gastrointestinal disorders. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2004;20:146.
155. Bibiloni R, Fedorak RN, Tannock GW, et al. VSL#3 probioticmixture induces remission in patients with active ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2005;100:1539.
156. Watson AJ, Chu S, Sieck L, et al. Epithelial barrier function in vivo is sustained despite gaps in epithelial layers. Gastroenterology 2005;129:902.
157. Madara JL. Maintenance of the macromolecular barrier at cell extrusion sites in intestinal epithelium: physiological rearrangement of tight junctions. J Membr Biol 1990;116:177.
158. Bullen TF, Forrest S, Campbell F, et al. Characterization of epithelial cell shedding from human small intestine. Lab Invest 2006;86:1052.
159. Russo JM, Florian P, Shen L, et al. Distinct temporal-spatial roles for rho kinase and myosin light chain kinase in epithelial purse-string wound closure. Gastroenterology 2005;128:987.
160. Bement WM, Forscher P, Mooseker MS. A novel cytoskeletal structure involved in purse string wound closure and cell polarity maintenance. J Cell Biol 1993;121:565.
161. Rosenblatt J, Raff MC, Cramer LP. An epithelial cell destined for apoptosis signals its neighbors to extrude it by an actin- and myosin-dependent mechanism. Curr Biol 2001;11:1847.
162. Madara JL, Carlson S. Supraphysiologic L-tryptophan elicits cytoskeletal and macromolecular permeability alterations in hamster small intestinal epithelium in vitro. J Clin Invest 1991;87:454.

163. Atisook K, Madara JL. An oligopeptide permeates intestinal tight junctions at glucose-elicited dilatations. Implications for oligopeptide absorption. Gastroenterology 1991;100:719.
164. Cummins AJ. Absorption of glucose and methionine from the human intestine: the influence of glucose concentrations in the blood and in the intestinal lumen. J Clin Invest 1952;31:928.
165. Fullerton PM, Parsons DS. Absorption of sugars and water from rat intestine in vivo. Q J Exp Physiol 1956;41:387.
166. Meddings JB, Westergaard H. Intestinal glucose transport using perfused rat jejunum in vivo: model analysis and derivation of corrected kinetic constants. Clin Sci (Lond) 1989;76:403.
167. Pappenheimer JR, Reiss KZ. Contribution of solvent drag through intercellular junctions to absorption of nutrients by the small intestine of the rat. J Membr Biol 1987;100:123.
168. Turner JR, Cohen DE, Mrsny RJ, Madara JL. Noninvasive in vivo analysis of human small intestinal paracellular absorption: regulation by Na+-glucose cotransport. Dig Dis Sci 2000;45:2122.
169. Pappenheimer JR, Dahl CE, Karnovsky ML, Maggio JE. Intestinal absorption and excretion of octapeptides composed of D amino acids. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:1942.
170. Turner JR, Black ED. NHE3-dependent cytoplasmic alkalinization is triggered by Na+-glucose cotransport in intestinal epithelia. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2001;281:C1533.
171. Shiue H, Musch MW, Wang Y, et al. Akt2 phosphorylates ezrin to trigger NHE3 translocation and activation. J Biol Chem 2005;280:1688.
172. Turner JR, Rill BK, Carlson SL, et al. Physiological regulation of epithelial tight junctions is associated with myosin light-chain phosphorylation. Am J Physiol 1997;273:C1378.
173. Clayburgh DR, Shen L, Turner JR. A porous defense: the leaky epithelial barrier in intestinal disease. Lab Invest 2004;84:282.
174. Macdonald TT, Monteleone G. Immunity, inflammation, and allergy in the gut. Science 2005;307:1920.
175. Duerksen DR, Wilhelm-Boyles C, Parry DM. Intestinal permeability in long-term follow-up of patients with celiac disease on a glutenfree diet. Dig Dis Sci 2005;50:785.
176. Cooke KR, Hill GR, Crawford JM, et al. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha production to lipopolysaccharide stimulation by donor cells predicts the severity of experimental acute graft-versus-host disease. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1882.
177. Brenchley JM, Price DA, Schacker TW, et al. Microbial translocation is a cause of systemic immune activation in chronic HIV infection. Nat Med 2006;12:1365.
178. Wyatt J, Vogelsang H, Hubl W, et al. Intestinal permeability and the prediction of relapse in Crohn's disease. Lancet 1993;341:1437.
179. D'Inca R, Di Leo V, Corrao G, et al. Intestinal permeability test as a predictor of clinical course in Crohn's disease. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:2956.
180. Katz KD, Hollander D, Vadheim CM, et al. Intestinal permeability in patients with Crohn's disease and their healthy relatives. Gastroenterology 1989;97:927.
181. Suenaert P, Bulteel V, Vermeire S, et al. Hyperresponsiveness of the mucosal barrier in Crohn's disease is not tumor necrosis factordependent. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2005;11:667.
182. Buhner S, Buning C, Genschel J, et al. Genetic basis for increased intestinal permeability in families with Crohn's disease: role of CARD15 3020insC mutation? Gut 2006;55:342.
183. Hollander D. Crohn's disease ­ a permeability disorder of the tight junction? Gut 1988;29:1621.
184. Suenaert P, Bulteel V, Lemmens L, et al. Anti-tumor necrosis factor treatment restores the gut barrier in Crohn's disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:2000.
185. Wang F, Graham WV, Wang Y, et al. Interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha synergize to induce intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction by up-regulating myosin light chain kinase expression. Am J Pathol 2005;166:409.
186. Wang F, Schwarz BT, Graham WV, et al. IFN-gamma-induced TNFR2 expression is required for TNF-dependent intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction. Gastroenterology 2006;131:1153.

185

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

187. Taylor CT, Dzus AL, Colgan SP. Autocrine regulation of epithelial permeability by hypoxia: role for polarized release of tumor necrosis factor alpha. Gastroenterology 1998;114:657.
188. Zolotarevsky Y, Hecht G, Koutsouris A, et al. A membrane-permeant peptide that inhibits MLC kinase restores barrier function in in vitro models of intestinal disease. Gastroenterology 2002;123:163.
189. Ma TY, Boivin MA, Ye D, et al. Mechanism of TNF-{alpha} modulation of Caco-2 intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier: role of myosin light-chain kinase protein expression. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G422.
190. Graham WV, Wang F, Clayburgh DR, et al. Tumor necrosis factorinduced long myosin light chain kinase transcription is regulated by differentiation-dependent signaling events. Characterization of the human long myosin light chain kinase promoter. J Biol Chem 2006;281:26205.
191. Blair SA, Kane SV, Clayburgh DR, Turner JR. Epithelial myosin light chain kinase expression and activity are upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease. Lab Invest 2006;86:191.
192. Florian P, Schoneberg T, Schulzke JD, et al. Single-cell epithelial defects close rapidly by an actinomyosin purse string mechanism with functional tight junctions. J Physiol 2002;545:485.
193. Tamada M, Perez TD, Nelson WJ, Sheetz MP. Two distinct modes of myosin assembly and dynamics during epithelial wound closure. J Cell Biol 2007;176:27.
194. Zhang J, Owen CR, Sanders MA, Turner JR, Basson MD. The motogenic effects of cyclic mechanical strain on intestinal epithelial monolayer wound closure are matrix dependent. Gastroenterology 2006;131:1179.
195. Corredor J, Yan F, Shen CC, et al. Tumor necrosis factor regulates intestinal epithelial cell migration by receptor-dependent mechanisms. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2003;184:C953.
196. Myhre GM, Toruner M, Abraham S, Egan LJ. Metalloprotease disintegrin-mediated ectodomain shedding of EGFR ligands promotes intestinal epithelial restitution. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G1213.

197. Smith JM, Johanesen PA, Wendt MK, et al. CXCL12 activation of CXCR4 regulates mucosal host defense through stimulation of epithelial cell migration and promotion of intestinal barrier integrity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G316.
198. Taupin D, Podolsky DK. Trefoil factors: initiators of mucosal healing. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003;4:721.
199. Mizoguchi E, Mizoguchi A, Takedatsu H, et al. Role of tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2) in colonic epithelial hyperplasia and chronic intestinal inflammation in mice. Gastroenterology 2002;122:134.
200. Neutra MR, Mantis NJ, Kraehenbuhl JP. Collaboration of epithelial cells with organized mucosal lymphoid tissues. Nat Immunol 2001;2:1004.
201. Kraus TA, Brimnes J, Muong C, et al. Induction of mucosal tolerance in Peyer's patch-deficient, ligated small bowel loops. J Clin Invest 2005;115:2234.
202. Macpherson AJ, Uhr T. Induction of protective IgA by intestinal dendritic cells carrying commensal bacteria. Science 2004;303: 1662.
203. Niess JH, Brand S, Gu X, et al. CX3CR1-mediated dendritic cell access to the intestinal lumen and bacterial clearance. Science 2005;307:254.
204. Chieppa M, Rescigno M, Huang AY, Germain RN. Dynamic imaging of dendritic cell extension into the small bowel lumen in response to epithelial cell TLR engagement. J Exp Med 2006;203:2841.
205. Savidge TC. Enteric glia regulate intestinal barrier function and inflammation via release of s-nitrosoglutathione. Gastroenterology 2007;132:1344.
206. Brown SL, Riehl TE, Walker MR, et al. Myd88-dependent positioning of Ptgs2-expressing stromal cells maintains colonic epithelial proliferation during injury. J Clin Invest 2007;117:258.
207. Neunlist M, Aubert P, Bonnaud S, et al. Enteric glia inhibits intestinal epithelial cell proliferation partly through a TGF1-dependent pathway. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007;292:G231.

186

B MOTILITY
9 Esophageal motor function
Peter J. Kahrilas, John E. Pandolfino

Pharynx and upper esophageal sphincter, 187 Mechanics of oropharyngeal swallowing, 190

Esophagus, 193 Esophagogastric junction, 198

The esophagus is the simplest of organs, a hollow muscular tube with a sphincter at each end, designed to keep itself empty in the face of frequent intrusions from above and below. Despite such simplicity of function, the structure and control mechanisms of the esophagus are far from simple. One of the many complexities of the esophagus is that it encompasses the anatomical and physiological transition between two distinct regions, the oropharynx and the gut. The oropharynx is composed of striated muscle, controlled by the cerebral cortex and the medulla, and is capable of precise tactile sensation; the distal esophagus is composed of smooth muscle, controlled by the vagus nerve and the enteric nervous system, and only capable of notoriously imprecise sensation. Although there is a gradual transition between these end points, motor function in the oropharynx and esophageal body are quite distinct. The ensuing discussion exemplifies this distinction, describing selected aspects of pharyngeal, gastric, and diaphragmatic functions that are inextricably entwined with esophageal functions. Similarly, in the interest of presenting swallowing as the complex, highly integrated motor response that it is, the discussion of swallowing encompasses the oropharyngeal swallow and central nervous system control mechanism as well as the strictly esophageal aspects of swallowing.
Pharynx and upper esophageal sphincter
Anatomy and function Pharynx The oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx are all involved in the task of transferring food from the palate to the esophagus. Within the oral cavity, the lips, teeth, hard palate, soft palate, mandible, floor of the mouth, and tongue serve functions
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

in masticating, containing, and forming food into a bolus suitable for transfer to the pharynx. The pharynx is a hollow cylinder extending from the base of the skull to the lower border of the cricoid cartilage. Anatomically it is separated into three segments: nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx (Fig. 9.1). The nasopharynx extends from the base of the skull to the distal edge of the soft palate. Although the nasopharynx is not part of the alimentary tract, muscles located in the nasopharynx contribute to elevating the soft palate and sealing the nasopharynx during swallowing to prevent bolus entry. The oropharynx extends from the soft palate to the base of the tongue. The inferior margin of the oropharynx is demarcated by the valleculae anteriorly and the mobile tip of the epiglottis posteriorly. The hypopharynx extends from the valleculae to the inferior margin of the cricoid cartilage and includes the upper esophageal sphincter (UES).
Muscle groups participating in deglutition include those of the soft palate, tongue, and pharynx. In addition, muscles that elevate and pull the pharynx forward, sometimes referred to as extrinsic muscles, alter the shape of the pharynx and seal the airway during deglutition. Intrinsic muscles, on the other hand, are responsible for collapsing the lumen of the pharynx and propelling the bolus into the esophagus. Within the nasopharynx, the levator veli palatini, tensor veli palatini, and palatoglossus act to raise and tense the soft palate and uvula, sealing the nasopharynx and preventing the dissipation of pressure through the nose. Posteriorly, the stylohyoid, styloglossus, palatopharyngeus, stylopharyngeus, and posterior digastric elevate the larynx, while the geniohyoid, mylohyoid, anterior digastric, and thyrohyoid pull the larynx forward and contribute to the opening of the UES.
The intrinsic muscles of the pharynx are the superior, middle, and inferior pharyngeal constrictors (see Fig. 9.1). The constrictors overlap and insert into a collagenous sheet, the buccopharyngeal aponeurosis. The superior pharyngeal constrictor arises from the pterygoid hamulus, pterygomandibular raphe, mandible, and tongue, passes posteromedially, and inserts in the posterior raphe. The middle constrictor arises from the hyoid bone and stylohyoid ligament, passes

187

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Soft palate Hard palate Oral cavity Tongue
Mylohyoid muscle Thyrohyoid membrane Vocal cord Transverse arytenoid muscle Cricothyroid membrane Cricoid cartilage

Oral pharynx Valeculae Hyoid bone Epiglottis

Laryngeal pharynx (hypopharynx)
Esophagus

Buccinator Lateral
pterygoid plate
Digastric (anterior belly)
Mylohyoid Stylohyoid Hyoid bone Thyroid cartilage Cricothyroid membrane Cricoid cartilage

Digastric (posterior belly) Superior constrictor Styloid process Styloglossus Stylohyoid ligament Glossopharyngeus Stylopharyngeus
Middle constrictor Hyoglossus Thyrohyoid membrane
Inferior constrictor
Cricopharyngeus
Esophagus

(a) (b)

Figure 9.1 Anatomy of the pharynx. (a) Sagittal view of the pharynx showing the musculoskeletal structures involved in swallowing. At rest, the esophagus is collapsed and empty. In the course of a swallow, the laryngeal inlet is sealed and the mouth of the esophagus is opened by highly

coordinated muscular activity. (b) Cutaway view of the musculature of the pharynx. Note that the hyoid bone is positioned as a fulcrum and is instrumental in directing anteriorly and superiorly acting forces toward the larynx, opening the esophageal inlet.

posteromedially, and inserts in the posterior median raphe. The inferior constrictor comprises the thyropharyngeus (superior part) and the cricopharyngeus (inferior part). The thyropharyngeus arises from the thyroid cartilage, passes posteromedially, and inserts in the median raphe. The cricopharyngeus has superior and inferior components, each of which arise bilaterally from the sides of the cricoid lamina; the superior fibers course posteromedially to the median raphe, whereas the inferior fibers loop around the esophageal inlet without a median raphe. The Killian triangle, a triangular area of thin muscular wall, is formed posteriorly between these components of the cricopharyngeus and is the site of origin of Zenker diverticulum.
The pharyngeal walls contain or are supported by five cartilages: epiglottic, arytenoid, cuneiform, corniculate, and cricoid (see Fig. 9.1). The spaces formed between the lateral insertion of the inferior constrictor and the lateral walls of the thyroid cartilage are the pyriform sinuses, which end inferiorly at the cricopharyngeus muscle, separating the pharynx from the esophagus. The larynx and trachea are suspended in the neck between the hyoid bone superiorly and the sternum inferiorly. A number of muscles, categorized as the laryngeal strap muscles, contribute to this suspension and, together with the intrinsic elasticity of the trachea, permit the larynx to be raised and lowered. The tongue rests on the hyoid bone, which also serves as its base. Laryngeal movement is crucial to the successful enactment of the swallow response as the laryngeal inlet is both closed and physically removed from

the bolus path in the course of a swallow. Failure to achieve this complex laryngeal movement can result in aspiration.
The motor neurons that innervate the pharyngeal muscles have their cell bodies in the nuclei of the trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, and hypoglossal nerves, as well as in the nucleus ambiguus and spinal segments C1­C3. The pharynx is densely innervated, with a ratio of motor fibers to muscle fibers of between 1:2 and 1:6 [1], which is comparable to ratios in the extraocular muscles and suggests the capacity for exquisite motor control. The innervation of the major pharyngeal muscles is as follows: mylohyoid, tensor veli palatini, and anterior digastric muscles ­ trigeminal nerve; stylohyoid and posterior part of the digastric ­ facial nerve; stylopharyngeus ­ glossopharyngeal nerve; levator veli palatini, palatopharyngeus, salpingopharyngeus, thryroarytenoid, arytenoid, pharyngeal constrictors, and cricopharyngeus ­ vagus nerve; thyrohyoid, geniohyoid, and tongue ­ hypoglossal nerve [2]. The nucleus ambiguus is the vagal nucleus responsible for the innervation of the striated muscle of the pharynx, larynx, and esophagus [3]. Within the nucleus ambiguus, all motor neurons seem to participate in swallowing, with those innervating the esophagus situated rostrally and those innervating the larynx situated more caudally [4]. The significance of this internal organization is highlighted by the observation that polio victims with damage to the rostral portion of the nucleus ambiguus experience dysphagia, whereas those with damage to the caudal portion experience primarily dysarthria.

188

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

Upper esophageal sphincter The muscular elements of the UES are the cricopharyngeus, adjacent esophagus, and adjacent inferior constrictor. The cricopharyngeus inserts bilaterally into the inferior­lateral margins of the cricoid lamina and the zone of maximal UES pressure is about 1 cm in length at precisely this location [5]. The closed sphincter has a slit-like configuration with the cricoid lamina anteriorly and the cricopharyngeus making up the lateral and posterior walls. Thus, it is not surprising that the resting UES pressure is markedly asymmetric with the greatest values anteriorly and posteriorly [6]. The asymmetry disappears in patients who have undergone laryngectomy, supporting the concept that the asymmetry is attributable to the cross-sectional shape imposed by the laryngeal cartilage that forms the anterior wall of the sphincter. The maintenance of high resting pressure and the precise coordination of relaxation with swallowing requires neural input. In the opossum, sphincter tone is mediated through neural fibers in the vagal trunks that originate in the nucleus ambiguus [7]. Electrophysiologically, the muscles of the UES exhibit continuous spike activity, indicating that motor neuron activity is responsible for the maintenance of tone. Cessation of firing, or administration of curare, causes relaxation, whereas increased spike activity increases tone. Vagal transection abolishes contractile activity in the cricopharyngeus and inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles [8].
Manometric evaluation of UES function is difficult because the UES is a short, complex anatomical zone that moves briskly during swallowing. Furthermore, UES pressure mea-

surement is heavily influenced by recording methodology because of both the marked asymmetry of the UES and the fact that the measurement per se stimulates sphincter contraction. The less movement applied to the recording catheter and the smaller the measuring device, the lower the recorded pressures [9]. Thus, considerable variability in reported "normal" UES pressure ranges makes it impossible to define a meaningful normal range [9]. Measurement of UES relaxation during swallowing also poses substantial recording challenges. Relaxation occurs during swallowassociated laryngeal elevation [10]. However, movements of the sphincter and the transnasally positioned catheter are dysynchronous. The UES may move 2­3 cm proximally during swallowing, whereas the sensor may move only 1 cm [10]. Given the short length of the high-pressure zone, this dissociation simulates relaxation when recorded with a point sensor. Although positioning the recording site at the proximal aspect of the UES to anticipate subsequent movement would appear to be a logical solution [11], variable movement of both the UES and the catheter among individuals and certainly among various disease conditions diminishes the reliability of such an approach. High-resolution manometry is capable of a resolution of 1 cm and can accurately measure UES pressure changes during swallowing, the degree of UES relaxation, and intrabolus pressure (Fig. 9.2).
The main function of the UES is to maintain closure of the proximal end of the esophagus unless opening is required for either swallowing or belching [12]. It constitutes an

(a) (b)
Proximal striated muscle segment

(a) Pharyngeal contraction
UES opening

Common cavity

(b)

LES relaxation

tLESR

Figure 9.2 High-resolution manometric analysis of upper esophageal sphincter (UES) function. High-resolution manometry can quantify the completeness of lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxation, intrabolus pressure, and the duration of UES opening without movement artifact. (a) UES opening during swallowing. Typical UES relaxation pressures during swallowing are less than 10 mmHg. UES closure coincides with the arrival

UES opening
of the propagated pharyngeal contraction. The contractile wave front propagates through the striated portion of the proximal esophagus. (b) UES opening during belching. During a transient LES relaxation (tLESR) a common cavity develops that leads to UES relaxation and gas venting. Note the lack of pharyngeal activity and the esophageal shortening during the tLESR.

189

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

additional barrier to refluxed materials entering the pharynx and also prevents air from entering the esophagus during inspiration. A common observation during intralumenal UES manometry or cricopharyngeal electromyography is that the UES contracts in synchrony with inspiration, a response that probably serves to prevent the inhaling of air into the esophagus. Inspiratory augmentation is most evident during periods of low UES pressure and is often undetectable during periods of higher sphincter pressures, presumably because it is obscured by more vigorous responses. Balloon distention of the esophagus stimulates UES contraction with the effect being more pronounced with proximal balloon positions [13]. However, when the distention pattern of gas reflux is imitated by using a long cylindrical balloon or by rapid air injection into the esophagus, UES relaxation rather than contraction occurs [5]. Belch-induced relaxation is also associated with glottic closure [14]. Figure 9.2 details the unique aspects of belch-associated UES relaxation compared with swallow-associated relaxation. Note especially the absence of a pharyngeal contraction and the more prolonged UES relaxation during belching. The larger the volume of air injected into the esophageal body, the longer the duration of the ensuing UES relaxation [5]. Stress augments UES pressure in humans [15], whereas anesthesia [16] or sleep [17] virtually eliminates it. Esophageal acidification was once thought to induce UES contraction [18,19] but this response has not been confirmed, even in studies involving 30 min of esophageal acid perfusion [20]. Probably the most relevant observation is that spontaneous gastroesophageal acid reflux has no effect on continuously recorded UES pressure in

either healthy volunteers [17] or in individuals with peptic esophagitis [20].
Mechanics of oropharyngeal swallowing
Oropharyngeal swallowing begins with an oral phase, which is followed by a pharyngeal phase. The largely voluntary and highly variable oral phase of swallowing is influenced by such factors as taste, environment, hunger, and motivation. Conditions characterized by global neurological dysfunction, such as head trauma, cerebral tumors, or chorea, often manifest disorders of the oral phase of swallowing. Detailed discussions of these conditions may be found in texts on swallow evaluation and therapy [21,22]. The pharyngeal phase of swallowing is the complex oropharyngeal contractile event referred to as the swallow response. A typical individual swallows about 600 times a day (350 times while awake, 200 times while eating and 50 times while asleep) without giving significant thought or effort to this activity [23]. Afferent sensory fibers capable of triggering the pharyngeal swallow travel centrally by way of the internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (from the larynx) and by way of the glossopharyngeal nerve (from the pharynx) [24]. These sensory fibers converge before terminating in the swallowing center of the medulla, the location and architecture of which have been extensively investigated [25]. The evolving model is summarized in Figure 9.3 [26]. The clinical significance of this neuronal architecture is that swallowing is relatively resistant to disturbance by diseases affecting

Superior laryngeal Glutamine Nucleus of

nerve

solitary tract

Glossopharyngeal nerve

Subjacent reticular formation

Nucleus ambiguus
Surrounding reticular formation

Trigeminal nuclei N. V Facial nuclei N. VII
Glossopharyngeal N. IX nuclei
Nucleus ambiguus N. X Hypoglossal nuclei N. XII

Peripheral sensory input

Dorsal group

Ventral group

Master interneurons Switching interneurons

Early, late, and very late interneurons

Neurons linking the pharyngeal and
esophageal phases

Motor nuclei Activate peripheral
musculature

Figure 9.3 Neural organization of the pharyngeal swallow response. Sensory input enters the medulla at and below the nucleus of solitary tract and motor output exits by way of five cranial nerves. The presumed function of each group of neurons is itemized beneath each anatomical grouping. The "master" interneurons establish the timing of sequential excitation of specific cranial motor nuclei. These neurons are believed to be among the dorsal group, located in and around the nucleus of solitary tract. Once activated, the master neurons can establish the entire motor sequence of the swallow without further sensory input. Also among the dorsal group are

interneurons that are activated at specific times within the swallow pattern, corresponding to the activity of specific groups of pharyngeal and esophageal muscles. Depending on the temporal relationship of neuronal activity with the onset of deglutition, these medullary neurons are classified as "early," "late," or "very late." The ventral group of interneurons, which are located in and around the nucleus ambiguus, probably function as switching neurons, relaying the swallowing orders from the dorsal pattern generators to the various motor neuron pools involved in enacting the muscular response. From Kahrilas [166].

190

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

­0.33 s

0.00 s

Figure 9.4 The oropharyngeal swallow as imaged by videofluoroscopy and reconstructed in three dimensions with computer graphics. From left to right, each horizontal band of images contains the three-dimensional reconstruction of the pharyngeal cavity and surrounding structures, the lateral radiographic appearance of the pharynx during a 10-mL barium swallow, the corresponding posteroanterior radiographic appearance, and a magnified view of the hypopharynx reconstructed at the instant in time indicated at the far left. Time 0.00 s is the instant of upper esophageal sphincter (UES) opening; the entire sequence transpires within 1.00 s. The metal sphere under the chin is used to compare images. In the magnified hypopharyngeal reconstructions, 1 is the epiglottis, 2 is the laryngeal vestibule, 3 is the arytenoid cartilage, 4 is the esophagus, and 4 is the pyriform sinus after closure of the UES. Note the laryngeal elevation during the pharyngeal reconfiguration and the synchrony of UES opening with laryngeal vestibule closure.

0.13 s 0.67 s 0.93 s

brain centers higher than the medulla. However, medullary motor neuron diseases such as bulbar polio or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis can lead to severe dysfunction.
Although understood physiologically as the patterned activation of motor neurons and their corresponding motor units, swallowing is clinically evaluated in mechanical terms, specifically, the effect of this motor activity on the configuration of the oropharyngeal cavity. The anatomical complexity of the oropharynx is best evaluated by videofluoroscopic or cineradiographic analysis. The major events comprising the pharyngeal swallow are illustrated by the representative radiographs and three-dimensional reconstructions in Figure 9.4. As the images reveal, swallowing results in the transient geometric rearrangement of pharyngeal structures from a respiratory to an alimentary pathway, which is normally

accomplished and reversed within 1 s. The overall swallow response can be subdivided into a series of closely coordinated actions: · nasopharyngeal closure by elevation and retraction of the soft palate · UES opening · laryngeal closure · tongue loading (ramping) · tongue pulsion · pharyngeal clearance. Early attempts to define this coordination focused on the timing of the individual elements of the swallow response relative to each other. However, the effects of volition and the volume of the swallowed bolus make it difficult to establish a universal temporal reference among elements. A

191

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Glossopalatal junction opening

Velopharyngeal junction closure

Laryngeal vestibule closure

Upper esophageal sphincter opening

Time (s)

0 0.2
Pharyngeal reconfiguration

Volumedependent 1 mL = 0.0 s 20 mL = 0.2 s

­0.4'

­0.2'

0'

Pharyngeal clearance and offset of reconfiguration

Figure 9.5 Time line showing the coordinated events and volume-induced modifications that comprise the pharyngeal swallow. Each horizontal bar depicts the period during which one of the oropharyngeal valves is in its swallow configuration as opposed to its respiratory configuration. Note that events at the onset and offset of pharyngeal reconfiguration bear a fixed time relationship to each other regardless of swallow bolus volume. The stereotypy of these phases is demonstrated by referencing onset events from time 0 counting forward, and offset events from time 0 counting forward or backward. This timing scheme defines the volumedependent, middle portion of the time line (shaded), which has a value of 0.0 s for 1-mL swallows and 0.2 s for 20-mL swallows. Thus, the alteration in the timing of the swallow response with larger volume swallows occurs by prolonging the persistence of pharyngeal reconfiguration without changing the synchrony of events at onset or offset. From Kahrilas et al. [167], with permission from Elsevier.

detailed analysis of the coordination among swallow events has concluded that there is, in fact, constant coordination at the beginning and end of the swallow but variability in how long the alimentary pharyngeal configuration persists before reverting to the respiratory configuration [27]. Thus, to construct a time line of the biomechanical events within the swallow, and still preserve the constancy of the most stereotypical aspects of the swallow, onset events must be timed from the beginning and offset events from the end as illustrated in Figure 9.5.
The most fundamental anatomical reconfiguration required to transform the oropharynx from a respiratory to an alimentary pathway is to open the inlet to the esophagus and seal the inlet to the larynx. The images in Figures 9.4 and 9.5 suggest that these events are synchronized. Examination of Figure 9.4 reveals that the larynx exhibits substantial axial mobility and that the UES is obligated to move with the larynx because the cricopharyngeus attaches to the lateral aspects of the cricoid cartilage and the lamina of the cricoid underlies the anterior wall of the sphincter. The mechanical determinants of UES opening are laryngeal elevation and anterior traction on the hyoid [28,29]. The mechanical determinants of closure of the laryngeal vestibule, which is almost exactly synchronized with UES opening, are laryngeal elevation and anterior tilting of the arytenoid cartilages against the base of the epiglottis [21]. Thus, analysis of the efficacy of either of these events inevitably focuses on laryngeal elevation, which is greater and persists longer for swallows of larger volumes [10]. Upper sphincter relaxation occurs at

roughly the same degree of elevation regardless of swallow volume, and precedes sphincter opening by about 0.1 s. What changes with swallow volume is the persistence of laryngeal elevation above this critical value, consistent with the scheme depicted in Figure 9.5. The distinction between UES relaxation and UES opening must be recognized. UES relaxation occurs as a result of cessation of excitatory neural input while the larynx is elevating. Once the larynx is elevated, opening of the UES results from traction on the anterior sphincter wall caused by contraction of the supra- and infrahyoid musculature, which also results in a characteristic pattern of hyoid displacement [28,29]. Both the diameter and the duration of sphincter opening increase with increased bolus volume.
The two main determinants of bolus transport out of the oropharynx are the actions of the tongue and the pharyngeal constrictors. The propagated pharyngeal contraction exhibits similar propagative abilities and vigor regardless of bolus volume [30]. However, the propagated pharyngeal contraction is more involved with bolus clearance than with bolus propulsion; it strips the last residue from the pharyngeal walls. Tongue motion, in contrast, varies substantially with bolus volume suggesting that it has a cardinal role in determining differences in bolus propulsion among swallow volumes [31].
The closure of the UES coincides with the arrival of the propagated pharyngeal contraction, as evidenced by the fixed time relationship between these events [29]. However, the contractile activity of the sphincter has an added dimension in that it exhibits increased electromyographic activity

192

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

during laryngeal descent [32]. The magnitude of this deglutitive UES contractile activity is further augmented by either sphincteric or proximal esophageal distention. The net result is a grabbing effect in which reflexive contraction of the sphincter and laryngeal (UES) descent complement each other to clear residue from the hypopharynx [33]. This clearing function probably acts to minimize the risk of postswallow aspiration by preventing residual material from adhering to the laryngeal inlet when respiration resumes.
Intralumenal manometry can quantify the strength of pharyngeal contraction, the completeness of UES relaxation, and the relative timing of these events. When coupled with concurrent videoflouroscopy, manometry may provide useful complementary information regarding UES dysfunction. High intrabolus pressures may distinguish impaired UES opening from impaired UES relaxation and weak pharyngeal contractions as a cause of oropharyngeal dysphagia [34] (see Fig. 9.2).
Esophagus
Anatomy and function Esophageal body The esophagus is a 20- to 22-cm-long muscular tube with a wall composed of skeletal muscle and smooth muscle. The proportion of each muscle type is species dependent. In the human esophagus, the proximal 5% including the UES is striated, the middle 35%­40% is mixed with an increasing proportion of smooth muscle moving distally, and the distal 50%­60% is entirely smooth muscle [35]. The bundles of the outer longitudinal muscle arise from the cricoid cartilage, receive slips from the cricopharyngeus, and pass dorsolaterally to fuse posteriorly about 3 cm below the cricoid cartilage. This arrangement results in a posterior triangular area devoid of longitudinal muscle known as the Laimer triangle. Distal to the Laimer triangle, the longitudinal muscles form a continuous sheath of uniform thickness about the esophagus [36]. The adjacent, inner circular muscle layer also forms a sheath of uniform thickness throughout the length of the esophageal body. Unlike the distal gastrointestinal tract, the esophagus lacks a serosal layer.
Both the striated and smooth muscle portions of the esophagus contain a nerve network, known as the myenteric plexus, situated between the longitudinal and circular muscle layers [37]. The inner circular and outer longitudinal muscle layers of the proximal esophagus are composed of striated muscle and are controlled by somatic motor fibers from lower motor neurons in the nucleus retrofacialis and the nucleus ambiguus. Axons of these lower motor neurons course through the vagus nerve by way of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The thoracic esophagus is composed mainly of smooth muscle that receives innervation from preganglionic neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.

Vagal fibers synapse in the myenteric plexus ganglia and are generally considered to be the relay neurons between the vagus and the smooth muscle. A second nerve network, the submucosal or Meissner plexus, is situated between the muscularis mucosae and the circular muscle layer. The ganglia of the myenteric plexus are more numerous in the smooth muscle region than in the striated muscle region of the esophagus but, throughout, they are far less dense and smaller than in other regions of the gut [38,39]. The submucosal plexus of the esophagus is exceedingly sparse; only a few ganglion cells are present in the submucosal plexus of the human esophagus [39].
The vagus nerve provides the extrinsic innervation of the esophagus. Fibers innervating the striated muscle are axons of lower motor neurons with cell bodies situated in the nucleus ambiguous, whereas innervation of the smooth muscle esophagus is provided by the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus [40,41]. Efferent nerve fibers reach the cervical esophagus by way of the pharyngoesophageal nerve [42], and histological studies show that vagal efferents synapse directly on striated muscle neuromuscular junctions [43,44]. The vagus nerve also provides sensory innervation; in the cervical esophagus this is through the superior laryngeal nerve with cell bodies in the nodose ganglion, whereas in the remainder of the esophagus sensory fibers travel by way of the recurrent laryngeal nerve or, in the most distal esophagus, by way of the esophageal branches of the vagus. Histological studies show many free nerve endings in the mucosa, submucosa, and muscular layers [3,45]. A few encapsulated structures resembling spindles have also been described in humans. These vagal afferents are strongly stimulated by esophageal distention.
Esophageal manometry shows that the normal esophagus does not exhibit spontaneous contractions and its resting pressure is an approximate reflection of pleural pressure, becoming negative during inspiration. Analyses of the vigor and propagation of esophageal peristalsis have concluded that progression along the length of the tubular esophagus is not seamless. Rather, there is a distinct transition zone between the striated and smooth muscle segments that is characterized by low peristaltic amplitude, a slight delay in progression, and an increased likelihood of failed transmission [46]. This transition zone becomes quite evident when peristaltic amplitude and progression are plotted topographically (Fig. 9.6). The topographic analysis also reveals the segmental characteristic of peristaltic progression through the smooth muscle esophagus. Two distinct contractile segments are followed by the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), which contracts with vigor and persistence quite dissimilar to the adjacent smooth muscle esophagus [47].
Mechanics of esophageal peristalsis Esophageal peristalsis commences as the pharyngeal contraction traverses the UES and progresses along the esophagus at

193

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function
0

70

5 Proximal striated muscle segment
10
15 Smooth
20 muscle segment
25
30

Transition zone

LES

60 50 40 30 20 10 0

350 5 10
Figure 9.6 Topographic analysis of esophageal peristalsis using highresolution manometry. The isocontour plot clearly shows that peristaltic progression through the esophagus is not seamless. A transition zone separates the proximal striated and distal smooth muscle esophageal contractile segments. The smooth muscle esophagus is also divided into two

15 20

­10

distinct contractile segments. The region of the esophagogastric junction is distinguishable as a separate contractile segment that contracts with vigor and persistence dissimilar to the adjacent smooth muscle segment. LES, lower esophageal sphincter.

2­4 cm/s. Whereas primary peristalsis is initiated by a swallow, secondary peristalsis can be elicited in response to focal esophageal distention with air, fluid, or a balloon [48]. The mechanical correlate of peristalsis is of a stripping wave that milks the esophagus clean from its proximal to distal end (Fig. 9.7). The velocity of the stripping wave corresponds closely with that of the manometrically recorded contraction, such that the point of the inverted "V" seen fluoroscopically at each esophageal locus occurs with the upstroke of the pressure wave [49]. The efficacy of distal esophageal emptying is inversely related to peristaltic amplitude, such that emptying becomes progressively impaired with peristaltic amplitudes of 30 mmHg [49] or less. This threshold amplitude was initially determined from simultaneous videofluoroscopic and manometric recordings of a relatively small number of subjects. Multichannel intralumenal impedance uses a much greater number of swallows and subjects to assess the efficacy of esophageal emptying as a function of peristaltic amplitude [50]. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of combined manometric and impedance data revealed that a 30-mmHg cutoff for distal esophageal peristaltic amplitude had a sensitivity of 85% and a

specificity of 66% for identifying incomplete bolus transit. With diminishing peristaltic amplitudes, the sensitivity progressively decreased and the specificity progressively increased.
Deglutitive inhibition is another crucial feature of the peristaltic mechanism. A second swallow, initiated while an earlier peristaltic contraction is still progressing in the striated muscle esophagus, causes rapid and complete inhibition of the contraction induced by the first swallow [51]. If the first swallow has reached the smooth muscle esophagus, it may proceed distally for a few seconds after the second swallow but its peristaltic amplitude diminishes progressively until it disappears [52]. Deglutitive inhibition is secondary to hyperpolarization of the circular smooth muscle and is mediated via nonadrenergic, noncholinergic neurons in the myenteric plexus. Sifrim and colleagues [53] developed an experimental model to illustrate deglutitive inhibition in the tubular esophagus (Fig. 9.8). They created an artificial high-pressure zone by distending the esophageal lumen with a balloon and recorded intralumenal pressure between the balloon and the esophageal wall. Once a high-pressure zone is established in the normally flaccid tubular esophagus, deglutitive

194

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

Seconds 0

5

mmHg

UES

40 1.0 s

3 cm

0 40 1.5 s
1.0 s

3 cm

0 100 3.3 s
1.0 s

3 cm

0 100 4.2 s
1.0 s

3 cm

0
100 5.0 s 1.0 s

10

15

3 cm

0 100 6.1 s

3 cm

0 40 6.6 s

1 cm

0 LES

8.5 s 13.8 s

1.0 s

1.5 s 3.3 s

Fluoroscopy of barium swallow

4.2 s

5.0 s

6.1 s

6.6 s
8.5 s 13.8 s

Manometry

Figure 9.7 The relationship between manometric and fluoroscopic recordings of esophageal peristalsis during concurrent manometric and video recordings of a 5-mL liquid barium swallow. The tracings from the video images of the fluoroscopic sequence (right) show the distribution of the barium column at the time specified above each tracing and also indicated by arrows on the manometric record (middle). In this example, a single peristaltic sequence completely cleared the barium bolus from the esophagus. Pharyngeal injection of barium into the esophagus occurred at the 1.0-s mark. The entry of barium causes distention and a slightly increased intralumenal pressure, indicated by the downward pointing arrows marked "1.0 s." Shortly thereafter, esophageal peristalsis is initiated.

During esophageal peristalsis, lumenal closure and hence the passage of the tail of the barium bolus at each recording site is concurrent with the onset of the manometric pressure wave. At 1.5 s, the peristaltic contraction had just reached the proximal recording site and barium had been stripped from the esophagus proximal to that point. Similarly, at 4.2 s, the peristaltic contraction was beginning at the third recording site and, correspondingly, the tail of the barium bolus was passing the third recording site. Finally, after completion of the peristaltic contraction (at 13.8 s), all of the barium was cleared into the stomach. From Kahrilas et al. [168], with permission from Elsevier.

inhibition can be demonstrated throughout the length of the esophagus, commencing concurrently with the pharyngeal swallow [53].
Control of esophageal peristalsis Esophageal striated muscle Distinct physiological control mechanisms govern the esophageal striated and smooth musculature. The striated muscle of the esophagus receives exclusively excitatory vagal innervation and its peristaltic contraction results from the sequential activation of motor units in a craniocaudal sequence. These fibers release acetylcholine and stimulate nicotinic cholinergic receptors on the motor endplates of the striated muscle cells. An ingenious series of experiments using the nerve suture technique provided physiological evidence of this arrangement [3]. In these experiments, the vagal branch innervating the esophagus was severed and the central end was sutured to the peripheral end of the severed spinal accessory nerve. Thus, after a period of nerve regeneration, the vagal branch effectively innervates the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. The occurrence

of excitatory vagal discharges can then be surmised from the contractile activity of these readily accessible muscles. Nerve suture experiments allowed for the description of several properties of vagal control of esophageal striated muscle: · vagal efferent fibers do not discharge spontaneously but fire in spike bursts (15­30 spikes/s) during primary or secondary peristalsis · vagal fibers innervating different levels of the esophagus fire sequentially during peristaltic contractions demonstrating peristaltic programming by the medullary swallowing center · vagal motor discharges during primary peristalsis are potentiated by stimulation of afferent fibers from the esophagus (designed to mimic the effect of a bolus being pushed ahead of a peristaltic contraction) · vagal motor fibers exhibit stronger discharges during primary peristalsis than during secondary peristalsis · vagal motor fibers are inhibited during the pharyngeal stage of deglutition or after distention of a proximal esophageal segment, supporting the notion that deglutitive inhibition has a central origin.

195

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function
Swallow

LES-21 LES-18
LES-13 baseline LES-5 LES
Swallow
LES-16
LES-13 LES-8 baseline LES Fundus

Artificial highpressure zone
Artificial highpressure zone

40 mmHg 10 s

Figure 9.8 Demonstration of deglutitive inhibition in the tubular esophagus by the creation of an artificial high-pressure zone. The top tracing is a swallow marker, and the position from which each of the other tracings was obtained is referenced to the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). The artificial high-pressure zone was created 13 cm above the LES in the upper panel and 8 cm above the LES in the lower panel by inflating a balloon within the esophagus. Pressure was measured by the manometric sensor interposed between the wall of the esophagus and the balloon. The tracings on the left were recorded before balloon inflation and the tracings on the right were recorded when the balloon was inflated and the high-pressure zone had developed. Note that the contraction within the artificial high-pressure zone is inhibited concurrently with the pharyngeal swallow. From Sifrim et al. [169], with permission from Elsevier.

These properties provide convincing evidence that the organization of peristalsis in the striated muscle esophagus is controlled by the swallowing center of the medulla in much the same way as is the swallow response of the oropharyngeal musculature.
The contractile strength of the esophageal striated muscle may be modulated by a variety of sensory inputs [54,55]. An increase in bolus volume will augment the amplitude and duration of the peristaltic contraction. In addition, the velocity of the contractile wavefront will slow to extend the time available for bolus clearance. Temperature has a moderate effect on contractile strength, as warm boluses will increase the amplitude of the peristaltic contraction and cold boluses will decrease the amplitude [56].
Esophageal smooth muscle Evidence supporting vagal control of primary peristalsis in the smooth muscle esophagus comes from bolus deviation and curarization experiments. Deviation of a swallowed bolus at the level of the cervical esophagus (thereby eliminating

the potential for bolus-initiated afferent feedback) does not eliminate the primary peristaltic contraction in the distal esophagus [57]. Furthermore, in baboons, primary peristalsis of the smooth muscle persists even after curarization. As curarization paralyzes the oropharyngeal and cervical esophagus, the persistence of distal esophageal peristalsis in these experiments strongly suggests that primary peristalsis in the smooth muscle segment is triggered by the medullary swallowing center, which can elicit the entire motor sequence of primary peristalsis without receiving afferent feedback.
Vagal control of the esophageal smooth muscle is more complex than that of the striated muscle. Vagal fibers synapse on myenteric plexus neurons rather than directly on muscle cells, and vagal stimulation either excites or inhibits esophageal musculature depending on the stimulation parameters [58,59]. In response to vagal or swallow-induced stimulation in the opossum, longitudinal muscle showed depolarization with superimposed spikes, and circular muscle showed initial hyperpolarization followed by depolarization and spike burst [60]. In studying swallowing initiated by

196

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

superior laryngeal nerve stimulation, the response characteristics of 188 single fibers participating in smooth muscle peristalsis could be divided into two groups [61]. Type I fibers exhibited short latencies (< 1 s) that correlated temporally with the onset of deglutitive inhibition along the esophagus, and type II fibers exhibited long latencies that correlated temporally with the onset of contraction at each esophageal segment. Thus, the activity of neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus reflects several properties of primary peristalsis in the smooth muscle esophagus, including deglutitive inhibition and both the speed and vigor of peristaltic contraction.
Control of peristalsis may also arise in the myenteric plexus. Stimulation of decentralized vagal efferents evokes peristalsis similar to that seen with swallowing. Transection of the esophageal smooth muscle obliterates this response, which suggests that an intact intramural neural myenteric plexus is necessary for peristaltic propagation within the smooth muscle segment. In contrast, transection of the striated muscle in the proximal esophagus does not inhibit peristaltic progression across the transection site or down the entire length of the esophagus [57]. Further evidence supporting the potential autonomy of peripheral mechanisms is that distention anywhere within the smooth muscle esophagus elicits secondary peristalsis despite extrinsic denervation [62].
Smooth muscle contraction is ultimately elicited by ganglionic cholinergic neurons during peristalsis. Swallowinduced peristalsis is highly sensitive to atropine, and it can be augmented by cholinergic agonists and inhibited by acetylcholinesterase [63­ 65]. Less clear, however, are the control mechanisms for the direction and velocity of the peristaltic wavefront. Nerve conduction studies indicate that neural stimuli initiated by swallowing propagate with a speed of 5­6 m/s and therefore reach the ganglionic neurons along the length of the esophagus essentially simultaneously [61]. However, the latency between the arrival of the vagal stimulus and muscle contraction progressively increases moving aborally. In humans, the latent period is 2 s in the proximal smooth muscle esophagus and 5­7 s just proximal to the LES. In vitro electrical stimulation evokes longer latencies to contraction in distal compared with proximal esophageal muscle strips [66,67]. The genesis of the latent gradient is controversial, but as it can be changed by varying the parameters of vagal stimulation or by pharmacological manipulation it may be the result of an interaction between the initial inhibition and subsequent excitation of esophageal smooth muscle [68].
Although not completely understood, the directionality of peristalsis is thought to be a manifestation of an intramural neural gradient that progressively delays contraction distally. Originally, Dodds and colleagues [69,70] characterized two intramural neural mechanisms that controlled peristalsis: an "on" contraction that was atropine sensitive and propagated

similarly to swallow-induced peristalsis and an "off" contraction that was atropine resistant and rapidly propagated. The "on" contraction was associated with activation of excitatory cholinergic neurons, whereas the "off" contraction was associated with the initial muscle hyperpolarization caused by activation of nonadrenergic, noncholinergic inhibitory neurons, followed by rebound contraction after cessation of the stimulus. It is now known that the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter (formerly referred to as the nonadrenergic, noncholinergic transmitter) is nitric oxide (NO), which is produced from L-arginine by the enzyme NO synthase in myenteric neurons [71,72]. NO synthase can be reversibly inhibited by N-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester and N-nitro-Larginine. NO synthase inhibitors decrease the latency and amplitude of "off" contractions in muscle strip experiments [73] and reduce the latency to contraction in vivo in response to swallowing [74,75]. Thus, the current hypothesis is that peristaltic direction results from a neural gradient along the esophagus in which excitatory ganglionic neurons dominate proximally and inhibitory ganglionic neurons dominate distally. In addition to NO-containing neurons, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)-containing neurons may also have a role in the initial inhibition [76,77].
Sympathectomy has no apparent effect on esophageal peristalsis [78,79]. In contrast, bilateral vagotomy results in paralysis of the striated muscle esophagus. Severing only the afferent nerve supply to the striated muscle abolishes secondary peristalsis while leaving primary peristalsis intact, highlighting the role of central programming in the latter and the necessity of afferent sensory signals in the former [3]. Recordings from the cervical esophageal vagal afferents show these fibers to be highly sensitive to intralumenal distention, implicating them as the sensory basis for secondary peristalsis. In the smooth muscle segment of the esophagus, vagal cooling or vagotomy reduces the amplitude of primary peristalsis [80,81] but does not affect secondary peristalsis [82].
Esophageal longitudinal muscle The longitudinal muscle of the esophagus also contracts during peristalsis with the net effect of transiently shortening the structure by 2­2.5 cm [83]. Similar to the pattern of circular muscle contraction, longitudinal muscle contraction is propagated distally as an active segment of contraction at a rate of 2­4 cm/s [33]. The segment of contracting longitudinal muscle precedes but overlaps with the contracting segment of circular muscle. Thus, within a given esophageal segment, the contractions of the longitudinal and circular muscle are slightly out of phase with each other. Propulsive force occurs in the zone of overlap as the delayed circular muscle contraction "catches up" with the distal longitudinal muscle contraction [33].
Central mechanisms also control the contraction of esophageal longitudinal muscle. Swallowing induces peristaltic sequences with gradual orad­caudad activation of

197

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

longitudinal muscle. This progression is associated with a progressive increase in latency, which is similar to the increase that occurs in esophageal circular smooth muscle [84]. However, unlike the responses observed in circular muscle, stimulation of decentralized vagal efferent fibers causes simultaneous contractions in the longitudinal muscle layer, suggesting that this muscle is free of inhibitory neuron control [68].

Left limb

Transverse membrane

Decussating fibers
Esophagus
Right limb

Esophagogastric junction
Anatomy and function The anatomy of the esophagogastric junction is complex. The distal end of the esophagus is anchored to the diaphragm by the phrenoesophageal membrane, which inserts circumferentially into the esophageal musculature close to the squamocolumnar junction. The esophagus then traverses the diaphragmatic hiatus and joins the stomach in almost a tangential fashion. Thus, there are several potential contributors to the esophagogastric junction high-pressure zone: the intrinsic LES, the influence of the diaphragmatic hiatus, and the muscular architecture of the gastric cardia, which constitutes the distal aspect of this zone.
The LES is a 3- to 4-cm-long segment of tonically contracted smooth muscle at the distal extreme of the tubular esophagus. Surrounding the LES at the level of the squamocolumnar junction is the crural diaphragm ­ most commonly the right diaphragmatic crus. The right crus of the diaphragm arises as two flattened muscle bundles from the upper lumbar vertebra, inclines forward to arch around the esophagus, diverges in a scissor-like movement approaching the hiatus, surrounds the esophagus, and then merges anteriorly with about 1 cm of muscle separating the anterior rim of the hiatus from the central tendon of the diaphragm [85,86] (Fig. 9.9). Thus, the diaphragmatic hiatus is a teardropshaped canal about 2 cm long on its major axis. Elegant anatomical studies suggest that the component of the esophagogastric junction high-pressure zone distal to the squamocolumnar junction is largely a function of the opposing sling and clasp fibers of the middle layer of gastric cardia musculature [85,87]. In this region, the lateral wall of the esophagus meets the medial aspect of the dome of the stomach at an acute angle, defined as the angle of His. Viewed intralumenally, this region extends within the gastric lumen, appearing as a large fold that has been referred to as a flap valve because increased intragastric pressure forces it to close, sealing off the entry to the esophagus [88,89]. Physiologically, both the LES and the surrounding crural diaphragm contribute to the esophagogastric junction high-pressure zone. Concurrent fluoroscopy and manometry, aided by the placement of an endoclip at the squamocolumnar junction, localized the esophagogastric junction high-pressure zone as extending 1­1.5 cm proximal to the squamocolumnar

Aorta
Figure 9.9 The most common anatomy of the diaphragmatic hiatus, in which the muscular elements of the crural diaphragm derive from the right diaphragmatic crus. The right crus arises from the anterior longitudinal ligament overlying the lumbar vertebrae. Once muscular elements emerge from the tendon, two flat muscular bands form that cross each other in a scissor-like fashion, form the walls of the hiatus, and decussate with each other anterior to the esophagus. Modified from Marchand [170].
junction and about 2 cm distal to it (Fig. 9.10) [90]. Manometric and intralumenal ultrasound studies suggest that the axial asymmetry of the pressure profile is attributable to the varying thickness of the muscularis propria, whereas the radial pressure asymmetry results from asymmetric compression by the surrounding crural diaphragm [90,91].
Resting LES tone normally varies from 10 to 30 mmHg relative to the intragastric pressure, with considerable temporal fluctuation. Although not fully understood, the mechanism of LES tonic contraction seems to display properties of both the muscle itself and the nerves controlling the sphincter. This conclusion is supported by the observation that pressure within the sphincter is minimally affected after the elimination of neural activity by close intraarterial injection of tetrodotoxin [92]. Myogenic LES tone is associated with a depolarized state and electrical spike activity, which leads to an influx of Ca2+ during rest. Asoh and Goyal [93] studied this phenomenon in the opposum LES and observed continuous spike activity and a direct relationship between the level of spike activity and muscle tone. Experimental evidence has also shown that LES tone is maintained in the absence of spike activity and that its magnitude varies directly with membrane potential [94]. In addition, direct intracellular recordings demonstrate a direct relationship between membrane potential and basal LES tone. Zelcer and Weisbrodt [95] reported that the resting membrane potential of the

198

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

Hiatal center

­3 ­2 ­1

0

1

2

Stomach

Esophagus

10 mmHg

0

Intragastric clip Squamocolumnar junction
Anterior

Maximal radial pressure

0 10

Left 20 30 mmHg

Figure 9.10 Pressure topography of the normal esophagogastric junction illustrating axial and radial asymmetry. Position zero on the axial scale is the midpoint of the diaphragmatic hiatus. The proximal clip indicates the position of the squamocolumnar junction and the distal clip marks the median position of the intragastric aspect to the esophagogastric junction as imaged endoscopically. All values of length and pressure are the medians of seven subjects. The bottom tracings represent maximal radial pressure for normal subjects. From Kahrilas et al. [90].
smooth muscle LES was slightly higher (­40 mV) than the resting membrane potential (­50 mV) of the esophageal body. Modulation of spike activity and membrane potential are not completely understood; however, it is believed that spike activity may be regulated by K+- and Ca2+-activated Cl­ channels [96]. Sphincter tone may be maintained by inositol phosphate-mediated continuous release of intracellular Ca2+ [97,98]. Inositol phosphates are found in higher concentrations in the LES than in the adjacent circular smooth muscle.
Although the cellular mechanism involved in maintaining the tonic LES contraction is unclear, input generated by vagal, adrenergic, hormonal, and mechanical influences can alter basal LES pressure. Vagal influence is similar to that

observed in the esophageal body, with vagal stimulation activating both excitatory and inhibitory myenteric neurons [59]. The excitatory intramural neurons are acetylcholine sensitive and they have both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors [99]. Presumably, the excitatory component is selectively activated under resting conditions and the inhibitory component mediates LES relaxation. Experimental data confirming these effects were obtained from a canine study using the nerve suture technique [100]. Dogs provide an interesting model for these studies because the canine esophagus is composed entirely of striated muscle except for a smooth muscle band at the LES. Vagal fibers innervating the LES are of two types: (1) spontaneously active fibers (1.5­4.5 spikes/s) that exhibit a sudden increase in firing with swallowing, abruptly cease firing when the peristaltic contraction arrives, and then resume a spontaneous rate, and (2) spontaneously active fibers (1­3 spikes/s) that cease activity with swallowing and resume normal activity when the bolus reaches the stomach. Thus, the LES pressure at any instant reflects the balance between excitatory and inhibitory neural input. Altering the pattern of vagal discharge can result in swallow-mediated LES relaxation. Data from human studies suggest that, similar to the situation in the dog, basal LES tone is partially generated by cholinergic input [63]. Adrenergic influences on LES pressure are complex and mostly mediated through the myenteric neurons [41,101]. Fibers from the stellate and proximal thoracic ganglia follow the splanchnic nerve, form a recurrent loop through the celiac ganglion, and then synapse on both the excitatory and inhibitory myenteric neurons. These fibers cause excitation of the excitatory neurons and inhibition of the inhibitory neurons via -adrenergic receptors, resulting in a net augmentation of LES pressure. The adrenergic effect on the esophageal body is the opposite to that on the sphincter; direct inhibition of the muscle and inhibition of the excitatory myenteric neurons.
At any given moment, LES pressure may be affected by myogenic factors, intraabdominal pressure, gastric distention, peptides, hormones, various foods, and many medications (Table 9.1). Large fluctuations of LES pressure occur with the migrating motor complex; during phase III, LES pressure may exceed 80 mmHg. Lesser fluctuations occur throughout the day with pressure decreasing in the postcibal state and increasing during sleep [102].
Another important anatomical consideration of the esophagogastric junction high-pressure zone is its relationship to the crural diaphragm. Even after esophagogastrectomy, with consequent removal of the smooth muscle LES, a highpressure zone of about 6 mmHg persists at the esophagogastric junction [103]. Furthermore, manometric recordings of esophagogastric junction pressure are often characterized by inspiratory augmentation. Although this has been partly attributed to catheter movement along an asymmetric axial pressure profile, evidence in both cats and humans suggests

199

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Table 9.1 Factors that influence lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure and transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation (tLESR) frequency

Increase LES pressure

Decrease LES pressure

Increase tLESR frequency Decrease tLESR frequency

Food(s)

Protein

Hormone(s)

Gastrin, motilin, substance P

Neural agent(s)

a-Adrenergic agonists, b-adrenergic antagonists, cholinergic agonists

Fat, chocolate, ethanol peppermint
Secretin, cholecystokinin, glucagon, gastric inhibitory polypeptide, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, progesterone
a-Adrenergic antagonists, b-adrenergic agonists, cholinergic antagonists, serotonin

Fat Cholecystokinin
L-Arginine

Medication(s)

Metoclopramide, domperidone, prostaglandin F2a, cisapride

Nitrates, calcium channel blockers, theophylline, morphine, meperidine, diazepam, barbituates

Sumatriptan

Baclofen, metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonists, cannaboid receptor agonists, L-NAME, serotonin
Atropine, morphine, loxiglumide

L-NAME, N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester.

that the inspiratory increase mainly results from contraction of the crural diaphragm encircling the LES (Fig. 9.11) [104,105]. Experimentally, the inspiratory augmentation of esophagogastric junction pressure persists despite pinning the manometric catheter in place, and the amplitude of respiratory oscillations can be increased with increased respiratory effort or eliminated by manual ventilation. The augmentation of LES pressure observed during sustained inspiration corresponds both temporally and quantitatively with the augmentation of crural electromyographic activity, and this augmented esophagogastric junction pressure can obscure intrinsic LES relaxation induced by esophageal distention [106]. Crural diaphragm contraction is also augmented during abdominal compression, straining, or coughing [107]. In contrast, during esophageal distention, vomiting, and belching, electrical activity in the crural diaphragm is selectively inhibited despite continued respiration, demonstrating a control mechanism independent of the costal diaphragm [108,109]. This reflex inhibition of crural activity is eliminated with vagotomy.
Esophagogastric junction opening Although the terms are often used synonymously, there is an important distinction between LES relaxation and esophagogastric junction opening. LES relaxation is a permissive event for esophagogastric junction opening, evident in manometric studies by the elimination, or near elimination, of intralumenal pressure within the sphincter. However, LES relaxation is not necessarily synchronous with esophagogastric junction opening and, in fact, not always associated with opening. Whether or not esophagogastric junction opening

follows LES relaxation depends on complex mechanical relationships involving peristaltic forces, the gastroesophageal pressure gradient and, most importantly, the transmural pressure gradient between the lumenal pressure within the sphincter and the extrinsic pressure surrounding the structure. Thus, in conceptualizing esophagogastric junction opening, it is necessary to consider three related topics: LES relaxation, esophagogastric junction opening in the setting of swallowing, and esophagogastric junction opening in the setting of reflux (retrograde flow).
Lower esophageal sphincter relaxation The neural mediation of LES relaxation has been studied extensively [36,99,110]. LES relaxation can be triggered by distention on either side of the esophagogastric junction or by swallowing [111]. Relaxation induced by esophageal distention can be modulated by bolus volume and is unaffected by vagotomy, which shows that it is an intramural process. Relaxation is, however, antagonized by tetrodotoxin (which denervates smooth muscle without affecting its contractile function), proving that it is mediated by postganglionic nerves [112,113]. Electrical stimulation of decentralized efferent vagal fibers or field stimulation of LES muscle strips causes complete relaxation, which is associated with concomitant circular muscle hyperpolarization [93,95]. Deglutition induces an initial inhibition of the entire smooth muscle of the esophagus, and LES relaxation is part of this inhibitory response. Deglutitive LES relaxation is mediated by the vagus nerve, which synapses with inhibitory neurons of the myenteric plexus. Ganglionic transmission is through nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and can be blocked by a

200

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

Figure 9.11 Contribution of the intrinsic lower esophageal sphincter and the extrinsic crural diaphragm to the esophagogastric junction high-pressure zone. (a) An isobaric contour plot of a swallow highlights the interval of potential esophagogastric junction relaxation extending from upper esophageal sphincter relaxation to the arrival of the peristaltic contraction (black dashed box). The inset magnifies the esophagogastric junction relaxation in time, spatial resolution, and pressure resolution; note the clear definition of the two contractions of the crural diaphragm (1 and 2). (b­e) Each focus on the same data set as in the inset in (a) but illustrate the calculation of the period of time in which flow is permissive at various pressure settings. In each of these panels, the heavy black isobaric contour line indicates the flow-permissive pressure. Note the dramatic effect of crural contraction (1 and 2) on instantaneous esophagogastric junction relaxation pressure during swallowing. This suggests that flow through the esophagogastric junction would not be permissive during crural contraction.

Length along esophagus (cm)

Length along esophagus (cm)

(a) 0

5
10
15
20
25 Esophagogastric
30 junction

(cm)

25 40 mmHg
35 30
27 25 30
20 15
29 10 20
0

310

10 4 (s) 8

0

35 0 5 10 15 20 Time (s)

(b) 25
Cumulative flow permissive time = 2.0 s
27

29 1

2

Cumulative flow permissive time = 2.45 s

(c)

2 1

Flow permissive pressure: 20 mmHg 31
Cumulative flow permissive time = 0.15 + 0.20 + 0.65 + 2.70 = 3.7 s

27

29 1

2

Flow permissive pressure: 22 mmHg
Cumulative flow permissive time = 2.15 + 2.75 = 4.9 s

1,2: crural diaphragm contraction

2 1

31 Flow permissive pressure: 24 mmHg

Flow permissive pressure: 26 mmHg

02460246

(d) Time (s)

8 (e)

combination of hexamethonium (i.e., nicotinic blocker) and atropine (i.e., muscarinic blocker).
Evidence implicates NO as the main neurotransmitter in the postganglionic neurons responsible for LES relaxation. NO is produced by neuronal NO synthase, a soluble cytosolic enzyme that has been identified in neurons of the myenteric plexus, colocalizing with VIP, which may be a second inhibitory neurotransmitter in the LES as well as in the esophageal body [114­116]. Neural stimulation in the esophagus, the LES, and the stomach induces NO release [71,117­119]. In the LES, NO has a marked inhibitory effect and multiple in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that NO synthase inhibitors block neurally mediated LES relaxation. Other evidence that neuronal NO synthase plays a role in LES relaxation has been obtained by comparing wild-type and genetically engineered mice that are deficient in neuronal NO synthase. In wild-type mice, electrical field stimulation

produces frequency-dependent relaxation, which can be abolished by the NO synthase inhibitor N()-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester. In neuronal NO synthase-deficient mice, electrical field stimulation does not produce relaxation [120].
Although the evidence implicating NO as the main inhibitory transmitter facilitating LES relaxation is convincing, NO may not act alone. VIP-containing neurons have been demonstrated in the submucosal plexus and VIP relaxes the LES by direct muscle action [121­125]. Electrical stimulation of LES muscle strips also causes an LES relaxationstimulated release of VIP in the muscle bath. Furthermore, VIP antiserum partially reduces LES relaxation evoked by vagal or field stimulation [77,125]. It is thought that VIP has two functions: it acts on NO synthase-containing neural terminals as a prejunctional neurotransmitter, facilitating the release of NO, and it acts on gastric muscle cells to stimulate the production of NO by the muscle [126­130]. In addition to

201

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

VIP, there is some evidence that peptide histidine isoleucine (PHI) in the cat and, to a lesser extent, calcitonin generelated peptide (CGRP) in the opossum may participate as inhibitory neurotransmitters [125,131]. In a similar way to VIP, PHI, and CGRP relax the LES by a direct action on the muscle [125,131,132]. PHI is of interest because it is derived from the same precursor as VIP and coexists with VIP in the same neurons [133].
The notion that multiple neurotransmitters may interact to produce LES relaxation may resolve inconsistencies and discrepancies that follow from the assumption that any one neurotransmitter is uniquely responsible for LES relaxation. Reports of the colocalization of NO synthase, VIP, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), CGRP, and galanin in myenteric neurons of the distal esophagus support this concept [134­136].
Antegrade opening The passage of an ingested bolus across the esophagogastric junction is facilitated by LES relaxation and by the force of the peristaltic contraction. LES relaxation occurs within 2 s of deglutition at a time when the peristaltic wave appears in the middle esophagus, at the beginning of the smooth muscle segment. Although accurate measurements are difficult because of motion artifacts associated with esophageal shortening, it is estimated that the LES relaxes to pressures equal to those of the stomach or the esophagus within 1 s of swallowing [137]. When the ingested boluses reach the LES, the LES is relaxed but closed. Subsequently, intrabolus pressure, generated either by its own weight (hydrostatic) or with the aid of the peristaltic contraction, forces the LES open and flow across the esophagogastric junction ensues. After 5­7 s, the LES recovers its initial pressure and then undergoes an aftercontraction, which probably represents the termination of the peristaltic sequence as it reaches the distal end of the esophagus. Circular muscle strips obtained from the LES proper exhibit only relaxation, but more proximal strips exhibit relaxation followed by an aftercontraction, perhaps because of the presence of mixed LES and adjacent esophageal muscle fibers [138]. If esophageal emptying is not completed in the 5- to 7-s window set by the time-limited nature of the peristaltic sequence, residual bolus escapes retrogradely through the contractile front and remains in the esophagus at the termination of the sequence.
Retrograde opening Physiologically, the esophagogastric junction must perform seemingly contradictory functions. During swallowing it must facilitate the esophagogastric flow of swallowed material. At the same time it prevents reflux of gastric content into the esophagus, which might be an effect of the positive abdomen-to-thoracic pressure gradient. During rest, the esophagogastric junction must, again, contain caustic gastric

juice but also be able to transiently relax and permit gas venting of the stomach. These functions are accomplished by the delicate interplay of anatomical elements and physiological responses of the esophagogastric junction. LES relaxation may occur transiently without swallowing or esophageal contraction. These transient LES relaxations (tLESRs) are thought to be an important mechanism in the pathogenesis of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and a multitude of evidence suggests that tLESRs are the most frequent mechanism for reflux during periods of normal LES pressure (> 10 mmHg). tLESRs occur independently of swallowing, are not accompanied by peristalsis, are accompanied by crural diaphragm inhibition, and persist for longer periods than swallow-induced LES relaxations (> 10 s). [137,139] Prolonged manometric recordings have not consistently demonstrated an increased frequency of tLESRs in patients with GERD compared with healthy controls [140]; however, the proportion of tLESRs associated with acid reflux (as opposed to gas reflux) has consistently been observed to be greater among patients with GERD [140]. tLESRs occur most often in the postprandial state during gastric accommodation, which is attributable to the vagally mediated receptive relaxation of the fundus. In the setting of the completely relaxed esophagogastric junction during tLESRs, even the minimal gastroesophageal pressure gradients observed with gastric distention (3­4 mmHg) are sufficient to facilitate gas venting of the stomach (i.e., belching). Thus, tLESRs are the physiological mechanism of belching [141].
Proximal gastric distention is the major stimulus for tLESRs. Distention stimulates mechanoreceptors (intraganglionic lamellar endings) in the proximal stomach, activating vagal afferent fibers that project to the nucleus of solitary tract [139,142,143]. The afferent and efferent neural pathways responsible for swallow-induced and nonswallow-induced LES relaxations have been compared in the mouse [142,143] The efferent limb of both types of LES relaxation lies in the preganglionic vagal inhibitory pathway to the LES [142,143]. Both relaxations can be blocked by bilateral cervical vagotomy, cervical vagal cooling, or NO synthase inhibitors [139,144]. The afferent arms of these two types of relaxation, however, differ from one another. The afferent arm of the swallow-induced relaxation lies in the pharyngeal and superior laryngeal nerves, with the central neural circuit in the medullary subnuclei [145­149]. Non-swallow-induced relaxations, in contrast, are initiated through gastric afferents in the subdiaphragmatic vagus and activate neurons in the medial, dorsomedial, and commissural solitary subnuclei and motor neurons in the caudal part of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus [150]. Vagal outflow from the dorsal motor nucleus completely inhibits both the LES and the crural diaphragm, an important distinction from the swallow-induced LES relaxation, which is not associated with concomitant inhibition of the crural diaphragm.

202

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

tLESRs triggered by gastric distention likely use NO and cholecystokinin (CCK) as neurotransmitters, as evidenced by their increased frequency after intravenous administration of CCK and blockade by either NO synthase inhibitors or CCK1 antagonists [151­154]. The increased frequency of tLESRs during intravenous infusions of CCK or after fatty meals is mediated through CCK1 receptors, as evidenced by inhibition of CCK1 [155,156]. Muscarinic receptor involvement in the tLESR pathway is suggested by atropine inhibition [157­160]. Finally, -aminobutyric acid (GABA)-B agonists, such as baclofen, inhibit tLESRs, possibly by acting on receptors located in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus [161­165].
References
1. Dutta CK, Basmajian JV. Gross and histological structure of the pharyngeal constrictors in the rabbit. Anat Rec 1960;137:127.
2. Weisbrodt NW. Neuromuscular organization of esophageal and pharyngeal motility. Arch Intern Med 1976;136:524.
3. Roman C, Gonnella J. Extrinsic control of digestive tract motility. In: Johnson L (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:507.
4. Doty RW, Richmond WH, Storey AT. Neural Organization of Deglutition. In: Code CF (ed.). Handbook of Physiology. Section 6: Alimentary Canal. Washington DC: American Physiological Society, 1968:1861.
5. Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Dent J, et al. Upper esophageal sphincter function during belching. Gastroenterology 1986;91:133.
6. Welch RW, Luckmann K, Ricks PM, et al. Manometry of the normal upper esophageal sphincter and its alterations in laryngectomy. J Clin Invest 1979;63:1036.
7. Yoshida Y, Miyazaki T, Hirano M, et al. Localization of efferent neurons innervating the pharyngeal constrictor muscles and the cervical esophagus muscle in the cat by means of the horseradish peroxidase method. Neurosci Lett 1981;22:91.
8. Asoh R, Goyal RK. Manometry and electromyography of the upper esophageal sphincter in the opossum. Gastroenterology 1978;74:514.
9. Pandolfino JE, Kahrilas PJ. AGA technical review on the clinical use of esophageal manometry. Gastroenterology 2005;128:209.
10. Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Dent J, et al. Upper esophageal sphincter function during deglutition. Gastroenterology 1988;95:52.
11. Castell JA, Castell DO. Modern solid state computerized manometry of the pharyngoesophageal segment. Dysphagia 1993;8:270.
12. Winans CS. The pharyngoesophageal closure mechanism: a manometric study. Gastroenterology 1972;63:768.
13. Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ. Dysfunction of the belch reflex. A cause of incapacitating chest pain. Gastroenterology 1987;93:818.
14. Shaker R, Dodds WJ, Ren J, et al. Esophagoglottal closure reflex: a mechanism of airway protection. Gastroenterology 1992;102:857.
15. Cook IJ, Dent J, Shannon S, Collins SM. Measurement of upper esophageal sphincter pressure. Effect of acute emotional stress. Gastroenterology 1987;93:526.
16. Vanner RG, Pryle BJ, O'Dwyer JP, Reynolds F. Upper oesophageal sphincter pressure during inhalational anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 1992;47:950.
17. Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Dent J, et al. Effect of sleep, spontaneous gastroesophageal reflux, and a meal on upper esophageal sphincter pressure in normal human volunteers. Gastroenterology 1987; 92:466.
18. Gerhardt DC, Shuck TJ, Bordeaux RA, Winship DH. Human upper esophageal sphincter. Response to volume, osmotic, and acid stimuli. Gastroenterology 1978;75:268.

19. Freiman JM, El-Sharkawy TY, Diamant NE. Effect of bilateral vagosympathetic nerve blockade on response of the dog upper esophageal sphincter (UES) to intraesophageal distention and acid. Gastroenterology 1981;81:78.
20. Vakil NB, Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Vanagunas A. Absence of an upper esophageal sphincter response to acid reflux. Am J Gastroenterol 1989;84:606.
21. Logemann J. Evaluation and Treatment of Swallowing Disorders. San Diego, CA: Pro-ed, 1983.
22. Perlman AL, Booth BM, Grayhack JP. Videofluoroscopic predictors of aspiration in patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia. Dysphagia 1994;9:90.
23. Lear CS, Flanagan JB Jr, Moorrees CF. The frequency of deglutition in man. Arch Oral Biol 1965;10:83.
24. Sinclair WJ. Role of the pharyngeal plexus in initiation of swallowing. Am J Physiol 1971;221:1260.
25. Miller AJ. The search for the central swallowing pathway: the quest for clarity. Dysphagia 1993;8:185.
26. Jean A. Brainstem control of swallowing: localization and organization of the central pattern generator for swallowing. In: Taylor A (ed.). Neurophysiology of the Jaws and Teeth. London: MacMillan, 1990:294.
27. Lin S, Chen J, Hertz P, Kahrilas PJ. Dynamic reconstruction of the oropharyngeal swallow using computer-based animation. Comput Med Imaging Graph 1996;20:69.
28. Cook IJ, Dodds WJ, Dantas RO, et al. Opening mechanisms of the human upper esophageal sphincter. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G748.
29. Jacob P, Kahrilas PJ, Logemann JA, et al. Upper esophageal sphincter opening and modulation during swallowing. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1469.
30. Ekberg O, Olsson R, Sundgren-Borgstrom P. Relation of bolus size and pharyngeal swallow. Dysphagia 1988;3:69.
31. Wein B, Bockler R, Klajman S. Temporal reconstruction of sonographic imaging of disturbed tongue movements. Dysphagia 1991;6:135.
32. Code CF, Schlegel JF. Motor Action of the Esophagus and its Sphincters. In: Code CF (ed.). Handbook of Physiology. Section 6: Alimentary Canal. Washington DC: American Physiological Society, 1968:1861.
33. Pouderoux P, Lin S, Kahrilas PJ. Timing, propagation, coordination, and effect of esophageal shortening during peristalsis. Gastroenterology 1997;112:1147.
34. Williams RB, Wallace KL, Ali GN, Cook IJ. Biomechanics of failed deglutitive upper esophageal sphincter relaxation in neurogenic dysphagia. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G16.
35. Meyer GW, Austin RM, Brady CE 3rd, Castell DO. Muscle anatomy of the human esophagus. J Clin Gastroenterol 1986;8:131.
36. Christensen J. Motor functions of the pharynx and esophagus. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1987:595.
37. Kuntz A. The Autonomic Nervous System. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1947.
38. Christensen J, Robison BA. Anatomy of the myenteric plexus of the opossum esophagus. Gastroenterology 1982;83:1033.
39. Christensen J, Rick GA, Robison BA, et al. Arrangement of the myenteric plexus throughout the gastrointestinal tract of the opossum. Gastroenterology 1983;85:890.
40. Higgs B, Kerr FW, Ellis FH Jr. The experimental production of esophageal achalasia by electrolytic lesions in the medulla. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1965;50:613.
41. Gonella J, Niel JP, Roman C. Mechanism of the noradrenergic motor control on the lower oesophageal sphincter in the cat. J Physiol 1980;306:251.
42. Hwang K, Grossman MI, Ivy AC. Nervous control of the cervical esophagus. Am J Physiol 1948;154:343.
43. Floyd K. Cholinesterase activity in sheep esophageal muscle. J Anat (Lond) 1973;116:357.
44. Samarasinghe DD. Some observations on the innervation of the striated muscle in the mouse esophagus. J Anat (Lond) 1972;112:173.

203

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

45. Abe S. On the histology and the innervation of the esophagus and the first forestomach of the goat. Arch Histol Jpn 1959;16:109.
46. Brasseur JG. Mechanical studies of the esophageal function. Dysphagia 1993;8:384.
47. Clouse RE, Staiano A. Topography of normal and high-amplitude esophageal peristalsis. Am J Physiol 1993;265:G1098.
48. Schoeman MN, Holloway RH. Secondary oesophageal peristalsis in patients with non-obstructive dysphagia. Gut 1994;35:1523.
49. Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ. Effect of peristaltic dysfunction on esophageal volume clearance. Gastroenterology 1988;94:73.
50. Tutuian R, Castell DO. Clarification of the esophageal function defect in patients with manometric ineffective esophageal motility: studies using combined impedance-manometry. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2004;2:230.
51. Hellemans J, Vantrappen G, Valembois P, et al. Electrical activity of striated and smooth muscle of the esophagus. Am J Dig Dis 1968;13:320.
52. Meyer GW, Castell DO. Current concepts of esophageal function. Am J Otolaryngol 1980;1:440.
53. Sifrim D, Janssens J, Vantrappen G. A wave of inhibition precedes primary peristaltic contractions in the human esophagus. Gastroenterology 1992;103:876.
54. Winship DH, Viegas de Andrade SR, Zboralske FF. Influence of bolus temperature on human esophageal motor function. J Clin Invest 1970;49:243.
55. Jordan PH Jr, Longhi EH. Relationship between size of bolus and the act of swallowing on esophageal peristalsis in dogs. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1971;137:868.
56. Roman C, Tieffenbach L. [Recording the unit activity of vagal motor fibers innervating the baboon esophagus]. J Physiol (Paris) 1972;64:479.
57. Janssens J, De Wever I, Vantrappen G, Hellemans J. Peristalsis in smooth muscle esophagus after transection and bolus deviation. Gastroenterology 1976;71:1004.
58. Diamant NE, El-Sharkawy TY. Neural control of esophageal peristalsis. A conceptual analysis. Gastroenterology 1977;72:546.
59. Gonella J, Niel JP, Roman C. Vagal control of lower oesophageal sphincter motility in the cat. J Physiol 1977;273:647.
60. Sugarbaker DJ, Rattan S, Goyal RK. Mechanical and electrical activity of esophageal smooth muscle during peristalsis. Am J Physiol 1984;246:G145.
61. Gidda JS, Goyal RK. Swallow-evoked action potentials in vagal preganglionic efferents. J Neurophysiol 1984;52:1169.
62. Christensen J, Lund GF. Esophageal responses to distension and electrical stimulation. J Clin Invest 1969;48:408.
63. Dodds WJ, Dent J, Hogan WJ, Arndorfer RC. Effect of atropine on esophageal motor function in humans. Am J Physiol 1981; 240:G290.
64. Paterson WG, Hynna-Liepert TT, Selucky M. Comparison of primary and secondary esophageal peristalsis in humans: effect of atropine. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G52.
65. Holland BW, Koufman JA, Postma GN, McGuirt WF Jr. Laryngopharyngeal reflux and laryngeal web formation in patients with pediatric recurrent respiratory papillomas. Laryngoscope 2002; 112:1926.
66. Weisbrodt NW, Christensen J. Gradients of contractions in the opossum esophagus. Gastroenterology 1972;62:1159.
67. Crist J, Surprenant A, Goyal RK. Intracellular studies of electrical membrane properties of opossum esophageal circular smooth muscle. Gastroenterology 1987;92:987.
68. Gidda JS, Cobb BW, Goyal RK. Modulation of esophageal peristalsis by vagal efferent stimulation in opossum. J Clin Invest 1981;68:1411.
69. Dodds WJ, Christensen J, Dent J, et al. Esophageal contractions induced by vagal stimulation in the opossum. Am J Physiol 1978;235:E392.
70. Gilbert RJ, Dodds WJ. Effect of selective muscarinic antagonists on peristaltic contractions in opossum smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G50.

71. Bredt DS, Hwang PM, Snyder SH. Localization of nitric oxide synthase indicating a neural role for nitric oxide. Nature 1990;347:768.
72. Fang S, Christensen J. Distribution of NADPH diaphorase in intramural plexuses of cat and opossum esophagus. J Auton Nerv Syst 1994;46:123.
73. Richards WG, Stamler JS, Kobzik L, Sugarbaker DJ. Role of nitric oxide in human esophageal circular smooth muscle in vitro. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;110:157.
74. Murray J, Du C, Ledlow A, et al. Nitric oxide: mediator of nonadrenergic noncholinergic responses of opossum esophageal muscle. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G401.
75. Yamato S, Saha JK, Goyal RK. Role of nitric oxide in lower esophageal sphincter relaxation to swallowing. Life Sci 1992;50:1263.
76. Uddman R, Alumets J, Edvinsson L, et al. Peptidergic (VIP) innervation of the esophagus. Gastroenterology 1978;75:5.
77. Goyal RK, Rattan S, Said SI. VIP as a possible neurotransmitter of non-cholinergic non-adrenergic inhibitory neurones. Nature 1980;288:378.
78. Burgess JN, Schlegel JF, Ellis FH Jr. The effect of denervation of feline esophageal function and morphology. J Surg Res 1972;12:24.
79. Greenwood RK, Schlegel JF, Code CF, Ellis FH Jr. The effect of sympathectomy, vagotomy and esophageal interruption on the canine gastroesophageal sphincter. Thorax 1962;17:310.
80. Ryan JP, Snape WJ Jr, Cohen S. Influence of vagal cooling on esophageal function. Am J Physiol 1977;232:E159.
81. Reynolds RP, El-Sharkawy TY, Diamant NE. Lower esophageal sphincter function in the cat: role of central innervation assessed by transient vagal blockade. Am J Physiol 1984;246:G666.
82. Kravitz JJ, Snape WJ Jr, Cohen S. Effect of thoracic vagotomy and vagal stimulation on esophageal function. Am J Physiol 1966;238:233.
83. Edmundowicz SA, Clouse RE. Shortening of the esophagus in response to swallowing. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G512.
84. Sugarbaker DJ, Rattan S, Goyal RK. Swallowing induces sequential activation of esophageal longitudinal smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1984;247:G515.
85. Kahrilas PJ. Anatomy and physiology of the gastroesophageal junction. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1997;26:467.
86. Mittal RK, Balaban DH. The esophagogastric junction. N Engl J Med 1997;336:924.
87. Liebermann-Meffert D, Allgower M, Schmid P, Blum AL. Muscular equivalent of the lower esophageal sphincter. Gastroenterology 1979;76:31.
88. Thor KB, Hill LD, Mercer DD, Kozarek RD. Reappraisal of the flap valve mechanism in the gastroesophageal junction. A study of a new valvuloplasty procedure in cadavers. Acta Chir Scand 1987;153:25.
89. Hill LD, Kozarek RA, Kraemer SJ, et al. The gastroesophageal flap valve: in vitro and in vivo observations. Gastrointest Endosc 1996;44:541.
90. Kahrilas PJ, Lin S, Chen J, Manka M. The effect of hiatus hernia on gastro-oesophageal junction pressure. Gut 1999;44:476.
91. Liu J, Parashar VK, Mittal RK. Asymmetry of lower esophageal sphincter pressure: is it related to the muscle thickness or its shape? Am J Physiol 1997;272:G1509.
92. Goyal RK, Rattan S. Genesis of basal sphincter pressure: effect of tetrodotoxin on lower esophageal sphincter pressure in opossum in vivo. Gastroenterology 1976;71:62.
93. Asoh R, Goyal RK. Electrical activity of the opossum lower esophageal sphincter in vivo. Its role in the basal sphincter pressure. Gastroenterology 1978;74:835.
94. Papasova M, Milousheva E, Bonev A, et al. On the changes in the membrane potential and the contractile activity of the smooth muscle of the lower esophageal and ileo-caecal sphincters upon increased K in the nutrient solution. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg 1980;6:41.
95. Zelcer E, Weisbrodt NW. Electrical and mechanical activity in the lower esophageal sphincter of the cat. Am J Physiol 1984;246: G243.

204

Esophageal motor function CHAPTER 9

96. Zhang Y, Miller DV, Paterson WG. Opposing roles of K(+) and Cl(­) channels in maintenance of opossum lower esophageal sphincter tone. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G1226.
97. Biancani P, Harnett KM, Sohn UD, et al. Differential signal transduction pathways in cat lower esophageal sphincter tone and response to ACh. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G767.
98. Hillemeier C, Bitar KN, Sohn U, Biancani P. Protein kinase C mediates spontaneous tone in the cat lower esophageal sphincter. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1996;277:144.
99. Goyal RK, Rattan S. Nature of the vagal inhibitory innervation to the lower esophageal sphincter. J Clin Invest 1975;55:1119.
100. Miolan JP, Roman C. Discharge of efferent vagal fibers supplying gastric antrum: indirect study by nerve suture technique. Am J Physiol 1978;235:E366.
101. Gonella J, Niel JP, Roman C. Sympathetic control of lower oesophageal sphincter motility in the cat. J Physiol 1979;287:177.
102. Dent J, Dodds WJ, Friedman RH, et al. Mechanism of gastroesophageal reflux in recumbent asymptomatic human subjects. J Clin Invest 1980;65:256.
103. Klein WA, Parkman HP, Dempsey DT, Fisher RS. Sphincterlike thoracoabdominal high pressure zone after esophagogastrectomy. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1362.
104. Boyle JT, Altschuler SM, Nixon TE, et al. Role of the diaphragm in the genesis of lower esophageal sphincter pressure in the cat. Gastroenterology 1985;88:723.
105. Mittal RK, Rochester DF, McCallum RW. Effect of the diaphragmatic contraction on lower oesophageal sphincter pressure in man. Gut 1987;28:1564.
106. Mittal RK, Rochester DF, McCallum RW. Sphincteric action of the diaphragm during a relaxed lower esophageal sphincter in humans. Am J Physiol 1989;256:G139.
107. Mittal RK, Fisher M, McCallum RW, et al. Human lower esophageal sphincter pressure response to increased intra-abdominal pressure. Am J Physiol 1990;258:G624.
108. De Troyer A, Sampson M, Sigrist S, Macklem PT. Action of costal and crural parts of the diaphragm on the rib cage in dog. J Appl Physiol 1982;53:30.
109. Altschuler SM, Boyle JT, Nixon TE, et al. Simultaneous reflex inhibition of lower esophageal sphincter and crural diaphragm in cats. Am J Physiol 1985;249:G586.
110. Goyal RK, Rattan S. Mechanism of the lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Action of prostaglandin E1 and theophylline. J Clin Invest 1973;52:337.
111. Schulze-Delrieu K, Percy WH, Ren J, et al. Evidence for inhibition of opossum LES through intrinsic gastric nerves. Am J Physiol 1989;256:G198.
112. Paterson WG, Rattan S, Goyal RK. Esophageal responses to transient and sustained esophageal distension. Am J Physiol 1988;255:G587.
113. Gerson DE, Lewicki AM. Intrathoracic stomach: when does it obstruct? Radiology 1976;119:257.
114. Murthy KS, Zhang KM, Jin JG, et al. VIP-mediated G proteincoupled Ca2+ influx activates a constitutive NOS in dispersed gastric muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1993;265:G660.
115. Nathan C, Xie QW. Nitric oxide synthases: roles, tolls, and controls. Cell 1994;78:915.
116. Anonymous. Cisapride marketed for use in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Clin Pharm 1993;12:876,879.
117. Murray J, Bates JN, Conklin JL. Nerve-mediated nitric oxide production by opossum lower esophageal sphincter. Dig Dis Sci 1994;39:1872.
118. Furness JB, Bornstein JC, Murphy R, Pompolo S. Roles of peptides in transmission in the enteric nervous system. Trends Neurosci 1992;15:66.
119. Murray JA, Clark ED. Characterization of nitric oxide synthase in the opossum esophagus. Gastroenterology 1994;106:1444.
120. Kim CD, Goyal RK, Mashimo H. Neuronal NOS provides nitrergic inhibitory neurotransmitter in mouse lower esophageal sphincter. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G280.

121. Berezin I, Allescher HD, Daniel EE. Ultrastructural localization of VIP-immunoreactivity in canine distal oesophagus. J Neurocytol 1987;16:749.
122. Wattchow DA, Furness JB, Costa M, et al. Distributions of neuropeptides in the human esophagus. Gastroenterology 1987;93:1363.
123. Aggestrup S, Uddman R, Sundler F, et al. Lack of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide nerves in esophageal achalasia. Gastroenterology 1983;84:924.
124. Rattan S, Said SI, Goyal RK. Effect of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1977;155:40.
125. Biancani P, Beinfeld MC, Hillemeier C, Behar J. Role of peptide histidine isoleucine in relaxation of cat lower esophageal sphincter. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1083.
126. Teng B, Murthy KS, Kuemmerle JF, et al. Expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in human and rabbit gastrointestinal smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G342.
127. Murthy KS, Grider JR, Jin JG, Makhlouf GM. Interplay of VIP and nitric oxide in the regulation of neuromuscular activity in the gut. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1995;329:27.
128. Jin JG, Murthy KS, Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Stoichiometry of neurally induced VIP release, NO formation, and relaxation in rabbit and rat gastric muscle. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G357.
129. Murthy KS, Grider JR, Jin JG, Makhlouf GM. Interplay of VIP and nitric oxide in the regulation of neuromuscular function in the gut. Ann NY Acad Sci 1996;805:355; discussion 362.
130. Mashimo H, He XD, Huang PL, et al. Neuronal constitutive nitric oxide synthase is involved in murine enteric inhibitory neurotransmission. J Clin Invest 1996;98:8.
131. Rattan S, Gonnella P, Goyal RK. Inhibitory effect of calcitonin generelated peptide and calcitonin on opossum esophageal smooth muscle. Gastroenterology 1988;94:284.
132. Uc A, Murray JA, Conklin JL. Effects of calcitonin gene-related peptide on opossum esophageal smooth muscle. Gastroenterology 1997;113:514.
133. Lundberg JM, Fahrenkrug J, Larsson O, Anggard A. Corelease of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and peptide histidine isoleucine in relation to atropine-resistant vasodilation in cat submandibular salivary gland. Neurosci Lett 1984;52:37.
134. Ny L, Alm P, Larsson B, et al. Nitric oxide pathway in cat esophagus: localization of nitric oxide synthase and functional effects. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G59.
135. Ny L, Alm P, Ekstrom P, et al. Nitric oxide synthase-containing, peptide-containing, and acetylcholinesterase-positive nerves in the cat lower oesophagus. Histochem J 1994;26:721.
136. Singaram C, Sengupta A, Sweet MA, et al. Nitrinergic and peptidergic innervation of the human oesophagus. Gut 1994;35:1690.
137. Holloway RH, Penagini R, Ireland AC. Criteria for objective definition of transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G128.
138. Biancani P, Zabinski M, Kerstein M, Behar J. Lower esophageal sphincter mechanics: anatomic and physiologic relationships of the esophagogastric junction of cat. Gastroenterology 1982;82:468.
139. Mittal RK, Holloway RH, Penagini R, et al. Transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Gastroenterology 1995;109:601.
140. Sifrim D, Holloway R. Transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations: how many or how harmful? Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96:2529.
141. McNally EF, Kelly JE Jr, Ingelfinger FJ. Mechanism of belching: effects of gastric distension with air. Gastroenterology 1964;46:254.
142. Shapiro RE, Miselis RR. The central organization of the vagus nerve innervating the stomach of the rat. J Comp Neurol 1985;238:473.
143. Altschuler SM, Bao XM, Bieger D, et al. Viscerotopic representation of the upper alimentary tract in the rat: sensory ganglia and nuclei of the solitary and spinal trigeminal tracts. J Comp Neurol 1989;283:248.
144. Martin CJ, Patrikios J, Dent J. Abolition of gas reflux and transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation by vagal blockade in the dog. Gastroenterology 1986;91:890.

205

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

145. Jean A. Brainstem organization of the swallowing network. Brain Behav Evol 1984;25:109.
146. Kessler JP, Jean A. Identification of the medullary swallowing regions in the rat. Exp Brain Res 1985;57:256.
147. Jean A. Control of the central swallowing program by inputs from the peripheral receptors. A review. J Auton Nerv Syst 1984;10:225.
148. Bieger D. The brainstem esophagomotor network pattern generator: a rodent model. Dysphagia 1993;8:203.
149. Lu WY, Bieger D. Vagal afferent transmission in the NTS mediating reflex responses of the rat esophagus. Am J Physiol 1998; 274:R1436.
150. Sang Q, Goyal RK. Lower esophageal sphincter relaxation and activation of medullary neurons by subdiaphragmatic vagal stimulation in the mouse. Gastroenterology 2000;119:1600.
151. Hirsch DP, Holloway RH, Tytgat GN, Boeckxstaens GE. Involvement of nitric oxide in human transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations and esophageal primary peristalsis. Gastroenterology 1998;115:1374.
152. Boulant J, Fioramonti J, Dapoigny M, et al. Cholecystokinin and nitric oxide in transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation to gastric distention in dogs. Gastroenterology 1994;107:1059.
153. Zerbib F, Bruley Des Varannes S, Scarpignato C, et al. Endogenous cholecystokinin in postprandial lower esophageal sphincter function and fundic tone in humans. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G1266.
154. Boeckxstaens GE, Hirsch DP, Fakhry N, et al. Involvement of cholecystokinin A receptors in transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations triggered by gastric distension. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:1823.
155. Ledeboer M, Masclee AA, Biemond I, Lamers CB. Effect of mediumand long-chain triglycerides on lower esophageal sphincter pressure: role of CCK. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G1160.
156. Holloway RH, Lyrenas E, Ireland A, Dent J. Effect of intraduodenal fat on lower oesophageal sphincter function and gastro-oesophageal reflux. Gut 1997;40:449.
157. Mittal RK, Chiareli C, Liu J, et al. Atropine inhibits gastric distension and pharyngeal receptor mediated lower oesophageal sphincter relaxation. Gut 1997;41:285.

158. Lidums I, Checklin H, Mittal RK, Holloway RH. Effect of atropine on gastro-oesophageal reflux and transient lower oesophageal sphincter relaxations in patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Gut 1998;43:12.
159. Lidums I, Hebbard GS, Holloway RH. Effect of atropine on proximal gastric motor and sensory function in normal subjects. Gut 2000;47:30.
160. Mittal RK, Holloway R, Dent J. Effect of atropine on the frequency of reflux and transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation in normal subjects. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1547.
161. Hornby PJ, Abrahams TP. Central control of lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Am J Med 2000;(108Suppl4a):90S.
162. Poorkhalkali N, Rich HG, Jacobson I, et al. Chronic oesophagitis in the cat. Scand J Gastroenterol 2001;36:904.
163. Blackshaw LA, Staunton E, Lehmann A, Dent J. Inhibition of transient LES relaxations and reflux in ferrets by GABA receptor agonists. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G867.
164. Lehmann A, Antonsson M, Bremner-Danielsen M, et al. Activation of the GABA(B) receptor inhibits transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations in dogs. Gastroenterology 1999;117:1147.
165. Frisby CL, Mattsson JP, Jensen JM, et al. Inhibition of transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation and gastroesophageal reflux by metabotropic glutamate receptor ligands. Gastroenterology 2005;129:995.
166. Kahrilas PJ. Functional anatomy and physiology of the esophagus. In: Castell DO (ed.). The Esophagus, 2nd edn. Boston: Little Brown and Company, 1995:1.
167. Kahrilas PJ, Lin S, Chen J, Logemann JA. Oropharyngeal accommodation to swallow volume. Gastroenterology 1996;111:297.
168. Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ. Effect of peristaltic dysfunction on esophageal volume clearance. Gastroenterology 1988;94:73.
169. Sifrim D, Janssens J, Vantrappen G. A wave of inhibition precedes primary peristaltic contraction in the human esophagus. Gastroenterology 1992;103:876.
170. Marchand P. The anatomy of esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm and the pathogenesis of hiatus herniation. Thorac Surg 1959;37: 81.

206

10

B MOTILITY
The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying
William L. Hasler

Gastric smooth muscle, 207 Innervation of the stomach, 207 Interstitial cells of Cajal, 208

Regional motor patterns in the stomach and duodenum, 209 Gastric emptying, 216

Gastric motor activity serves distinct roles under fasting and fed conditions. Interdigestive patterns clear the stomach of undigested debris and sloughed epithelial cells. After eating, the stomach accommodates and then grinds the ingested food into fine particles that are delivered to the duodenum at a controlled rate. The stomach is divided into three regions: the proximal stomach (cardia, fundus, and proximal body), the distal stomach (distal body and antrum), and the pylorus. Additional feedback control from the small intestine regulates gastric motor function.
Gastric smooth muscle
The gastric smooth muscle layers are oriented to facilitate nutrient dispersal and emptying. The longitudinal muscle layer is prominent distally and is continuous with duodenal longitudinal muscle, although some fibers terminate in the pylorus. The circular muscle layer is more uniformly distributed in the stomach, but it is electrically isolated from its duodenal counterpart by a connective tissue septum at the pylorus. The oblique layer on the lesser curvature, in continuity with the gastroesophageal junction, is innermost. Distal gastric smooth muscle is thicker than that of the proximal stomach, and it is less compliant in response to distention [1]. Specialized pyloric circular smooth muscle comprises two circumferential loops that coalesce over the lesser curvature. The pylorus is reinforced by connective tissue from the mucosa and smooth muscle.
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

Innervation of the stomach
The stomach is innervated by extrinsic nerves that relay information to and from the extragastrointestinal ganglia, the spinal cord, and the central nervous system (CNS), and by intrinsic nerves in the gastric wall.
Extrinsic innervation Efferent supply Although only a minority of vagal fibers provide efferent input to the gastric myenteric plexus, studies in rats measuring myenteric c-Fos expression indicate extensive functional efferent vagal effects on the enteric nervous system [2]. Efferent fibers within the vagus include preganglionic parasympathetic cholinergic nerves that supply excitatory enteric neurons, preganglionic cholinergic nerves that supply inhibitory enteric neurons, and sympathetic fibers from the superior cervical and stellate ganglia. Cell bodies of most efferent vagal fibers reside in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMNV). Different neurons in the DMNV project to the proximal stomach and the pylorus, indicating regional variability in the internal structure of the nucleus [3]. The dorsal vagal complex receives input from the insular cortex of the brain [4]. Insular cortical microstimulation elicits changes in gastric motor activity. Stimulation of low-threshold efferent vagal cholinergic neurons activates nicotinic receptors within enteric ganglia, increasing gastric contractions. Some efferent fibers that exhibit a high threshold to electrical stimulation inhibit motor activity through nitric oxide (NO) and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) release [5].
Sympathetic innervation from splanchnic nerves originates from neuronal cell bodies in the prevertebral celiac ganglia. Preganglionic cholinergic neurons project from the inferomedial spinal cord to the prevertebral ganglia, where they synapse by way of nicotinic receptors. Postganglionic

207

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

noradrenergic neurons project by way of the splanchnic nerves to the enteric ganglia and inhibit excitatory myenteric transmission. A smaller fraction of sympathetic fibers exert direct inhibitory effects on gastric smooth muscle.
Afferent supply Afferent fibers greatly outnumber efferents in the vagus and splanchnic nerves. Vagal afferents terminate in the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) and the area postrema. Neurons of the NTS project to the DMNV and the nucleus ambiguus, and to higher centers. Sensory information from the stomach is also transmitted to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord through the splanchnic nerves, from where second-order neurons project centrally. The stomach is richly supplied with sensory fibers. Free mucosal nerve endings respond to stroking or chemical stimuli (e.g., hydrochloric acid). Smooth muscle mechanoreceptors respond to passive distention, active contractions, or exposure to extreme temperatures [6]. Two types of mechanoreceptors are evident. Intramuscular arrays serve as stretch receptors to mediate tonic activities, whereas intraganglionic laminar endings integrate tension and neuronal activity into propagative motor activity [7]. Neurons in the NTS and DMNV are activated by gastric distention, indicating vagal mediation of mechanoreceptor-evoked afferent function [8]. Mesenteric and serosal receptors respond to visceral tension and may mediate perception of visceral pain. In many regions of the gut, splanchnic nerves carry nociceptive sensory input.
Intrinsic innervation The enteric nervous system contains afferent neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons, and can initiate many programmed motor patterns in the absence of extrinsic input. Most intrinsic neurons participating in gastric motor control are located in the myenteric plexus, although submucous plexus neurons may play a minor role in some reflexes. Excitatory neurons containing acetylcholine and tachykinins project to circular muscle. Inhibitory motor neurons containing NO and VIP project aborally [9]. Neurons containing other neurotransmitters and expressing other neurotransmitter receptors are prominent, indicating the complexity of regulation of gastric motor activity.

Interstitial cells of Cajal
Interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) are histologically distinct from neurons and smooth muscle cells and represent a third major cell type responsible for the control of gastric motor function. Four classes of ICC are identified in the stomach: ICC-MY in the myenteric region are in contact with other ICC-MY and with smooth muscle cells; ICC-IM are present within the smooth muscle layers; ICC-SEP are present along the septa between circular muscle bundles; and ICC-SM are located submucosally [10,11]. In human tissue, fundic ICC are bipolar, whereas corpus and antral ICC are multipolar [12]. The density of ICC is greatest in the fundus; ICC in the corpus and antrum show close contact with inhibitory and excitatory nerves. ICC-IM decrease in density from the greater to the lesser curvature and longitudinally to the antrum [13]. Similarly, ICC-MY predominate along the greater curvature and are less dense along the lesser curvature [14].
Most evidence suggests that ICC-MY serve as the cells of origin of pacemaker activity in the stomach. In living guinea pig antral tissues, ICC form networks in the myenteric region that exhibit an electrical slow wave which oscillates in phase with intracellular calcium fluctuations (Fig. 10.1) [15]. The slow waves have large initial depolarizations along the greater curvature in the corpus that are difficult to demonstrate along the lesser curvature, suggesting that ICC-MY serve as slow wave generators in the region of the physiological gastric pacemaker [14]. Electrical pacemaker activity exhibits an initial fast transient current involving calcium release from inositol triphosphate-sensitive internal stores, followed by a plateau potential that is maintained by activation of a calcium-sensitive chloride channel [16]. Mdx mice, which lack full-length dystrophin, exhibit significant antral ICC structural abnormalities [17]. The slow waves in these mice are highly dysrhythmic with blunting of the plateau potential.
ICC-IM facilitate enteric neurotransmission. ICC in the circular and longitudinal smooth muscle layers form synaptic structures with nerve terminals and muscle cells from both layers [18,19]. ICC also form gap junctions with adjacent smooth muscle cells [10]. Connexins, which are present

(a) (b)

(c)

5 mV 20 sec

Figure 10.1 (a) A single ICC-MY from guinea pig antrum impaled with a recording electrode. (b) Rhythmic changes in intracellular membrane potential reflect the generation of slow wave activity by these cells. (c) A single slow wave on an expanded time scale. From Rich et al. [15].

208

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

in circular smooth muscle near ICC-IM, provide a means of electrical coupling, but their absence in longitudinal muscle indicates a different method of coupling in this region [20]. The close apposition of synaptotagmin-, syntaxin-, and SNAP-25-immunopositive nerve varicosities to ICC-IM suggests specialized synaptic connections between enteric nerves and ICC [21]. Gastric peristalsis depends on a decreasing gradient in slow wave frequency from the corpus to the antrum [22]. Slow wave propagation is mediated by an orderly activation sequence from ICC in the myenteric plexus and smooth muscle and may be followed by a sustained smooth muscle calcium wave that is responsible for contraction [23]. Knockout mice lacking these ICC populations exhibit disruption of the normal proximal-to-distal frequency gradient with the generation of ectopic pacemakers [24]. Slow antegrade propagation of gastric slow waves occurs because of restricted conduction within ICCMY, whereas rapid circumferential slow wave propagation occurs because of brisk conduction within ICC-IM [25]. Rapid antegrade conduction does not occur within ICC-IM because of the high resistance between circular muscle bundles. ICC-IM appear to mediate mechanosensitive responses of the stomach [26]. Stretching of antral muscles changes slow wave frequencies and leads to uncoupling of slow wave propagation. These effects are not observed in knockout mice lacking ICC-IM [26].
The genes that regulate ICC function have been studied using gene knockout animal models. In the gastric fundus, 11 gene transcripts show higher levels of mRNA expression in mutant mice without ICC-IM, whereas 10 transcripts show higher mRNA expression in wild-type animals [27]. Membrane-bound stem cell factor is necessary for ICC development. Mice that lack stem cell factor exhibit a loss of fundic ICC and show decreased responses to enteric nerve stimulation but not to direct smooth muscle stimulants such as acetylcholine [28].
Regional motor patterns in the stomach and duodenum
Proximal stomach The proximal stomach accommodates and stores ingested food, regulates intragastric pressure, and propels chyme to the distal stomach in a tonic fashion.
Basic myoelectric and motor patterns The fundus is in a state of continual partial tonic contraction, as determined by its resting membrane potential. In contrast to more distal regions, the resting membrane potential in the fundus (­ 48 mV) is higher than the electrical threshold for gastric contraction (­50 mV). Minor depolarizations or hyperpolarizations in membrane potential produce significant increases or decreases in tone respectively. The proximal

stomach does not exhibit slow wave activity. This region exhibits two basic contractile patterns. Slow, sustained contractions lasting up to 6 min constitute 80% of the motor activity in the proximal stomach and determine the intragastric pressure. Superimposed on these slow tonic changes are more rapid phasic contractions that last up to 30 s. In dogs, intragastric pressure initially drops after eating and then increases above basal levels 30­90 min later [29]. In humans, intragastric pressure decreases from 12.9 to 9.8 mmHg in the first 30 min after eating; tone does not return to normal until all solids have emptied from the stomach [30]. Maintenance of intragastric pressure is controlled by two reflexes: receptive relaxation and gastric accommodation. Receptive relaxation is the reduction in proximal gastric tone that occurs with the act of swallowing. The reflex may be elicited by a dry swallow or with pharyngeal stimulation, indicating that transfer of the bolus into the stomach is not required for its activation. Gastric accommodation, the relaxation of the proximal stomach in response to gastric distention, is mediated by gastric mechanoreceptor stimulation and may permit up to 80% of a swallowed bolus to be retained in the fundus and proximal corpus. Increases in gastric volume are greater after consuming a liquid meal than after eating an isocaloric mixed meal, indicating differential reflex activation based on meal consistency (Fig. 10.2) [31]. Receptive relaxation and accommodation are mediated by vagovagal reflex arcs through the NTS [32].
Neurohumoral control Extrinsic nerves exert regulatory influences on proximal gastric tone. Vagal cooling reduces fundic motor activity, whereas truncal or proximal gastric vagotomy produces decreased compliance and increased intragastric pressure after bolus ingestion [33]. Electrical activation of low-threshold vagal fibers increases fundic tone, whereas high-threshold fiber stimulation elicits relaxation [34]. Splanchnicectomy augments the increase in intragastric pressure evoked by vagal activation.
Motor activity of the fundus is modulated by several neurohumoral factors. The nitrergic agent nitroglycerin relaxes the proximal stomach, whereas NO synthase inhibitors increase fundic tone, an effect blocked by atropine or vagal cooling, indicating that NO acts presynaptically on vagal cholinergic efferent nerves [35]. Similarly, the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil promotes proximal relaxation by enhancing NO action [36]. The accommodation reflex is initiated by activation of NO neural pathways [37]. Accommodation is further modulated by activation of 5HT1B/D (5-hydroxytryptamine) receptors [38]. In cats, stimulation of 5-HT1F receptors elicits proximal gastric relaxation [39]. Receptive relaxation is postulated to result from VIP release by fundic nerves. Secretin relaxes the proximal stomach by activating vagal afferent pathways originating in the gastroduodenal mucosa [40]. Pentagastrin-evoked

209

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

(a) 888 mL

(b) 835 mL

(c) 636 mL

Liquid meal 1

Liquid meal 2

Mixed meal

Figure 10.2 Single photon emission computed tomography scans of gastric volume are shown after the consumption of two liquid meals and a mixed liquid­solid meal. Gastric volume increases are greater after liquid ingestion, indicating modulation of the accommodation reflex by meal consistency. From De Schepper et al. [31].

relaxation is mimicked by histamine and is abolished by acidsuppressing agents, suggesting mediation by gastric secretory mechanisms. The sensory neurotoxin capsaicin reduces proximal gastric tone and inhibits phasic contractions by acting on the vanilloid receptor 1 [41]. Other agents that relax the proximal stomach or enhance fundic compliance include cholecystokinin (CCK), somatostatin, dopamine, gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), glucagon, bombesin, and the 2-adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine. Motilin and thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), on the other hand, increase fundic pressure.
Neural reflex modulation Proximal gastric motor function is subject to reflex control by stimulation of other gut regions. Duodenal distention reduces fundic tone by way of vagal and splanchnic nonadrenergic, noncholinergic pathways. Treatment of the vagus nerves with capsaicin attenuates the decrease in fundic pressure after low-volume duodenal distention, whereas capsaicin treatment of the celiac and superior mesenteric ganglia reduces the response to all volumes of distention [42]. Vagal nonadrenergic, noncholinergic pathways variably participate in other enterogastric reflexes, including the inhibition of proximal gastric activity by duodenal protein or lipid perfusion. Nutrient perfusion of the small intestine reduces fundic tone. CCK is postulated to mediate the inhibition of proximal tone during duodenal delivery of lipids or amino acids (especially L-tryptophan) by capsaicin-sensitive pathways, indicating afferent pathway involvement [43]. Fundic relaxation in response to low-level duodenal acid exposure is mediated by the release of secretin, which acts on vagal afferent pathways; increased exposure to acid induces CCK release and directly activates afferent nerves [44]. Duodenal acidification also increases perceptual sensitivity to mechanical fundic distention and blunts gastric accommodation to eating [45]. Esophageal distention elicits proximal gastric relaxation by way of NO release in the NTS, which then inhibits neurons in the DMNV [46]. Rectal distention inhibits proximal gastric tone but also blunts accommodation [47].

Stimulation of the proximal stomach also elicits reflex responses elsewhere in the gut. Transient relaxations of the lower esophageal sphincter are evoked by proximal gastric distention, apparently in response to activation of fundic stretch receptors [48].
Distal stomach The distal stomach grinds and triturates solid food, and regulates the emptying of solids and, to a lesser extent, liquids.
Basic myoelectric patterns The distal stomach exhibits a more negative membrane potential than the proximal stomach. Because the membrane potential is less than the threshold for spontaneous contractions or tone, this region is quiescent at rest. Superimposed on the resting membrane potential is the slow wave, generated by ICC-MY. A site along the greater curvature in the proximal body with the highest slow wave frequency [3 cycles per min (cpm) in humans] serves as the dominant pacemaker to entrain the rest of the stomach. Slow waves propagate circumferentially and distally with increasing velocity in the distal antrum (4 cm/s) vs the proximal body (0.5 cm/s). Propagation is slightly faster along the greater curvature, such that slow waves from the greater and lesser curvatures reach the pylorus simultaneously. Slow waves do not propagate proximally into the fundus because of its less negative resting membrane potential and other properties that limit its excitability.
Slow wave rhythm may be modulated by neurochemical input. Acute vagotomy disrupts normal cycling with the generation of ectopic antral pacemakers. Muscarinic agonists and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors increase slow wave frequency by increasing the production of inositol triphosphate [22]. This effect is not seen in mutant mice lacking ICC-IM, indicating the importance of these cells in the regulation of slow wave transmission [49]. NO reduces slow wave amplitude through cyclic GMP-dependent mechanisms [50]. Prostaglandin E2 elicits positive chronotropic effects by stimulating E-prostanoid-3 receptors [51].

210

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

Basic motor patterns At rest, the gastric slow wave is of insufficient amplitude to evoke significant contractions. Contractile agonists increase the duration and amplitude of the slow wave plateau potential and, in some cases, induce action potentials (< 100 ms) superimposed on the plateau potential that provide adequate membrane depolarization to exceed the contractile threshold [52]. Conversely, most relaxing agents reduce the amplitude or duration of the plateau potential or prevent the stimulatory effects of contractile agonists. VIP inhibits motor activity without altering slow wave morphology, which suggests the involvement of other mechanisms with this mediator. Because the contractile threshold is exceeded only during the plateau potential, the slow wave determines the maximal distal gastric contractile frequency (3 cpm in humans). Phasic antral contractions, sometimes exceeding 100 mmHg, migrate with the propagating slow wave as a ring, increasing in amplitude and velocity as they approach the pylorus.
The distal stomach exhibits distinct motor patterns under fasting and postprandial conditions. The migrating motor complex (MMC) is the stereotypical pattern observed during fasting. Its loss in certain disease states promotes gastric bezoar formation. After eating, the MMC is replaced by a fed contractile pattern of variable intensity and duration that grinds and triturates the ingested meal.
Migrating motor complex The MMC clears the upper gut of undigested food residue, mucus, and sloughed epithelial cells during fasting and is termed the gastrointestinal housekeeper. The MMC comprises three phases with a combined duration of 84­112 min (Fig. 10.3) [53]. Phase I (40%­ 60% of the cycle length) is a period of relative motor quiescence. High-amplitude contractions are not observed during phase I, but diminutive pressure waves (< 9 mmHg) occur in phase with the slow wave [54]. Phase II (20%­30% of the cycle) is characterized by increasing but irregular contractions. Phase III is a 5- to 10-min period of intense, lumenally occlusive contractions, which originate in the gastric body and propagate at the frequency of the slow wave to the pylorus. Of the phase III complexes, 71% begin in the stomach, 18% originate in the proximal duodenum, and 11% start more distally [55]. The propulsive characteristics of interdigestive gastric motor activity vary depending on the MMC phase. Phase III contractions are highly propagative, whereas pressure waves during phase II show little coordination between adjacent regions, suggesting that phase II may serve as a period of lumenal mixing. Emptying of inert liquids and endogenous secretions is more rapid during phase III than during phases I and II [56]. MMC cycling exhibits diurnal variability, with fewer phase III complexes occurring during sleep (0.25/h) than while awake (0.64/h) [57]. Phase I is prolonged during sleep, whereas phase II is shortened. MMC cycling is more frequent and phase III complexes are shorter in women than in men.

A1 2 min
A2 40 mmHg
D1
D2
J1
J2
Figure 10.3 A representative migrating motor complex from the antrum (A), duodenum (D), and jejunum (J) is shown. In this tracing, a phase III complex is shown beginning in the distal stomach, which then propagates into the jejunum. From Dooley et al. [55].
Fed motor pattern Intermittent phasic contractions of variable amplitude similar to those of phase II of the MMC comprise the fed pattern, which is induced 5­10 min after eating and persists for the time that food remains in the stomach. Fluoroscopy shows that fed antral contractions propel the gastric contents distally, only for them to be repelled back into the proximal stomach, thus producing a mixing and grinding action. The interaction of fed contractions with the incisura facilitates the disruption of solid food. Ultrasound shows that fed activity is associated with shortening gastric length and an alteration of the configuration of the distal stomach [58]. In addition to its stimulatory effects on phasic motor activity, meal ingestion elicits antral relaxation similar to proximal gastric accommodation [1].
Fed pattern profiles depend on the consistency and composition of the ingested meal. The duration of the fed period correlates with the number of calories consumed, with fats inducing a more prolonged response than proteins or carbohydrates. The threshold for induction of the fed pattern is as little as 17 g of fat. Antral contractions evoked by eating solids are more intense than those induced by an equivalent homogenized meal, indicating modulation by

211

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

meal consistency. Increasing meal viscosity with polycarbophil, a gel-forming compound, reduces antral contractile amplitudes but prolongs the fed pattern for several hours [59]. Sham feeding elicits transient increases in antral contractility and delays recovery of phase III, indicating that nonnutritive factors may participate in the induction of the fed pattern. This response is blocked by the CCK antagonist loxiglumide, suggesting mediation by endogenous CCK [60]. Half of individuals receiving continuous intragastric feeding revert to a fasting pattern, indicating that nutrient inhibition of interdigestive motor activity is self-limited [61]. Intravenous amino acid solutions reduce phase II duration and suppress antral phase III activity [62]. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) prolongs the MMC cycle length in the antrum but not the jejunoileum of dogs and reduces the intestinal circumference in rats, indicating that systemic factors contribute to the induction of the fed pattern [63,64].
Neurohumoral control Distal gastric motor activity is regulated by extrinsic nerve pathways. Efferent vagal stimulation of low-threshold fibers evokes atropine-sensitive antral contractions, whereas stimulation of high-threshold fibers decreases antral activity, possibly through VIP release [65]. However, phase III of the MMC persists after sectioning of the vagus and splanchnic nerves, indicating a lack of dependence on extrinsic nerves. Likewise, gastric autotransplantation with extrinsic denervation does not interrupt spontaneous phase III events in the excluded stomach [66]. Nevertheless, vagal firing increases during antral phase III, whereas vagal cooling abolishes these complexes, indicating that distal gastric function during fasting is modulated by vagal input. Bilateral vagotomy blunts phase II activity, suggesting differential regulation of the three MMC phases.
Evidence strongly suggests that antral phase III activity is initiated by cyclic changes in levels of motilin, a hormone produced by specialized duodenal mucosal cells [67]. Motilin infusion evokes premature antral phase III in dogs and humans. Conversely, both motilin antibody administration and duodenal resection of motilin-secreting tissues suppress plasma motilin levels and abolish phase III activity in dogs for several hours [68]. Motilin-evoked antral phase III activity is atropine sensitive, whereas duodenal phase III activity is partly atropine resistant, indicating differential regulation in different regions of the gut [69]. Motilin receptors are present on antral smooth muscle and on myenteric nerves. The existence of two or more motilin receptor subtypes is supported by neurotransmitter binding studies that show different affinities for motilin agonists in membranes from neural and muscular tissues of the stomach [70]. Motilin receptors have also been characterized in the brain. In rats, the injection of motilin into the hippocampus increases gastric contractile amplitude by way of a vagal pathway, suggesting participation of a vagovagal reflex [71].

The physiological stimulus for motilin release is unknown. Although motilin levels increase after vagal stimulation, extrinsic denervation does not interrupt motilin cycling [66]. Intraduodenal capsaicin inhibits motilin release with concomitant loss of the antral MMC, indicating involvement of mucosal afferents [72]. Motilin regulation of antral phase III activity exhibits plasticity. Gastric MMC cycling recovers 1­4 months after resection of the pylorus, duodenum, and upper jejunum in dogs by recruiting vagal cholinergic and adrenergic efferent pathways and without the return of motilin cycling [73].
Other neurohumoral factors participate in motilin-evoked MMC activity. Most motilin-immunoreactive neurons in the myenteric plexus are positive for neuronal NO synthase, whereas few are positive for choline acetyltransferase [74]. In general, NO is an inhibitory transmitter in the distal stomach. In dogs, NO synthase inhibitors increase antral contractions, whereas NO precursors decrease motor function. The phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil inhibits antral motor activity by enhancing the action of endogenous NO [75]. However, motilin also induces the release of NO. NO synthase inhibitors evoke MMC-like contractions in fed rats, induce premature antral phase III in dogs, and increase MMC frequency and trigger premature phase III in humans, all with associated increases in plasma motilin, reflecting regulation of motilin release by endogenous NO (Fig. 10.4) [76,77]. Serotonin depletion with p-chlorophenylalanine suppresses spontaneous and motilin-induced antral phase III, suggesting involvement of serotonergic pathways [78]. The -opioid receptor antagonist naloxone doubles the MMC cycle length and delays plasma motilin peaking, indicating regulation of motilin release by endogenous opiates. Naloxone does not block motilin-evoked phase III, confirming that motilin does not act by way of opiate-dependent pathways.
Motilin-independent factors modulate gastric MMC activity. The 5-HT1 agonist sumatriptan prolongs the MMC cycle [79]. The histamine H2 antagonist famotidine shortens the length of the MMC cycle. The leukotriene inhibitor pranlukast prolongs the MMC period in dogs [80]. Pancreatic polypeptide levels cycle in phase with antral phase III, but exogenous pancreatic polypeptide does not induce a premature MMC. Pancreatic resection, which removes pancreatic polypeptide-secreting cells, does not disrupt the antral MMC. However, motilin stimulates pancreatic polypeptide release, indicating a possible physiological role for this hormone [81]. Serotonin is released cyclically into the duodenal lumen, in phase with the MMC, but as intraduodenal serotonin has no effect on gastroduodenal motor function, the physiological significance of this response is uncertain [82]. CCK, bombesin, substance P, and some opiates increase antral contractions, whereas secretin, somatostatin, glucagon, GRP, TRH, neurotensin, calcitonin, peptide YY, prostaglandin E2, the 1-adrenergic receptor agonist phenylephrine, and the

212

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

(a) Start placebo

Figure 10.4 Antroduodenal manometry tracings are shown after infusion of a placebo (a) or the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor N(G)monomethyl-L-arginine (L-NMMA) (b). In this individual, inhibition of NO synthase elicited a premature phase III complex, beginning in the proximal duodenum. From Kuiken et al. [77]. A, antrum; D, duodenum; PS, pyloric sphincter.

A1 A2 A3 PS D1 D2
D3
D4 D5 D6

(b) Start L-NMMA

5 min

30 mmHg

2-adrenoceptor agonist clonidine inhibit distal motor activity. The 5-HT3 agonist m-chlorophenylbiguanide increases antral motility during fasting but reduces postprandial antral contractions.
Secretory activities in the upper gut influence gastric MMC activity. Some, but not all, fasting pancreaticobiliary and secretory immunoglobulin A outputs cycle with phase III activity and motilin peaks [83]. However, duodenal bile acid perfusion suppresses antral contractions suggesting that endogenous bile release is not a stimulus for gastric phase III. Antral phase III complexes do not develop if the duodenal pH is less than 7.0, even during peak motilin levels, and duodenal acid perfusion abolishes phase III activity, indicating that duodenal alkalinization is a prerequisite for MMC cycling [84]. Gastric acidification to pH 1.0 inhibits spontaneous and motilin-induced gastric phase III through a vagovagal reflex. Patients with chronic pancreatic insufficiency exhibit MMC cycles of shorter duration, indicating an interaction between antroduodenal and pancreatic function [85].
Neurohumoral control of the fed motor pattern is less well understood than that of the MMC. Proximal gastric distention evokes irregular phasic contractions that mimic the fed pattern in the proximal intestine, indicating possible participation by gastric mechanoreceptors [86]. Perfusion of a meal into a denervated, autotransplanted, small intestinal loop interrupts antral MMC activity, indicating that external innervation is not needed to induce the fed pattern. However, both vagotomy and total gut autotransplantation increase the threshold number of calories required to induce the fed pattern, reflecting the ability of extrinsic nerves to modulate postprandial activity [87]. Vagal cooling replaces the fed pattern with intermittent phase III complexes, implicating vagal pathways in the recovery of the MMC after a meal. Perfusion of blood from a fed animal into an isolated stomach preparation elicits a motor response similar to the fed pattern, suggesting the presence of a circulating mediator of postprandial motility [88]. Several humoral candidates

have been proposed to be the physiological trigger of the fed pattern, but no studies have convincingly implicated any one hormone.
Neural reflex modulation As with the proximal stomach, distal gastric motor function is modified by reflex stimulation of other regions. An excitatory vagal cholinergic fundoantral reflex is induced by distention of the ferret, human, and canine proximal stomach [89,90]. Circumferential myotomy of the midstomach promotes increased antral motor activity after eating, suggesting an additional tonic inhibitory effect of the fundus on the distal stomach mediated by intrinsic pathways. Liquid stimulation of the larynx and epiglottis inhibits antral contractions by inhibiting neurons in the DMNV [2,91]. Rectal distention reduces antral motor activity and disrupts slow wave cycling [92]. Reflex inhibition of antral motor function by duodenal distention is mediated by vagal and splanchnic innervation. In contrast, this reflex is unaffected by duodenal transection, excluding participation of intrinsic neural pathways. In rats, duodenal glucose or amino acid perfusion increases vagal afferent firing [93]. However, reductions in antral contractions during intraduodenal lipid, protein, or hydrochloric acid perfusion are incompletely blocked by vagotomy. Vagal capsaicin treatment partly reverses the inhibitory effects of protein, glucose, or trypsin inhibitor on distal motor activity, clarifying the importance of the afferent arm of this reflex [94]. Hormonal mediation is suggested by the observation that reflex inhibition of motor activity by duodenal lipids persists after gastric denervation and autotransplantation. Long-chain triglycerides are more potent inhibitors of distal gastric contractions than short- or medium-chain lipids [95]. Protein or amino acid perfusates containing L-tryptophan effectively inhibit antral motility. Participation of CCK1 receptors in the reflex inhibition of gastric motility by duodenal protein is suggested by studies in rats that use specific antagonists [94].

213

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Pylorus The pylorus sieves the outflow of gastric contents. The mechanical properties imparted by its thickness and dense connective tissue restrict the passage of large particles. The sphincteric action of the pylorus is facilitated by a redundant, highly folded mucosa that further narrows the lumenal diameter.
Basic myoelectric and motor patterns Pyloric slow wave activity is entrained to the rate of slow waves in the distal stomach (3 cpm), although most slow waves do not propagate into the duodenum. In rodent models, a slow wave-free gap secondary to a loss of pyloric ICCMY may contribute to the independence of the antral and duodenal pacemaker systems (Fig. 10.5) [96]. In contrast, some action potentials in cats cross the pyloric region in patches and may form the basis for gastroduodenal coordination [97].
The pylorus exhibits both tonic and phasic motor activity in many species. The resting pressure is 10 mmHg in dogs; however, in humans, a basal pressure cannot be reliably demonstrated. Human pyloric muscle tissue relaxes in response to electrical stimulation, reflecting basal inhibitory neural input, whereas canine pyloric muscle tissue contracts in response to electrical depolarization. The ability of the

neural toxin tetrodotoxin to enhance pyloric contractions indicates that phasic motor activity is an inherent property of pyloric smooth muscle.
The pylorus exhibits characteristic motor patterns under fasting and fed conditions. During phase III of the MMC, the pylorus is open, facilitating exit of gastric contents into the duodenum. If the lumen is impeded, retrograde flow is common during phase I, whereas more than 80% of flow is antegrade during phases II and III [98]. After eating, the pylorus exhibits prolonged periods of closure interrupted by brief relaxations that permit gastric evacuation. Large particles are emptied during fasting but not in the fed state, reflecting enhanced sieving after eating. Pyloric resection does not prevent postprandial sieving, suggesting that other gastroduodenal regions also participate in this process; however, removal of both the antrum and the pylorus permits passage of large, untriturated food particles. In general, pyloric contractions are synchronous with fed antral activity, although some foods (e.g., milk) evoke isolated pyloric contractions with initial antral inhibition. On cinefluoroscopy, meal ingestion initiates a minor ring contraction in the gastric body, which is followed 2­3 s later by an intense lumen-occluding contractile ring. The minor ring contraction induces pyloric closure as the larger contraction approaches the midantrum. As the intense contractile ring propagates further, food is trapped by

Stomach Oral

Junction

1 2 3 4 Cycle length 5 6 7 8 9 10 Conduction 11 velocity 12 13 14 15 16 17 4 mm 18 19 20 Cycle length 21 22 23 24 25 Conduction 26 velocity 27 28 29 30 31 32
214

8 seconds

0.1 mV

Figure 10.5 Slow wave activity in the stomach, pylorus (junction), and duodenum. Slow waves are more frequent and exhibit faster conduction in the duodenum than in the stomach. There is a slow wave-free zone in the pyloric region that may contribute to the independence of the pacemakers in the different gut regions. From Wang et al. [96].

Duodenum

Caudal

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

the occluded pylorus and is ground, mixed, and repelled into the proximal stomach. Because the pylorus is closed by the initial minor ring contraction, all emptying occurs early in the cycle, before the major contraction reaches the midantrum. Ultrasound shows that transpyloric flow occurs with the formation of a common antropyloroduodenal chamber [99]. Bursts of duodenogastric reflux are demonstrable before pyloric closure, suggesting the occurrence of duodenal mixing and retropulsion [99]. The relative timing of the two ring contractions depends on the latency between the initial rapid depolarization of the slow wave, which induces the minor contraction, and the peak of the plateau potential, which elicits the major contraction, and is not affected by neurohumoral or meal-related factors. In dogs, the late postprandial period is characterized by profound pyloric relaxations synchronized with propagating antral contractions [100].
Neurohumoral control The pylorus exhibits distinct neurohumoral regulation separate from that of adjacent tissues. Nerve densities in pyloric circular muscle are 3- to 5-fold greater than in the antral circular muscle. Likewise, more afferent nerves project from the pylorus to the vagal nuclei of the brainstem than from the duodenum. The pylorus exhibits increased levels of neuronal VIP, substance P, enkephalins, neuropeptide Y, and galanin. Vagal stimulation elicits pyloric contraction at low frequencies and relaxation at high frequencies, suggesting both excitatory and inhibitory efferent supply. Splanchnic stimulation evokes pyloric contraction. Vagally mediated contractions are blocked by naloxone, correlating with observations of enkephalin-containing fibers in pyloric smooth muscle and in pyloric branches of the vagus [101]. NO donors blunt basal pyloric pressure waves and enhance transpyloric flow after eating, whereas NO synthase inhibitors block relaxation of the pylorus evoked by high-frequency vagal stimulation and direct electrical depolarization, and during the late postprandial period, suggesting that NO is a common mediator of pyloric relaxation [100,102]. Combined administration of NO synthase inhibitors and P2X purinoceptor antagonists more potently inhibits electrically induced pyloric relaxations than NO synthase inhibitors alone, suggesting the involvement of purinergic pathways [103]. Motor responses of the antrum and pylorus to intravenous CCK facilitate retropulsion of gastric contents [104]. Inhibition of fed pyloric motility by a CCK receptor antagonist supports a physiological role for CCK in the postprandial state [105]. VIP, peptide histidine isoleucine, galanin, prostaglandin E1, and serotonin relax the pylorus, whereas secretin and histamine produce contraction.
Neural reflex modulation Pyloric motor activity is modified by ascending and descending reflexes. Electrical duodenal stimulation induces

pyloric contraction, whereas antral depolarization relaxes the pylorus. Duodenal perfusion of lipids, amino acids, glucose, hypertonic saline, or hydrochloric acid produces pyloric closure and decreases transpyloric flow. The effects of fatty acids are dependent on chain length; intraduodenal lauric acid (12 carbons) more potently evokes isolated pyloric contractions, whereas decanoic acid (10 carbons) has little effect [106,107]. Duodenal lipids blunt pyloric contractility by inhibiting lipase activity, which suggests that products of lipolysis mediate this enterogastric reflex [108]. Chronic exposure to a high-fat diet attenuates the excitatory effects of duodenal lipids on pyloric motility, indicating plasticity in this reflex [109]. Ileal triglycerides evoke isolated pyloric contractions, whereas ileal short-chain fatty acids increase pyloric tone and reduce transpyloric fluid pulses [110].
Neurohumoral pathways mediate reflex activation of pyloric motor activity. Pyloric contractions evoked by duodenal hydrochloric acid are antagonized by atropine and hexamethonium but not by vagotomy, indicating control by nonvagal cholinergic pathways [111]. Involvement of serotonin pathways is suggested by the observation that the 5-HT3 antagonist zacopride reduces pyloric responses to intraduodenal hydrochloric acid. Prevention of acid-induced pyloric contraction by the topical anesthetic xylocaine suggests that mucosal receptors play a role in initiating this reflex [111]. Opioid pathway participation is suggested by the ability of naloxone to block pyloric contractions induced by duodenal amino acids. The inability of naloxone to block lipid-evoked pyloric contractility is evidence of the differential regulation of responses to different stimuli. Antagonists to glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) stimulate pyloric motor activity and blunt responses to intraduodenal glucose, indicating a physiological role for GLP-1 in this enteropyloric reflex [112]. The role of other hormones such as CCK in enteropyloric reflex activity is undefined.
Proximal small intestine The small intestine provides feedback regulation of gastric and pyloric motor activity. The dominant pacemaker of the duodenum is distinct from that of the stomach, and cycles at 11­12 cpm. Some gastric myoelectric activity propagates across the pylorus through longitudinal muscle tissue, producing intermittent antroduodenal coordination, with one gastric slow wave in phase with every four duodenal cycles. This permits propagation of some antral pressure waves into the duodenum, most commonly during phase II.
The duodenum exhibits characteristic motor patterns. High-resolution manometry reveals that most duodenal contractions during phase III travel antegradely [113]. Under some conditions, strong retroperistaltic contractions in the duodenum propel intestinal contents orally and induce duodenogastric reflux. Fasting duodenal pH may be regulated by a retroperistaltic pump during late phase III. Retrograde propulsion of bile is limited by phase III-associated closure of

215

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

the sphincter of Oddi [114]. After eating, isolated duodenal contractions segment and mix food particles with pancreaticobiliary secretions. In the proximal 5­6 cm of the duodenum, 40%­50% of postprandial pressure waves are retrograde and may participate in the control of gastric emptying [115]. Intraduodenal lipid and bile perfusions increase duodenal diameter, decrease contractile frequency, reduce propagation distances, and slow intestinal flow [116]. In contrast, hydrochloric acid and hyperosmolar solutions retard propagation by inducing tonic duodenal lumenal occlusion.
The small intestine exhibits reflex responsiveness to gastric stimulation. Gastric distention delays intestinal transit. This gastroenteric reflex is unaffected by vagotomy but is reduced by small intestinal denervation and by severing connections from the celiac plexus. L-Arginine applied to celiac ganglion neurons enhances the reflex, whereas NO synthase inhibitors block it, indicating mediation by nitrergic pathways [117]. The gastroileal reflex, defined as the increase in ileal propulsion after eating, is abolished by intestinal transection, indicating mediation by intrinsic nerves. Decreased ileocecal junction pressure is observed after nutrient ingestion.
Gastric emptying
Coordinated actions of the different gastric regions with feedback from the small intestine regulate the emptying of stomach contents. Gastric emptying profiles of liquids, digestible solids, fats, and indigestible solids exhibit distinctive characteristics.
Gastric emptying of liquids Kinetics Gastric emptying of inert liquids (e.g., water, isotonic saline) follows a single exponential curve, termed first-order kinetics, with a time to 50% emptying of 8­18 min. The volume emptied into the duodenum in a given time is a constant fraction of the volume that remains in the stomach. Thus, 300 mL of saline empties twice as fast as a 150-mL load. Liquid emptying is slower in women than in men [118]. Nutrient-containing liquids are emptied more slowly in elderly individuals than in young controls [119].
Factors that modify liquid emptying The nutritional properties of a liquid modify the rate of gastric emptying to ensure that all carbohydrates, proteins, and fats are digested and absorbed in the small intestine. Feedback mechanisms in the small intestine delay liquid emptying by modifying the first-order kinetic pattern. Emptying of nutrient liquids exhibits an initial rapid phase lasting 5­30 min, followed by a slower phase of linear emptying lasting as long as 120 min. During the linear phase, 300 mL of 11% glucose empties at the same rate as 150 mL of

the same liquid. Liquids of high caloric density empty more slowly than those with fewer calories per unit volume [120]. Nutrient liquid emptying is regulated such that about 200 kcal/ h are delivered to the duodenum, regardless of whether fats, proteins, or carbohydrates are consumed [121]. However, some nutrient liquids that are more concentrated than 1 M empty at rates exceeding 200 kcal/h, indicating that caloric control of liquid emptying operates within a limited range of concentrations [120].
Other nutrient characteristics modulate liquid emptying. Carbohydrates and most amino acids modulate duodenal delivery, in part by acting on intestinal osmoreceptors. Glucose solutions empty more slowly than isocaloric, hypotonic glucose polymer solutions [122]. This discrimination is mediated by vagal and celiac ganglionic pathways. The relative inability of fructose to retard liquid emptying, compared with glucose or xylose, suggests the involvement of additional nonosmotic factors. Stimulation of specific intestinal L-tryptophan receptors may contribute to the delay in emptying elicited by isotonic L-tryptophan solutions. Isocaloric solutions of protein and amino acids delay gastric evacuation to similar degrees, as do isocaloric starch, disaccharide, and monosaccharide solutions, whereas nonhydrolyzable sucrose polymers have no effect [123]. These observations indicate that the digestive products of carbohydrate and protein hydrolysis are the major regulators of liquid emptying. The inhibitory effects of proteins are prevented by VIP antibodies, suggesting mediation by VIP [124]. Liquid peptone emptying is faster in rats fed a high-fat diet for 3 weeks than in those fed a low-protein diet, indicating plasticity in emptying kinetics [125]. Emptying of liquid lipids is not inhibited by pancreatic insufficiency or by biliary diversion, suggesting that fatty acids modulate gastric motor function. Medium-chain fatty acids (i.e., 12­14 carbons) induce more potent inhibitory actions than longer or shorter chain lengths.
Liquid gastric emptying is also modulated by physicochemical factors. Duodenal acid delivery is constant regardless of the pH or lipid solubility of acids within the stomach. Secretin is released by duodenal acid exposure, but the rapidity of the inhibition of gastric emptying with duodenal acidification is more consistent with a neurally mediated reflex. The inhibitory actions of duodenal hydrochloric acid on liquid emptying are observed only with an intact pylorus, suggesting mediation by acid-evoked pyloric contractions [124]. Increased viscosity slows liquid emptying without affecting gastric motor or myoelectric activity [126]. Assuming a supine position slightly delays emptying of saline or nutrient liquids when consumed as part of a mixed meal [127].
Finally, liquid emptying is modified by postabsorptive factors. In healthy humans, TPN slows liquid emptying by 38% [128]. The emptying delay is attenuated when half of the amino acids in TPN are replaced with branched-chain amino

216

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

acids, suggesting modulation of motility by different parenteral formulations. Similarly, patients receiving intravenous fat emulsions show delays in gastric emptying.
Roles of different regions Each region of the proximal gut participates in the regulation of liquid gastric emptying. Extrinsic denervation of the proximal stomach impairs receptive relaxation and accommodation and accelerates liquid emptying. Proximal gastric resection or fundoplication produce similar effects. Liquid meals empty more rapidly when delivered by orogastric perfusion than when swallowed, confirming a modulatory role for receptive relaxation. The importance of a fundus-generated gastroduodenal pressure gradient in the control of liquid emptying has not been resolved. Diabetic patients with normal fundic tone may exhibit delayed liquid emptying [129]. Liquid emptying proceeds normally even if the pressure in the proximal stomach is maintained at a constant 2 cmH2O below the pressure in the duodenum [130].
The antrum stimulates or inhibits liquid emptying under different conditions. In humans, a substantial degree of low calorie liquid emptying occurs in the absence of peristaltic antroduodenal motor activity [131]. Although not required for liquid emptying, the magnitude of antral contractile activity correlates with liquid expulsion into the duodenum [132]. In pigs, emptying of nonnutrient liquids occurs as a consequence of phasic contractions that originate in the gastric body and propagate to the pylorus, producing discrete flow pulses into the duodenum [133]. Magnetic resonance imaging shows that antral contractions of greater amplitude increase the emptying of liquid nutrients of low caloric density (e.g., 10% dextrose) vs more concentrated solutions (e.g., 25% dextrose), indicating differential nutrient regulation of distal gastric motor activity [134]. If the proximal stomach is excised, coordinated antropyloric pressure waves generate fluid pulses that preserve normal liquid emptying. Antral resection accelerates initial liquid emptying, suggesting inhibition by the distal stomach.
The pylorus and duodenum also participate in liquid emptying. The initial rapid phase of liquid emptying is accelerated with pyloric stenting, while the slower linear phase is unaffected. Likewise, pyloromyotomy and pyloroplasty with or without highly selective vagotomy increase early liquid emptying [130]. The absence of duodenal motor activity is associated with accelerated emptying, whereas the presence of continuous duodenal contractile activity correlates with delayed liquid gastric emptying. Liquid emptying is enhanced by circular myotomy of the duodenal wall [135].
Gastric emptying of digestible solids Kinetics Gastric emptying of digestible solids proceeds more slowly than emptying of liquids. Solid-phase emptying exhibits an initial lag phase that lasts for up to 1 h, during which little

100 P < 0.002
90

80

% Gastric retention

70 P < 0.0001 60

50

40

30
P < 0.2 20

10

0 Males Females
1h

Males Females 2h

Males Females 4h

Figure 10.6 Box and whisker plots for gastric retention of a low-fat solid meal in healthy men and women at 1, 2, and 4 h after eating. Normal values from these studies show < 60% retention at 2 h and < 10% retention at 4 h. Emptying rates for women were slightly slower than for men at 1 h and 2 h. From Tougas et al. [137].

food residue is expelled into the duodenum [136]. Cinefluoroscopy shows that extensive mixing and retropulsion occur during the lag phase, dispersing the food into fine particles. The linear emptying phase follows the lag phase and is characterized by slow, controlled delivery of the dispersed food residue to the duodenum [136]. The linear phase exhibits zero-order kinetics, during which time lumenal contents exit the stomach at a constant rate independent of the residual gastric volume. Solid-phase emptying terminates in a third phase of very slow transit of the remaining digestible residue [136]. In healthy humans, more than 40% of a low-fat digestible meal empties the stomach in 2 h and more than 90% empties within 4 h (Fig. 10.6) [137]. Solid-phase emptying is slower in premenopausal women than in men, regardless of the phase of the menstrual cycle, because of differences in the linear emptying rate [138]. The rate of digestible solid emptying correlates positively with body mass index [139].
Physical factors regulate the differential gastric emptying of solids and liquids. The J shape of the stomach may promote selective retention of solids that settle out along the greater curvature of the gastric body and proximal antrum, while liquids layered on top of the solids are expelled by gastric motor activity [140]. The principles of fluid mechanics dictate that liquids and small dispersed particles will be transported in the center of the fluid stream, which is expelled before pyloric closure. Larger food particles at the periphery of the fluid stream are not propelled into the distal antrum until pyloric closure has occurred. As a consequence, the

217

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

residue of larger particles is repulsed proximally, where it is mixed and triturated into finer particles. Dispersal of the digestible solid residue is facilitated by shear forces generated by the sudden changes in fluid direction that occur during this retropulsion.
Factors that modify digestible solid emptying Physical and nutritional properties of a digestible solid meal determine its rate of emptying from the stomach. In humans and dogs, digestible solids are delivered to the duodenum as finely dispersed particle suspensions of less than 1 mm in diameter. After a chicken meal, the mean particle size recovered in the duodenum is 0.05 mm and 95% of particles are less than 0.5 mm in diameter. Eggs and noodles are expelled into the duodenum faster than an equicaloric meal of 10-mm liver cubes [136]. Similarly, homogenized eggs empty more rapidly than 2.5- or 5-mm cubes [141]. These differences are caused by modulation of the lag phase. Larger particles prolong the lag phase, whereas homogenized food of less than 0.25 mm in diameter is emptied without a significant lag. Emptying is influenced by the amount of liquid consumed with the solid meal. After consumption of a mixed solid­liquid meal, the liquid phase is emptied more rapidly, indicating that the stomach distinguishes between the separate meal phases. Ingestion of liquid can prolong the lag phase of digestible solid emptying. Indeed, liquid consumption 90­180 min after a solid meal blunts antral motor activity and can induce a second lag phase [142]. Increasing the viscosity of a dispersed solid meal suspension impairs the discrimination of large from small particles and thus promotes the expulsion of larger particles into the duodenum. The addition of fats, triglycerides, or carbohydrates (e.g., glucose, fructose, or xylose) to a solid meal prolongs the lag phase of emptying. Conversely, solid emptying is accelerated by adding lowcalorie foods (e.g., lettuce) that increase meal volume without enhancing nutritive value. The effects of posture on digestible solid-phase emptying have been debated.
Roles of different regions Digestible solid emptying results primarily from the combined actions of the distal stomach and pylorus. The rate of solid emptying correlates strongly with the degree of antral motor activity. After pyloroplasty, with or without vagotomy, there is no increase in the particle sizes emptied from the stomach, indicating that the pylorus is not solely responsible for regulating the delivery of fine suspensions to the duodenum [143]. Conversely, after antrectomy with vagotomy, early acceleration of solid emptying occurs with loss of the lag phase. Of the particles expelled into the duodenum after antrectomy, 30% are less than 1 mm in diameter [143]. Thus, antral resection may promote impaired digestion. In dogs that have ingested chicken liver with carbon 14-labeled fat, 85% of the radiolabel is absorbed in the upper intestine [144]; however, after antrectomy, 57% of the radioactive

tracer reaches the distal intestine. The role of the proximal stomach in regulating digestible solid emptying is not well defined. That 70% of food material expelled into the duodenum after antrectomy is appropriately dispersed suggests that the proximal stomach has some capacity to mix and grind solid food [143].
Gastric emptying of fats Foods with high levels of fat are handled differently by the stomach, and their emptying patterns are distinct from those of other liquids and solids. After consumption, high-fat foods are warmed to body temperature and may be converted from a semisolid or solid consistency to a liquid phase, which is emptied more slowly than nonlipid liquids. As with digestible solids, emptying of fats exhibits an initial lag period during which to-and-fro movements in the antrum enhance fat emulsification [145]. Solid and liquid fats empty at similar rates in the first hour after ingestion; thereafter, solid highfat foods empty more slowly [146]. Prolonged ingestion of a high-fat diet promotes acceleration of the intrinsic gastric emptying rate of fats but not carbohydrates, indicating plasticity in this parameter [147].
Emptying of fats is slow for many reasons. Lipids have specific gravities of less than 1 g/cm3 and they float on top of aqueous liquids in the stomach, whereas nonlipid solids exhibit densities of greater than 1.2 g/cm3 and they settle in dependent fashion [148]. Indeed, emptying rates of fats and low-density spheres are similar, emphasizing the importance of relative density as a determinant of gastric emptying. Because of poor aqueous solubility, fats coalesce into large globules and do not easily disperse into fine particles. Liquid lipids adhere to solid food particles and are emptied at the rate of digestible solids.
Gastric emptying of indigestible solids Indigestible solid residue from a meal is emptied from the stomach in a manner dependent on particle size. Plastic spheres  3 mm in diameter can pass into the intestine during the fed period, whereas larger spheres pass more slowly, often after a lag period [149]. Spheres greater than 7 mm in diameter do not empty with the digestible solid meal; rather, they are expelled after the fed motor pattern terminates and antral phase III activity resumes. This observation likely relates to the functional differences of the pylorus, which is mostly closed during the fed period but is widely patent during fasting. Indeed, during fasting, indigestible objects of greater than 2 cm may pass from the stomach into the intestine. Emptying of indigestible solid rings is slower in women than in men [150]. From a clinical perspective, particle size is relevant to the design of encapsulated drugs. Drug absorption from 0.7-mm pellets is more rapid than absorption from 3.6mm pellets, which are emptied more slowly from the stomach [151]. Specific gravity is an independent determinant of indigestible solid emptying, with spheres having a density

218

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

greater than 2 g/cm3 or less than 0.5 g/cm3 emptying more slowly than spheres with a density of 1.0 g/cm3 [152]. Increasing intragastric liquid viscosity with guar accelerates emptying of 3.2-mm indigestible spheres. Compressibility of an indigestible compound is important, with soft solids emptying faster than hard ones [153].
Emptying of indigestible solids is regulated by distal gastric motor activity. Antrectomy promotes accelerated indigestible solid emptying, whereas fundic resection has no effect. Interruption of vagal innervation of the distal stomach impairs emptying of indigestible spheres, whereas selective proximal vagotomy does not affect the emptying rate.
Differential intragastric distribution The sequestration of different meal components in the distinct regions of the stomach contributes to the differential rates of emptying observed for liquids and solids. Fluoroscopy shows that large solid food particles are retained in the fundus, whereas fine particles are mixed in the antrum. After consumption of a radiolabeled solid meal, antral filling to a maximal level of radioactivity is observed during the lag period. This level of radioactivity remains constant during the linear emptying phase, while radioactivity in the fundus progressively declines [141]. Ingested liquids are also retained proximally to limit the volume delivered to the distal stomach. However, nonnutritive liquids are stored to lesser degrees than caloric liquid meals, thus promoting increased antral diameter. The addition of substances with high lipid levels (e.g., margarine) to a liquid meal promotes greater fundic storage with further delays in emptying [154]. When liquids and solids are consumed together, the solid fraction is retained in the proximal stomach while the liquid portion is delivered to the antrum. Large solid meals retard the transfer of liquid from the proximal stomach to the antrum and delay liquid emptying [155]. If solids are ingested with carbonated water, the proximal stomach retains a greater proportion of the solid meal, suggesting that gaseous distention modulates intragastric distribution [156]. Indigestible and digestible solids are distributed separately. After the ingestion of liver with 2.4-mm plastic spheres, the liver is retained in the fundus, whereas the spheres are propelled to the distal stomach where they remain until the late postprandial period.
External regulation of gastric emptying Gastric emptying is extensively modulated by external influences, including reflex inhibition by intestinal stimuli, input from extrinsic nerve pathways and neurohumoral factors, interaction with the CNS, and disruption by immune activation.
Neural reflex modulation Gastric emptying is modulated by stimulation of the small intestine. Duodenal acidification slows gastric emptying by

acting on pH receptors on the duodenal mucosa. Nutrient perfusion (e.g., amino acids, fats) of the small intestine delays emptying of digestible solids by prolonging the initial lag phase [157]. Duodenal amino acid delivery also enhances pyloric sieving, increasing the percentage of particles of less than 1 mm delivered to the duodenum from 66% to 82%. Duodenal osmoreceptors mediate hypertonic saline-evoked inhibition of emptying, whereas longer segments of small intestine participate in the inhibitory effects of acids, lipids, and glucose [158]. Exposure of as little as 15 cm of the proximal duodenum to hydrochloric acid or oleic acid delays liquid gastric emptying [159]. Maximal inhibition of liquid emptying is seen after contact of the proximal 150 cm of small intestine with acid, glucose, or oleic acid. Solid gastric emptying is inhibited by ileal glucose or oleic acid perfusion, a phenomenon known as the ileal brake. Lipids that activate the ileal brake include corn oil, lecithin, and petroselinic, oleic, myristoleic, erucic, linoleic, linolenic, and deoxycholic acids, but not taurocholic acid [160].
Mechanisms of small intestinal feedback inhibition of gastric emptying have been extensively investigated. Antrectomy does not prevent the inhibition of solid emptying by fats, indicating persistence of enterogastric reflex inhibition. Conversely, duodenal transection prevents the induction of isolated pyloric contractions and retardation of liquid emptying by nutrient perfusion, indicating involvement of intrinsic duodenal innervation in feedback control of gastric motor function [161]. Placement of a duodenal fistula to divert nutrients from mucosal receptors converts liquid nutrient emptying to the first-order kinetic profile seen with nonnutrient liquids. The inhibitory effects of lipids on gastric emptying are mediated by the products of their digestion, as evidenced by the observation that patients with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency exhibit rapid emptying of fats [162]. Similarly, inhibition of lipolysis by orlistat accelerates gastric emptying of lipids [163]. Conversely, intestinal perfusion of nonhydrolyzable fats does not inhibit emptying [123]. Administration of surfactants that prevent chylomicron formation abolish duodenal lipid-evoked inhibition of gastric emptying, indicating that chylomicron generation is required for this enterogastric reflex [164]. Similarly, in rats, lymph with high levels of chylomicrons collected during intestinal lipid infusion significantly inhibits gastric motility when given intraarterially [165]. Data suggests that CCK release evoked by chylomicrons activates CCK1 receptors on vagal afferent nerves and leads to reflex inhibition of gastric motility (Fig. 10.7) [166]. Apolipoprotein A-IV, a peptide released by enterocytes in response to triglyceride absorption, also delays gastric emptying [167]. Intestinal capsaicin perfusion abolishes inhibition of emptying induced by intestinal hydrochloric acid, but it reduces the inhibition evoked by duodenal glucose or lipid by only 59% and 42%, respectively [168]. Likewise, vagal capsaicin attenuates lipid-induced inhibition of gastric emptying by 57% and prevents the

219

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Impulses bin-1 Vehicle CCK Control lymph Chylous lymph MK329 Chylous lymph CCK Control lymph

180
120
60
0 0
(a)

20 40 60 80 100 120 Time (min)

Impulses bin-1 Vehicle CCK Control lymph Chylous lymph MK329 Chylous lymph CCK Control lymph

120
60
0 0
(b)

Figure 10.7 The effects of cholecystokinin

(CCK), lymph (control), and chylous lymph on

discharge from multiunit (a) and single-unit

(b) duodenal vagal afferent fibers. CCK and

chylous lymph, but not the control lymph,

increased afferent vagal activity. The ability

of the CCK antagonist MK329 to block the

response to chylous lymph suggests that

chylomicrons in chylous lymph activate vagal

20 40 60 80 100 120 afferents by way of CCK-dependent pathways.

Time (min)

From Glatzle et al. [166].

inhibitory effects of duodenal distention [169]. The enterogastric inhibition of gastric emptying by duodenal maltose is blocked by a selective CCK antagonist, indicating mediation by CCK release [170]. The inhibition of gastric motility by perfusion of the duodenum with the products of protein digestion is mediated by activation of CCK-sensitive duodenal afferent nerves by way of a mechanism involving the oligopeptide transporter PepT1 [171].
Regions other than the small intestine regulate gastric emptying. Nonpainful rectal distention slows the emptying of solids [172]. In rats, proximal colonic distention induces Fos expression in the brain and inhibits gastric emptying by way of capsaicin-sensitive afferent nerves [173]. Soups with high levels of fat delay gastric emptying more when ingested orally than when given by intragastric perfusion, indicating modulation by orosensory stimulation [174].
Neurohumoral control The extrinsic and intrinsic nerve supplies are essential for normal gastric emptying. Thoracic spinal cord transection acutely delays nutrient liquid emptying [175]. Truncal or proximal vagotomy produces rapid liquid evacuation, which is enhanced by the addition of pyloroplasty [176]. Truncal vagotomy accelerates the earliest phase of solid emptying

but retards overall emptying of digestible and indigestible solids and can promote bezoar formation in some patients. Conversely, proximal vagotomy has little effect on solid emptying [176]. Denervation of the myenteric plexus with benzalkonium chloride leads to delayed liquid gastric emptying [177]. Antral transection and reanastomosis reduces the volume of transpyloric flow pulses and retards gastric emptying. However, this operation does not affect the inhibition of antral contractions, the stimulation of pyloric motility, or the inhibition of gastric emptying elicited by duodenal glucose, indicating that intrinsic gastric pathways are not involved in this enterogastric reflex. Conversely, participation of intrinsic duodenal innervation is shown by the observation that duodenal transection impairs nutrient-evoked delays in gastric emptying [161].
Gastric emptying is modified by many neurotransmitters and hormones. In humans, NO donors delay gastric emptying, whereas NO synthase inhibitors have accelerating properties [178]. Conversely, in pigs and rodents, NO synthase inhibitors delay gastric emptying by modulating motor function in the proximal stomach and by increasing pyloric and duodenal contractions (Fig. 10.8) [179]. The phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil alters the intragastric distribution of food and delays gastric emptying by augmenting the

220

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

1.0

0.9 Saline L-NAME
0.8

Fraction of the meal remaining

0.7
* 0.6
** 0.5
*** 0.4 **
** **
0.3 ** ** **
0.2

0.1

0.0 0

30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 Time (min)

Figure 10.8 The effects of the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor N(G)-nitro-Larginine methyl ester (L-NAME) on retention of a semisolid meal in the proximal (filled symbols) and distal (open symbols) stomach. L-NAME (triangles) delayed gastric emptying compared with the control (squares) by prolonging retention in the proximal stomach. From Lefebvre et al. [179].

actions of NO [180,181]. Opiates of different receptor subclasses exert inhibitory and excitatory effects on emptying through naloxone-sensitive and naloxone-insensitive pathways. Activation of the ileal brake by lipids is antagonized by naloxone, indicating involvement of opiate pathways [182]. Emptying delays induced by meperidine (pethidine) are reversed by the -adrenergic receptor antagonist phentolamine, suggesting mediation by adrenergic pathways. 5-HT3 antagonists and 5-HT1 agonists (e.g., sumatriptan) both delay gastric emptying, indicating the opposing effects of the two serotonin receptor pathways [183]. Inhibition of gastric emptying by duodenal glucose perfusion is mediated by 5HT3 receptor activation on extrinsic afferent nerves [184]. The enhancement of emptying by the histamine H2 antagonist nizatidine suggests involvement of endogenous histamine pathways in the regulation of gastric emptying [185]. Blockade of GRP receptors delays solid emptying, also indicating a physiological role for GRP [186]. Likewise, a role for endogenous secretin is indicated by the observation that secretin antibodies accelerate emptying [187]. Baclofen accelerates solid emptying but delays liquid emptying, reflecting differential actions of -aminobutyric acid B receptors on different gastric regions [188]. GLP-1 increases postprandial gastric volume and retards gastric emptying [189].

GLP-2 also inhibits gastric emptying but is less potent [190]. Antibodies to calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) prevent the inhibition of emptying by intestinal hydrochloric acid or hypertonic saline, suggesting the participation of CGRP pathways in these enterogastric reflexes [191]. Other agents that delay gastric emptying include gastrin, somatostatin, neurotensin, pancreatic polypeptide, peptide YY, enteroglucagon, oxyntomodulin, prostaglandins E1 and E2, neuromedin B, amylin, adrenomedullin, epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor-, interleukin-1, and cannabinoid agonists.
CCK has been proposed to be an important physiological regulator of gastric emptying. Exogenous CCK inhibits liquid emptying and stimulates antral motor activity, and higher doses increase pyloric contractions. CCK infusions that mimic the postprandial state produce fundic relaxation and increase proximal gastric compliance [192]. In humans, administration of an oral CCK1 agonist delays gastric emptying of solids [193]. Selective CCK antagonists accelerate the emptying of mixed meals, glucose, lipids, and radiopaque markers, and enhance antral contractility in most but not all studies [194,195]. The ability of the CCK1 antagonist devazepide to blunt retardation of emptying evoked by a peptone meal decreases as the caloric density increases, indicating recruitment of CCK-independent factors with greater nutrient loads [196]. Gastric emptying of liquids is accelerated in mice lacking CCK2 receptors [197]. Oleate-induced inhibition of gastric emptying is attenuated in rats fed a high-fat diet [198]. In the same rats, exogenous CCK less potently inhibits gastric emptying, indicating the plasticity of the response to CCK.
The actions of CCK on gastric emptying involve the participation of several regions and neural pathways. Antrectomy in combination with pyloroplasty inhibits the effects of CCK on gastric emptying. Fundic resection prevents CCK-induced inhibition of emptying in some studies but not in others. The application of benzalkonium chloride to the antral serosa does not prevent inhibition of gastric emptying induced by CCK, suggesting that intrinsic antral neurons are not involved [199]. In rats, intraarterial or intraperitoneal CCK increases firing in gastric vagal mechanoreceptor afferents [200]. Perivagal capsaicin abolishes the delay in emptying evoked by CCK, indicating mediation by vagal afferents [42]. The ability of devazepide to block the increase in vagal afferent firing evoked by CCK indicates mediation by CCK1 receptors [201]. Devazepide attenuates the inhibition of emptying evoked by duodenal lipids, but vagal capsaicin offers no additive effect, indicating that CCK acts solely on vagal afferent CCK1 receptors [202]. Similarly, the effects of apolipoprotein A-IV on gastric emptying are mediated by CCK release, which activates CCK1 receptors on duodenal vagal afferents [167]. CCK antagonists that do not cross the blood­brain barrier, such as A-70104, also block nutrient-induced inhibition of gastric emptying, indicating the involvement of peripheral

221

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

CCK receptors [203]. In rats, serotonin 5-HT2A/2C receptors are postulated to mediate the inhibitory effects on gastric emptying of endogenous CCK released by intestinal lipid perfusion [204]. An additional modulatory role for splanchnic pathways has been proposed. In cats, CCK-evoked catecholamine release from splanchnic efferent nerves produces excitatory and inhibitory effects on gastric muscle by acting on 2- and -adrenergic, receptors, respectively [205].
Central nervous system modulation The CNS has potent modulatory effects on gastric motor function. Acoustic stress modifies both fasting and fed motor activity [206]. Physical restraint stress in rats disrupts MMC activity, as does mental stress in humans. Cold stress induces isolated pyloric contractions, inhibits antral contractions, stimulates duodenal phase III, alters fed motor activity, and prolongs liquid emptying (Fig. 10.9) [207]. Experimentally induced vertigo, noise stress, restraint stress, and ischemic

Time (min)

100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0
(a)

Lag time

* T1/2

160

140

120

100

Time (min)

80

60

40

20

0 (b)

Lag time

T1/2

Figure 10.9 The lag times and half-emptying times (T1/2) for liquid (a) and solid (b) meals. Induction of cold pain (solid bars) prolonged the half-time

of liquid emptying but had no effect on solid-phase emptying parameters.

From Nakae et al. [207].

pain retard gastric emptying. In humans, anger enhances gastric motor activity, in contrast to fear and depression, which evoke decreased levels. Many of these stress responses are associated with norepinephrine (noradrenaline) and endorphin release and they are blocked by vagotomy or by adrenergic or opioid antagonism [208].
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) has been proposed to be a major mediator of stress effects on gastric motor function. The peripheral effects of many stressors are inhibited by CRF antagonists, confirming a physiological role for CRF [209]. Studies of the neural pathways and receptor subtypes mediating the actions of CRF have yielded conflicting results. CRF infusion into the brain or spinal cord delays gastric emptying by way of a vagal cholinergic pathway [209]. Similarly, in a study testing its effects on DMNV neurons, CRF excited efferent vagal activity by activating CRF2 receptors (Fig. 10.10) [210]. The ability of the CRF2 ligand urocortin to disrupt gastric motility when given intracisternally and the inability of CRF1 antagonists to block the effects of CRF or urocortin also support a role for CRF2 receptors in mediating the responses to CRF [211]. However, another group reported that CRF delays gastric emptying by acting on CRF2 receptors ­ a response that is blocked by guanethidine, propranolol, and celiac ganglionectomy, indicating the involvement of sympathetic pathways [212]. Similarly, different researchers observed that intracisternal injection of urocortin-2 inhibits gastric emptying by acting through CRF2 pathways involving sympathetic innervation of the stomach [213]. However, the inhibitory effects of urocortin-1 and CRF on gastric emptying were reported to be mediated by vagal pathways. CRF released by the CNS may interact with other transmitters. TRH-stimulated gastric motility is inhibited by intracisternal urocortin acting on CRF2 receptors [214]. Central administration of GLP-1 delays gastric emptying by way of central CRF and peripheral sympathetic pathways [215]. Centrally administered CRF antagonists reverse intracisternal interleukin-1-evoked delays in gastric emptying, indicating an interaction of inflammatory mediators with central CRF pathways [216]. Infusion of a somatostatin analogue into the fourth ventricle blocks the inhibitory effects of CRF on gastric emptying [217]. Inhibition of gastric emptying by nociceptin/orphanin FQ is mediated by CRF pathways [218].
The peripheral actions of CRF differ from its central effects. CRF1 and CRF2 receptors are present in rat gastroduodenal nerve fibers and myenteric neurons [219,220]. Specific urocortin-2 receptors are also expressed in antral smooth muscle. Activation of peripheral CRF2 receptors inhibits phasic antral contractions. In humans, intravenous administration of CRF elicits phasic pyloric and duodenal pressure waves [221]. In mice, peripheral administration of a CRF1 antagonist prevents gastric ileus induced by surgical visceral manipulation [222]. Likewise, CRF1 receptor-deficient mice do not exhibit impaired gastric emptying in this model of postoperative ileus.

222

Discharge rate (% increase over control)

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

[CRF] nM 10

Figure 10.10 (a) Representative discharge traces from a gastric-projecting dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus neuron. Corticotropinreleasing factor (CRF) produced dosedependent increases in neuronal firing. (b) Neuronal discharge rate (solid line) and depolarization (dashed line) plotted as a function of CRF dose. Both parameters increased in a dose-dependent fashion. From Lewis et al. [210].

(a)

30 100

Depolarization (mV)

* * 200 5.00

3.75 * 2.50

100

1.25 10

0 30 100 300
[CRF] nM log scale

20 mV 10 s (b)

Other CNS neurohumoral factors participate in the regulation of gastric motor function. NO synthase is present in the dorsal vagal complex of the brainstem. Inhibition of central NO synthase suppresses antroduodenal phase III of the MMC and increases pyloric motor activity but has no effect on jejunal cycling or on solid emptying, indicating differential central regulation of proximal and distal motor function and of fasting and fed contractile patterns [223]. Central TRH administration increases gastric motor activity by acting on vagal cholinergic pathways [224]. TRH perfusion into the DMNV or the cisterna magna increases gastric vagal efferent discharge and induces atropine-sensitive stimulation of gastric motor function [225]. TRH antibodies block the gastric contractile response to central glutamate injection, and TRH1 antisense oligonucleotides prevent the delay in gastric emptying evoked by cold stress, suggesting a stimulatory physiological role for central TRH [226]. Oxytocin infusion into the DMNV reduces gastric motor activity, whereas central administration of an oxytocin antagonist increases fasting gastric activity [227]. Oxytocin antagonists also prevent the inhibition of gastric motor activity evoked by electrical stimulation of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. The central action of adrenomedullin inhibits gastric emptying by acting on CRF-independent, -adrenergic pathways [228]. Central administration of cocaine- and amphetamineregulated transcript-derived peptides (CARTp) in the dorsal vagal complex inhibits gastric emptying [229]. The central inhibitory effects of -opioid receptor agonists on antral motility are mediated by sympathetic pathways [230]. Centrally administered CCK, bombesin, tachykinins, atrial natriuretic factor, -aminobutyric acid, calcitonin, CGRP, substance P, and peptide YY inhibit gastric emptying or motility, whereas pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)-38, pancreatic polypeptide, serotonin, glutamate, and prolactin-releasing peptide increase gastric motor activity when they are administered into selected brainstem nuclei.
The brain­stomach axis plays an important role in regulating food intake. The effects of centrally acting agents on

gastric motor function may contribute to appetite control. CCK acts on gut CCK1 receptors to suppress food intake by activating vagal pathways that project to the NTS, lateral parabrachial nucleus, amygdala, and higher sites [231]. Rats lacking CCK1 receptors develop obesity, reflecting the importance of CCK as a satiety hormone. The role of the gastric motor effects of CCK in mediating satiety is unresolved. One group has reported that blockade of 5-HT3 receptors attenuates CCK-induced inhibition of food intake by reversing CCK-induced delays in gastric emptying [232]. However, another group observed that central administration of a CCK antagonist increases food intake without affecting the gastric emptying rate [233]. Leptin is a hormone secreted by adipose tissue and gastric mucosa. Intracisternal injection of leptin inhibits gastric emptying by acting on leptin receptors located on cholinergic neurons in the DMNV [234]. Leptin-deficient obese mice exhibit accelerated gastric emptying and increased jejunal responses to CCK [235]. Leptin applied to the stomach activates vagal afferent neurons that also respond to CCK [236]. When given together, leptin and CCK have an additive effect on vagal discharges. Similarly, leptin stimulation of intestinal electromyographic activity occurs only in the presence of CCK, supporting the hypothesis that leptin may modulate the effects of CCK to regulate food intake [237]. Conversely, ghrelin, a peptide secreted by the stomach, decreases vagal afferent activity and increases gastric motor activity in rats [238]. Ghrelin levels are suppressed by leptin, suggesting that it may act downstream from leptin to control appetite. Ghrelin potently stimulates gastric emptying and small intestinal transit of liquid meals by acting on motilin-independent, cholinergic pathways (Fig. 10.11) [239,240]. Ghrelin colocalizes with choline acetyltransferase in the gastric myenteric plexus [74]. In rats, intravenous and intracisternal administration of ghrelin induce fasting motor activity in the stomach and duodenum [241]. In humans, ghrelin elicits premature antral phase III activity that is not mediated by motilin release [242]. The effects of intravenous injection of ghrelin on gastric motility are inhibited by intracisternal injection of a CRF2 antagonist [243]. Ghrelin

223

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Gastric retention (%) MPO activity (U/g ileal tissue)

100 * P < 0.05

L

80

Saline Ghrelin

IM 16

* P < 0.05

60

40 8 * P < 0.05
20

0 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 Time (min)
Figure 10.11 Gastric retention is plotted as a function of time after consuming a nutrient meal during intravenous administration of saline or ghrelin. Ghrelin evoked an acceleration of gastric emptying, as reflected by decreased retention throughout the emptying curve. From Levin et al. [240], with permission.

0 6

12 24 48 h PO

Figure 10.12 Ileal myeloperoxidase activity (MPO), reflecting leukocyte recruitment, is plotted as a function of time after laparotomy (L) and after laparotomy with intestinal manipulation (IM). Increases in MPO activity were seen for at least 48 h postoperatively (PO) after intestinal manipulation, but not after laparotomy alone, in the intestine but not the stomach, reflecting leukocyte infiltration. From De Jonge et al. [257].

may also act through Y1 receptors for neuropeptide Y in the arcuate hypothalamic nucleus to increase food intake and decrease energy expenditure [238,244]. The neuropeptides orexin-A (OXA) and -B (OXB) also stimulate food intake. OXA-like immunoreactivity is present in duodenal neurons, circular muscle, and mucosal enterochromaffin cells [245]. Both peripheral and intracisternal administration of OXA and OXB induce proximal gastric relaxation and prolong MMC cycle lengths in rats by acting on vagal pathways [245,246]. Peripheral OXA administration slightly delays gastric emptying [247]. Conversely, microinjections of OXA and OXB into the DMNV rostral to the obex increase intragastric pressure and antral contractions [248].
Immune system disruption Activation of the gut immune system disrupts normal gastric motor function. Immune abnormalities are postulated to underlie several clinical disorders. Gastric dysmotility often occurs with bacterial infection. Lipopolysaccharide treatment of rats elicits initial strong repetitive antral contractions mediated by 5-HT4 pathways, followed by motor suppression associated with increased inducible NO synthase levels [249]. Rats treated with endotoxin exhibit increases in NO synthesis in fundic soma, axons, and nerve endings of the fundus [250]. Inhibition of inducible NO synthase reverses the inhibition of gastric emptying by lipopolysaccharide [251]. Endotoxin treatment also increases prostaglandin synthesis in the rat antrum [252]. Polyethylene glycol­superoxide dismutase reverses delays in gastric emptying evoked by endotoxin, indicating a role for oxidative stress [253]. Intracisternal perfusion of a tumor necrosis factor- (TNF-) construct with a TNF receptor linked to the Fc portion

of immunoglobulin G1 to neutralize endogenous TNF- prevents the inhibition of gastric motility induced by lipopolysaccharide, indicating participation of central TNF- in the inflammatory response [254,255]. Similarly, the effects of lipopolysaccharide are prevented by intracisternal perfusion of indomethacin (indometacin), suggesting a role for central prostaglandin pathways [255]. Intraperitoneal lipopolysaccharide also reduces fasting levels of ghrelin, an effect blocked by indomethacin and an interleukin-1 antagonist [256]. Exogenous ghrelin significantly improves the impairments in gastric emptying and food intake elicited by lipopolysaccharide. In a model of postoperative gastric ileus, intestinal manipulation delays gastric emptying in mice for as long as 48 h (Fig. 10.12) [257]. This delay is associated with leukocyte infiltrates in the manipulated small intestine but not the stomach, and it is blocked by inhibitors of leukocyte recruitment. Similarly, the delay in gastric emptying elicited by intestinal manipulation is partly reversed by antibodies or antisense nucleotides to intercellular adhesion molecule-1, indicating a mediating role for this substance [258].
References
1. Lee KJ, Vos R, Janssens J, Tack J. Differences in the sensorimotor response to distention between the proximal and distal stomach in humans. Gut 2004;53:938.
2. Zheng H, Berthoud HR. Functional vagal input to gastric myenteric plexus as assessed by vagal stimulation-induced Fos expression. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G73.
3. Kobashi M, Koga T, Mizutani M, Matsuo R. Suppression of vagal motor activities evokes laryngeal afferent-mediated inhibition of gastric motility. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2002;282: R818.

224

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

4. Bagaev V, Aleksandrov V. Visceral-related area in the rat insular cortex. Auton Neurosci 2006;125:16.
5. Murray J, Du C, Ledlow A, et al. Nitric oxide: mediator of nonadrenergic noncholinergic nerve-induced responses of opossum esophageal muscle. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G401.
6. El Ouazzani T, Mei N. Electrophysiologic properties and role of the vagal thermoreceptors of lower esophagus and stomach of cat. Gastroenterology 1982;83:995.
7. Wang FB, Powley TL. Topographic inventories of vagal afferents in gastrointestinal muscle. J Comp Neurol 2000;421:302.
8. Barber WD, Burks TF. Brainstem response to phasic gastric distention. Am J Physiol 1983;245:G242.
9. Reiche D, Michel K, Pfannkuche H, Schemann M. Projections and neurochemistry of interneurons in the myenteric plexus of the guinea-pig corpus. Neurosci Lett 2000;295:109.
10. Horiguchi K, Sanders KM, Ward SM. Enteric motor neurons form syntaptic-like junctions with interstitial cells of Cajal in the canine gastric antrum. Cell Tissue Res 2003;311:299.
11. Mazet B, Raynier C. Interstitial cells of Cajal in the guinea pit gastric antrum: distribution and regional density. Cell Tissue Res 2004;316:23.
12. Ibba Manneschi L, Pacini S, Corsani S, et al. Interstitial cells of Cajal in the human stomach: distribution and relationship with enteric innervation. Histol Histopathol 2004;19:1153.
13. Song G, David G, Hirst S, et al. Regional variation in ICC distribution, pacemaking activity and neural responses in the longitudinal muscle of the murine stomach. J Physiol 2005;564:523.
14. Hirst GD, Beckett EA, Sanders KM, Ward SM. Regional variation in contribution of myenteric and intramuscular interstitial cells of Cajal to generation of slow waves in mouse gastric antrum. J Physiol 2002;540:1003.
15. Rich A, Hanani M, Ermilov LG, et al. Physiological study of interstitial cells of Cajal identified by vital staining. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:189.
16. Kito Y, Suzuki H, Edwards FR. Properties of unitary potentials recorded from myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal distributed in the guinea-pig gastric antrum. J Smooth Muscle Res 2002;38:165.
17. Vannucchi MG, Zizzo MG, Zardo C, et al. Ultrastructural changes in the interstitial cells of Cajal and gastric dysrhythmias in mice lacking full-length dystrophin (mdx mice). J Cell Physiol 2004;199:293.
18. Mitsui R, Komuro T. Direct and indirect innervation of smooth muscle cells of rat stomach, with special reference to the interstitial cells of Cajal. Cell Tissue Res 2002;309:219.
19. Seki K, Komuro T. Distribution of interstitial cells of Cajal and gap junction protein Cx 43 in the stomach of wild-type and W/Wv mutant mice. Anat Embryol 2002;206:57.
20. Cousins HM, Edwards FR, Hickey H, et al. Electrical coupling between the myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal and adjacent muscle layers in the guinea-pig gastric antrum. J Physiol 2003;550:829.
21. Beckett EA, Takeda Y, Yanese H, et al. Synaptic specializations exist between enteric motor nerves and interstitial cells of Cajal in murine stomach. J Comp Neurol 2005;493:193.
22. Kim TW, Koh SD, Ordög T, et al. Muscarinic regulation of pacemaker frequency in murine gastric interstitial cells of Cajal. J Physiol 2003;546:415.
23. Hennig GW, Hirst GD, Park KJ, et al. Propagation of pacemaker activity in the guinea-pig antrum. J Physiol 2004;556:585.
24. Ordög T, Baldo M, Danko R, Sanders KM. Plasticity of electrical pacemaking by interstitial cells of Cajal and gastric dysrhythmias in W/Wv mutant mice. Gastroenterology 2002;123:2028.
25. Hirst GD, Garcia-Londono AP, Edwards FR. Propagation of slow waves in the guinea-pig gastric antrum. J Physiol 2006;571:165.
26. Won KJ, Sanders KM, Ward SM. Interstitial cells of Cajal mediate mechanosensitive responses in the stomach. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:14913.
27. Daigo Y, Takayama I, Ponder BA, et al. Differential gene expression in the murine gastric fundus lacking interstitial cells of Cajal. BMC Gastroenterol 2003;3:14.

28. Beckett EA, Horiguchi K, Khoyi M, et al. Loss of enteric motor neurotransmission in the gastric fundus of SI/SId mice. J Physiol 2002;543:871.
29. Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Physiological variations in canine gastric tone measured by an electronic barostat. Am J Physiol 1985;248:G229.
30. Ahluwalia NK, Thompson DG, Barlow J. Effect of distension and feeding on phasic changes in human proximal gastric tone. Gut 1996;39:757.
31. De Schepper H, Camilleri M, Cremonini F, et al. Comparison of gastric volumes in response to isocaloric liquid and mixed meals in humans. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:567.
32. Andrews PL, Grundy D, Scratcherd T. Vagal afferent discharge from mechanoreceptors in different regions of the ferret stomach. J Physiol 1980;298:513.
33. Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Importance of vagal input in maintaining gastric tone in the dog. J Physiol 1987;384:511.
34. Andrews PL, Scratcherd T. The gastric motility patterns induced by direct and reflex excitation of the vagus nerves in the anesthetized ferret. J Physiol 1980;302:363.
35. Paterson CA, Anvari M, Tougas G, Huizinga JD. Nitrergic and cholinergic vagal pathways involved in the regulation of canine proximal gastric tone: an in vivo study. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2000;12:301.
36. Sarnelli G, Sifrim D, Janssens J, Tack J. Influence of sildenafil on gastric sensorimotor function in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G988.
37. Tack J, Demedts I, Meulemans A, et al. Role of nitric oxide in the gastric accommodation reflex and in meal induced satiety in humans. Gut 2002;51:219.
38. De Ponti F, Crema F, Moro E, et al. Role of 5-HT1B/D receptors in canine gastric accommodation: effects of sumatriptan and 5-HT1B/D receptor antagonists. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003; 285:G96.
39. Janssen P, Tack J, Sifrim D, et al. Influence of 5-HT1 receptor agonists on feline stomach relaxation. Eur J Pharmacol 2004;492:259.
40. Lu Y, Owyang C. Secretin at physiological doses inhibits gastric motility via a vagal afferent pathway. Am J Physiol 1995;268: G1012.
41. Lee KJ, Vos R, Tack J. Effects of capsaicin on the sensorimotor function of the proximal stomach in humans. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:415.
42. Holzer HH, Raybould HE. Vagal and splanchnic sensory pathways mediate inhibition of gastric motility induced by duodenal distension. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G603.
43. Raybould HE, Tache Y. Cholecystokinin inhibits gastric motility and emptying via a capsaicin-sensitive vagal pathway in rats. Am J Physiol 1988;255:G242.
44. Lu YX, Owyang C. Duodenal acid-induced gastric relaxation is mediated by multiple pathways. Am J Physiol 1999;276:G1501.
45. Lee KJ, Vos R, Janssens J, Tack J. Influence of duodenal acidification on the sensorimotor function of the proximal stomach in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G278.
46. Ferriera M, Sahibzada N, Shi M, et al. Hindbrain chemical mediators of reflex-induced inhibition of gastric tone produced by esophageal distention and intravenous nicotine. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2005;289:R1482.
47. Lei Y, Zhu H, Xing J, Chen JD. Rectal distention modulates canine gastric tone and accommodation. Dig Dis Sci 2005;50:2134.
48. Penagini R, Carmagnola S, Cantu P, et al. Mechanoreceptors of the proximal stomach: role in triggering lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Gastroenterology 2004;126:49.
49. Forrest AS, Ordog T, Sanders KM. Neural regulation of slow-wave frequency in the murine gastric antrum. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G486.
50. Kim T, La J, Lee J, Yang I. Effects of nitric oxide on slow waves and spontaneous contraction of guinea pig gastric antral circular muscle. J Pharmacol Sci 2003;92:337.

225

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

51. Kim TW, Beckett EA, Hanna R, et al. Regulation of pacemaker frequency in the murine gastric antrum. J Physiol 2002;538:145.
52. Morgan KG, Szurszewski JH. Mechanisms of phasic and tonic actions of pentagastrin on canine gastric smooth muscle. J Physiol 1980;301:229.
53. Code CF, Marlett JA. The interdigestive myoelectric complex of stomach and small bowel of dogs. J Physiol 1975;246:289.
54. Collard JM, Romagnoli R. Human stomach has a recordable mechanical activity at a rate of about three cycles/minute. Eur J Surg 2000;166:942.
55. Dooley CP, Di Lorenzo C, Valenzuela JE. Variability of migrating motor complex in humans. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37:723.
56. Schindlbeck NE, Heinrich C, Muller-Lissner SA. Relation between fasting antroduodenal motility and transpyloric fluid movements. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G198.
57. Wilson P, Perdikis G, Hinder RA. Prolonged ambulatory antroduodenal manometry in humans. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:1489.
58. Schulze-Delrieu K, Herman RJ, Shirazi SS, Brown BP. Contractions move contents by changing the configuration of the isolated cat stomach. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G359.
59. Prove J, Ehrlein HJ. Motor function of gastric antrum and pylorus for evacuation of low and high viscosity meals in dogs. Gut 1982;23:150.
60. Katschinski M, Dahmen G, Reinshagen M, et al. Cephalic stimulation of gastrointestinal secretory and motor responses in humans. Gastroenterology 1992;103:383.
61. Ledeboer M, Masclee AA, Coenraad M, et al. Antroduodenal motility and small bowel transit during continuous intraduodenal or intragastric administration of enteral nutrition. Eur J Clin Invest 1999;29:615.
62. Gielkens HA, Van den Biggelaar A, Vecht J, et al. Effect of intravenous amino acids on interdigestive antroduodenal motility and small bowel transit time. Gut 1999;44:240.
63. Kaji T, Takamatsu H, Kajiya H. Motility of the gastrointestinal tract and gallbladder during long-term total parenteral nutrition in dogs. J Parenteral Enteral Nutr 2002;26:198.
64. Ekelund M, Ekelund M, Qader SS, et al. Effects of total parenteral nutrition on rat enteric nervous system, intestinal morphology, and motility. J Surg Res 2005;124:187.
65. Dickens EJ, Edwards FR, Hirst GD. Vagal inhibition in the antral region of guinea pig stomach. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G388.
66. Siadati M, Sarr MG. Role of extrinsic innervation in release of motilin and patterns of upper gut canine motility. J Gastrointest Surg 1998;2:363.
67. Helmstaedter V, Kreppein W, Domschke W, et al. Immunohistochemical localization of motilin in endocrine non-enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine of humans and monkey. Gastroenterology 1979;76:897.
68. Lee KY, Chang TM, Chey WY. Effect of rabbit antimotilin serum on myoelectric activity and plasma motilin concentrations in fasting dog. Am J Physiol 1983;245:G547.
69. Boivin M, Pinelo LR, St.-Pierre S, Poitras P. Neural mediation of the motilin motor effect on the human antrum. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G71.
70. Miller P, Roy A, St.-Pierre S, et al. Motilin receptors in the human antrum. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;278:G18.
71. Guan Y, Tang M, Jiang Z, Peeters TL. Excitatory effects of motilin in the hippocampus on gastric motility in rats. Brain Res 2003;984:33.
72. Shibata C, Naito H, Ueno T, et al. Intraduodenal capsaicin inhibits gastric migrating motor complex via an extrinsic neural reflex in conscious dogs. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:543.
73. Chung SA, Rotstein O, Greenberg GR, Diamant NE. Mechanisms coordinating gastric and small intestinal MMC: role of extrinsic innervation rather than motilin. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G800.
74. Xu L, Depoortere I, Tomasetto C, et al. Evidence for the presence of motilin, ghrelin, and the motilin and ghrelin receptor in neurons of the myenteric plexus. Regul Pept 2005;124:119.

75. Bortolotti M, Mari C, Lopilato C, et al. Sildenafil inhibits gastroduodenal motility. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2001;15:157.
76. Russo A, Fraser R, Adachi K, et al. Evidence that nitric oxide mechanisms regulate small intestinal motility in humans. Gut 1999;44:72.
77. Kuiken SD, Tytgat GN, Boeckxstaens GE. Role of endogenous nitric oxide in regulating antropyloroduodenal motility in humans. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:1661.
78. Haga N, Mizumoto A, Satoh M, et al. Role of endogenous 5-hydroxytryptamine in the regulation of gastric contractions by motilin in dogs. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G20.
79. Calvert EL, Whorwell PJ, Houghton LA. Inter-digestive and postprandial antro-pyloro-duodenal motor activity in humans: effect of 5-hydroxytryptamine 1 receptor agonism. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:805.
80. Garcia M, Nakabayashi T, Mochiki E, et al. Pranlukast, a leukotriene receptor antagonist, prolongs the duration of the migrating motor complex in dogs. Dig Dis Sci 2004;49:1228.
81. Mochiki E, Inui A, Satoh M, et al. Motilin is a biosignal controlling cyclic release of pancreatic polypeptide via the vagus in fasted dogs. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G224.
82. Tanaka T, Mizumoto A, Mochiki E, et al. Relationship between intraduodenal 5-hydroxytryptamine release and interdigestive contractions in dogs. J Smooth Muscle Res 2004;40:75.
83. Mellander A, Mattsson A, Svennerholm AM, Sjovall H. Relationship between interdigestive motility and secretion of immunoglobulin A in human proximal small intestine. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42:554.
84. Woodtli W, Owyang C. Duodenal pH governs interdigestive motility in humans. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G146.
85. Vu MK, Vecht J, Eddes EH, et al. Antroduodenal motility in chronic pancreatitis: are abnormalities related to exocrine insufficiency? Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;278:G458.
86. Bull JS, Grundy D, Scratcherd T. Disruption of the jejunal migrating motor complex by gastric distension and feeding in the dog. J Physiol 1987;394:381.
87. Siadati MR, Murr MM, Foley MK, et al. In situ neural isolation of the entire canine upper gut: effects on fasting and fed motility patterns. Surgery 1997;121:174.
88. Pilot MA, Thomas PA, Gill RE, et al. Hormonal control of the gastric motor response to feeding: cross-perfusion of an isolated stomach using a conscious donor dog. World J Surg 1982;6:422.
89. Rao SS, Vemuri S, Harris B, Schulze K. Fundic balloon distension stimulates antral and duodenal motility in man. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:1015.
90. Rao SS, Kumar A, Harris B, et al. Investigation of the fundo-antral reflex in human beings. World J Gastroenterol 2005;11:6676.
91. Kobashi M, Mizutani M, Matsuo R. Water stimulation of the posterior oral cavity induces inhibition of gastric motility. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2000;279:R778.
92. Qian L, Orr WC, Chen JD. Inhibitory reflexive effect of rectal distention on postprandial gastric myoelectrical activity. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:2473.
93. Schwartz GJ, Moran TH. Duodenal nutrient exposure elicits nutrient-specific gut motility and vagal afferent signals in rat. Am J Physiol 1998;274:R1236.
94. Raybould HE. Capsaicin-sensitive vagal afferents and CCK in inhibition of gastric motor function induced by intestinal nutrients. Peptides 1991;12:1279.
95. Melone J, Mei N. Intestinal effects of the products of lipid digestion on gastric electrical activity in the cat. Possible involvement of vagal intestinal receptors sensitive to lipids. Gastroenterology 1991;100:380.
96. Wang XY, Lammers WJ, Bercik P, Huizinga JD. Lack of pyloric interstitial cells of Cajal explains distinct peristaltic motor patterns in stomach and small intestine. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G539.
97. Lammers WJ, Slack JR, Stephen B, Pozzan O. The spatial behaviour of spike patches in the feline gastroduodenal junction in vitro. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2000;12:467.

226

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

98. Savoye G, Savoye-Collet C, Oors J, Smout AJ. Interdigestive transpyloric fluid transport assessed by intraluminal impedance recording. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G663.
99. Pallotta N, Cicala M, Frandina C, Corazziari E. Antro-pyloric contractile patterns and transpyloric flow after meal ingestion in humans. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:2513.
100. Ueno T, Uemura K, Harris MB, et al. Role of vagus nerve in postprandial antropyloric coordination in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G487.
101. Edin R, Lundberg J, Terenius L, et al. Evidence for vagal enkephalinergic neural control of the feline pylorus and stomach. Gastroenterology 1980;78:492.
102. Allescher HD, Tougas G, Vergara P, et al. Nitric oxide as a putative nonadrenergic noncholinergic inhibitory transmitter in the canine pylorus in vivo. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G695.
103. Ishiguchi T, Takahashi T, Itoh H, Owyang C. Nitrergic and purinergic regulation of the rat pylorus. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G740.
104. Adelson DW, Million M, Kanamoto K, et al. Coordinated gastric and sphincter motility evoked by intravenous CCK-8 as monitored by ultrasonomicrometry in rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G321.
105. Holle GE, Hahn D, Forth W. Innervation of pylorus in control of motility and gastric emptying. Am J Physiol 1992;263:G161.
106. Feltrin KL, Little TJ, Meyer JH, et al. Effects of intraduodenal fatty acids on appetite, antropyloroduodenal motility, and plasma CCK and GLP-1 in humans vary with their chain length. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2004;287:R524.
107. Little TJ, Feltrin KL, Horowitz M, et al. Dose-related effects of lauric acid on antropyloroduodenal motility, gastrointestinal hormone release, appetite, and energy intake in healthy men. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2005;289:R1090.
108. Feinle C, O'Donovan D, Doran S, et al. Effects of fat digestion on appetite, APD motility, and gut hormones in response to duodenal fat infusion in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G798.
109. Boyd KA, O'Donovan DG, Doran S, et al. High-fat diet effects on gut motility, hormone, and appetite responses to duodenal lipid in healthy men. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003; 284:G188.
110. Cuche G, Malbert CH. Ileal short-chain fatty acids inhibit transpyloric flow in pigs. Scand J Gastroenterol 1999;34:149.
111. Allescher HD, Daniel EE, Dent J, et al. Neural reflex of the canine pylorus to intraduodenal acid infusion. Gastroenterology 1989; 96:18.
112. Schirra J, Nicolaus M, Roggel R, et al. Endogenous glucagon-like peptide 1 controls endocrine pancreatic secretion and antro-pyloroduodenal motility in humans. Gut 2006;55:243.
113. Andrews JM, O'Donovan DG, Hebbard GS, et al. Human duodenal phase III migrating motor complex activity is predominantly antegrade, as revealed by high-resolution manometry and colour pressure plots. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:331.
114. Castedal M, Bjornsson E, Gretarsdottir J, et al. Scintigraphic assessment of interdigestive duodenogastric reflux in humans: distinguishing between duodenal and biliary reflux material. Scand J Gastroenterol 2000;35:590.
115. Castedal M, Bjornsson E, Abrahamsson H. Postprandial peristalsis in the human duodenum. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1998;10:227.
116. Andrews JM, Doran SM, Hebbard GS, et al. Nutrient-induced spatial patterning of human duodenal motor function. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G501.
117. Quinson N, Catalin D, Niel JP, Miolan JP. Release of nitric oxide within the coeliac plexus is involved in the organization of a gastroduodenal inhibitory reflex in the rabbit. J Physiol 1999;519: 223.
118. Caballero-Plasencia AM, Valenzuela-Barranco M, Martin-Ruiz JL, et al. Are there changes in gastric emptying during the menstrual cycle? Scand J Gastroenterol 1999;34:772.

119. Nakae Y, Onouchi H, Kagaya M, Kondo T. Effects of aging and gastric lipolysis on gastric emptying of lipid in liquid meal. J Gastroenterol 1999;34:445.
120. Calbet JA, MacLean DA. Role of caloric content on gastric emptying in humans. J Physiol 1997;498:553.
121. Brener W, Hendrix TR, McHugh PR. Regulation of the gastric emptying of glucose. Gastroenterology 1983;85:76.
122. Vist GE, Maughan RJ. The effect of osmolality and carbohydrate content on the rate of gastric emptying of liquids in man. J Physiol 1995;486:523.
123. Cortot A, Phillips SF, Malagelada JR. Parallel gastric emptying of non-hydrolyzable fat and water after a solid-liquid meal in humans. Gastroenterology 1982;82:877.
124. Forster ER, Green T, Dockray GJ. Efferent pathways in the reflex control of gastric emptying in rats. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G499.
125. Shi G, Leray V, Scarpignato C, et al. Specific adaptation of gastric emptying to diets with differing protein content in the rat: is endogenous cholecystokinin implicated? Gut 1997;41:612.
126. Xu X, Brining D, Rafiq A, et al. Effects of enhanced viscosity on canine gastric and intestinal motility. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;20:387.
127. Spiegel TA, Fried H, Hubert CD, et al. Effects of posture on gastric emptying and satiety rating after a nutritive liquid and solid meal. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2000;279:R684.
128. Bursztein-De Myttenaere S, Gil KM, Heymsfield SB, et al. Gastric emptying in humans: influence of different regimens of parenteral nutrition. Am J Clin Nutr 1994;60:244.
129. Malagelada JR, Rees WD, Mazzotta LJ, Go VLW. Gastric motor abnormalities in diabetic and postvagotomy gastroparesis: effect of metoclopramide and bethanechol. Gastroenterology 1980;78:286.
130. Miller J, Kauffman G, Elashoff J, et al. Search for resistances controlling gastric emptying of liquid meals. Am J Physiol 1981; 241:G403.
131. Hausken T, Mundt M, Samsom M. Low antroduodenal pressure gradients are responsible for gastric emptying of a low-caloric liquid meal in humans. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:97.
132. Camilleri M, Malagelada JR, Brown ML, et al. Relation between antral motility and gastric emptying of solids and liquids in humans. Am J Physiol 1985;249:G580.
133. Anvari M, Dent J, Malbert C, Jamieson GG. Mechanics of pulsatile transpyloric flow in the pig. J Physiol 1995;488:193.
134. Schwizer W, Fraser R, Borovicka J, et al. Measurement of proximal and distal gastric motility with magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G217.
135. Bortolotti M, Pandolfo N, Nebiacolombo C, et al. Modifications in gastroduodenal motility induced by extramucosal section of circular duodenal musculature in dogs. Gastroenterology 1981;81:910.
136. Siegel JA, Urbain JL, Adler LP, et al. Biphasic nature of gastric emptying. Gut 1988;29:85.
137. Tougas G, Eaker EY, Abell TL, et al. Assessment of gastric emptying using a low fat meal: establishment of international control values. Am J Gastroenterol 2000;95:1456.
138. Knight LC, Parkman HP, Brown KL, et al. Delayed gastric emptying and decreased antral contractility in normal premenopausal women compared with men. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:968.
139. Brogna A, Ferrara R, Bucceri AM, et al. Gastric emptying rates of solid food in relation to body mass index: an ultrasonographic and scintigraphic study. Eur J Radiol 1998;27:258.
140. King PM, Adam RD, Pryde A, et al. Relationships of human antroduodenal motility and transpyloric fluid movement: non-invasive observations with real-time ultrasound. Gut 1984;25:1384.
141. Urbain JL, Siegel JA, Charkes ND, et al. The two-component stomach: effects of meal particle size on fundal and antral emptying. Eur J Nucl Med 1989;15:254.
142. Tanaka T, Mizumoto A, Muramatsu S, et al. Postprandial normal saline intake delays gastric emptying of solids in conscious dogs: partial involvement of CCK in its mechanism. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:1516.

227

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

143. Mayer EA, Thomson JB, Jehn D, et al. Gastric emptying of solid food and pancreatic and biliary secretions after solid meals in patients with nonresective ulcer surgery. Gastroenterology 1984;87:1264.
144. Doty JE, Meyer JH. Vagotomy and antrectomy impairs intracellular but not extracellular fat absorption in the dog. Gastroenterology 1988;94:50.
145. Boulby P, Moore R, Gowland P, Spiller RC. Fat delays emptying but increases forward and backward antral flow as assessed by flowsensitive magnetic resonance imaging. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1999;11:27.
146. Meyer JH, Elashoff JD, Lake R. Gastric emptying of indigestible versus digestible oils and solid fats in normal humans. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:1076.
147. Castiglione KE, Read NW, French SJ. Adaptation to high-fat diet accelerates emptying of fat but not carbohydrate test meals in humans. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2002;282:R366.
148. Cortot A, Phillips SF, Malagelada JR. Gastric emptying of lipids after ingestion of a solid-liquid meal in humans. Gastroenterology 1981;80:922.
149. Stotzer PO, Abrahamsson H. Human postprandial gastric emptying of indigestible solids can occur unrelated to antral phase III. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2000;12:415.
150. Sadik R, Abrahamsson H, Stotzer PO. Gender differences in gut transit shown with a newly developed radiological procedure. Scand J Gastroenterol 2003;38:36.
151. Rhie JK, Hayashi Y, Welage LS, et al. Drug marker absorption in relation to pellet size, gastric motility and viscous meals in humans. Pharmaceutical Res 1998;15:233.
152. Sirois PJ, Amidon GL, Meyer JH, et al. Size and density discrimination of nondigestible solids during gastric emptying in the canine. A hydrodynamic correlation. Am J Physiol 1990;258:G65.
153. Meyer B, Beglinger C, Neumayer M, Stadler GA. Physical characteristics of indigestible solids affect emptying from the fasting stomach. Gut 1989;30:1526.
154. Houghton LA, Mangnall YF, Read NW. Effect of incorporating fat into a liquid test meal on the relation between intragastric distribution and gastric emptying in human volunteers. Gut 1990;31:1226.
155. Collins PJ, Horowitz M, Maddox A, et al. Effects of increasing solid component size of a mixed solid/liquid meal on solid and liquid gastric emptying. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G549.
156. Pouderoux P, Friedman N, Shirazi P, et al. Effect of carbonated water on gastric emptying and intragastric meal distribution. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42:34.
157. Landers BR, Devitt PG, Jamieson GG. Effect of duodenal amino acid infusion on gastric emptying in pigs. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G676.
158. Lin HC, Elashoff JD, Gu YG, Meyer JH. Nutrient feedback inhibition of gastric emptying plays a larger role than osmolarity dependent duodenal resistance. Am J Physiol 1993;265:G672.
159. Lin HC, Doty JE, Reedy TJ, Meyer JH. Inhibition of gastric emptying by acids depends on pH, titratable acidity, and length of intestine exposed to acid. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G1025.
160. Brown NJ, Read NW, Richardson A, et al. Characteristics of lipid substances activating the ileal brake in the rat. Gut 1990;31:1126.
161. Treacy PJ, Jamieson GG, Dent J, et al. Duodenal intramural nerves in control of pyloric motility and gastric emptying. Am J Physiol 1992;263:G1.
162. Carney BI, Jones KL, Horowitz M, et al. Gastric emptying of oil and aqueous meal components in pancreatic insufficiency: effects of posture and on appetite. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G925.
163. Schwizer W, Asal K, Kreiss C, et al. Role of lipase in the regulation of upper gastrointestinal function in humans. Am J Physiol 1997;273:G612.
164. Raybould HE, Meyer JH, Tabrizi Y, et al. Inhibition of gastric emptying in response to intestinal lipid is dependent on chylomicron formation. Am J Physiol 1998;274:R1834.
165. Glatzle J, Kalogeris TJ, Zittel TT, et al. Chylomicron components mediate intestinal lipid-induced inhibition of gastric motor function. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G86.

166. Glatzle J, Wang Y, Adelson DW, et al. Chylomicron components activate duodenal vagal afferents via a cholecystokinin A receptormediated pathway to inhibit gastric motor function in the rat. J Physiol 2003;550:657.
167. Glatzle J, Darcel N, Rechs AJ, et al. Apolipoprotein A-IV stimulates duodenal vagal afferent activity to inhibit gastric motility via a CCK1 pathway. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2004;287:R354.
168. Zittel TT, Rothenhofer I, Meyer JH, Raybould HE. Small intestinal capsaicin-sensitive afferents mediate feedback inhibition of gastric emptying in rats. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G1142.
169. Bozkurt A, Oktar BK, Kurtel H, et al. Capsaicin-sensitive vagal fibres and 5-HT3-, gastrin releasing peptide- and cholecystokinin Areceptors are involved in distention-induced inhibition of gastric emptying in the rat. Regul Pept 1999;83:81.
170. Raybould HE, Holzer H. Dual capsaicin-sensitive afferent pathways mediate inhibition of gastric emptying in rat induced by intestinal carbohydrate. Neurosci Lett 1992;141:236.
171. Darcel NP, Liou AP, Tome D, Raybould HE. Activation of vagal afferents in the rat duodenum by protein digests requires PepT1. J Nutr 2005;135:1491.
172. Coremans G, Geypens B, Vos R, et al. Influence of continuous isobaric rectal distension on gastric emptying and small bowel transit in young healthy women. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004; 16:107.
173. Martinez V, Wang L, Tache Y. Proximal colon distension induces Fos expression in the brain and inhibits gastric emptying through capsaicin-sensitive pathways in conscious rats. Brain Res 2006; 1086:168.
174. Cecil JE, Francis J, Read NW. Comparison of the effects of a high-fat and high-carbohydrate soup delivered orally and intragastrically on gastric emptying, appetite, and eating behaviour. Physiol Behav 1999;67:299.
175. Gondim FA, Rodrigues CL, Da Graca JR, et al. Neural mechanisms involved in the delay of gastric emptying and gastroduodenal transit of liquid after thoracic spinal cord transection in awake rats. Autonom Neurosci 2001;87:52.
176. Blat S, Guerin S, Chauvin A, et al. Role of vagal innervation on intragastric distribution and emptying of liquid and semisolid meals in conscious pigs. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2001;13:73.
177. Sobriera LF, Zucoloto S, Garcia SB, Troncon LE. Effects of myenteric denervation on gastric epithelial cells and gastric emptying. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:2493.
178. Konturek JW, Fischer H, Gromotka PM, et al. Endogenous nitric oxide in the regulation of gastric secretory and motor activity in humans. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1999;13:1683.
179. Lefebvre RA, Dick JM, Guerin S, Malbert CH. Involvement of NO in gastric emptying of semi-solid meal in conscious pigs. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:229.
180. De Rosalmeida MC, Saraiva LD, Da Graca JR, et al. Sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor, delays gastric emptying and gastrointestinal transit of liquid in awake rats. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48: 2064.
181. Cho SH, Park H, Kim JH, et al. Effect of sildenafil on gastric emptying in healthy adults. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006;21:222.
182. Read NW, McFarlane A, Kinsman RI, et al. Effect of infusion of nutrient solutions into the ileum on gastrointestinal transit and plasma levels of neurotensin and enteroglucagon in man. Gastroenterology 1984;86:274.
183. Coulie B, Tack J, Maes B, et al. Sumatriptan, a selective 5-HT1 receptor agonist, induces a lag phase for gastric emptying of liquids in humans. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G902.
184. Raybould HE, Glatzle J, Robin C, et al. Expression of 5-HT3 receptors by extrinsic duodenal afferents contribute to intestinal inhibition of gastric emptying. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G367.
185. Ueki S, Matsunaga Y, Yoneta T, et al. Gastroprokinetic activity of nizatidine during the digestive state in the dog and rat. Arzneim Forsch 1999;49:618.

228

The physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying CHAPTER 10

186. Degen LP, Peng FP, Collet A, et al. Blockade of GRP receptors inhibits gastric emptying and gallbladder contraction but accelerates small intestinal transit. Gastroenterology 2001;120:361.
187. Jin HO, Lee KY, Chang TM, et al. Secretin: a physiological regulator of gastric emptying and acid output in dogs. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G702.
188. Symonds E, Butler R, Omari T. The effect of the GABAB receptor agonist baclofen on liquid and solid gastric emptying in mice. Eur J Pharmacol 2003;470:95.
189. Delgado-Aros S, Kim DY, Burton DD, et al. Effect of GLP-1 on gastric volume, emptying, maximum volume ingested, and postprandial symptoms in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G424.
190. Nagell CF, Wettergren A, Pedersen JF, et al. Glucagon-like peptide2 inhibits antral emptying in man, but is not as potent as glucagonlike peptide-1. Scand J Gastroenterol 2004;39:353.
191. Forster ER, Dockray GJ. Immunoneutralization suggests that calcitonin gene related peptide regulates gastric emptying in the rat. Neurosci Lett 1991;131:5.
192. Straathof JW, Mearadji B, Lamers CB, Masclee AA. Effect of CCK on proximal gastric motor function in humans. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G939.
193. Castillo EJ, Delgado-Aros S, Camilleri M, et al. Effect of oral CCK-1 agonist GI181771X on fasting and postprandial gastric functions in healthy volunteers. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G363.
194. Borovicka J, Kreiss C, Asal K, et al. Role of cholecystokinin as a regulator of solid and liquid gastric emptying in humans. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G448.
195. Liddle RA, Gertz BJ, Kanayama S, et al. Effects of a novel cholecystokinin (CCK) receptor antagonist, MK-329, on gallbladder contraction and gastric emptying in humans. Implications for the physiology of CCK. J Clin Invest 1989;84:1220.
196. White WO, Schwartz GJ, Moran TH. Role of endogenous CCK in the inhibition of gastric emptying by peptone and Intralipid in rats. Regul Pept 2000;88:47.
197. Miyasaka K, Ohta M, Kanai S, et al. Enhanced gastric emptying of a liquid gastric load in mice lacking cholecystokinin-B receptor: a study of CCK-A, B, and AB receptor gene knockout mice. J Gastroenterol 2004;39:319.
198. Covasa M, Ritter RC. Adaptation to high-fat diet reduces inhibition of gastric emptying by CCK and intestinal oleate. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2000;278:R166.
199. Higham A, Vaillant C, Yegen B, et al. Relation between cholecystokinin and antral innervation in the control of gastric emptying in the rat. Gut 1997;41:24.
200. Schwartz GJ, Moran TH, White WO, Ladenheim EE. Relationships between gastric motility and gastric vagal afferent responses to CCK and GRP in rats differ. Am J Physiol 1997;272:R1726.
201. Wei JY, Wang YH. Effect of CCK pretreatment on the CCK sensitivity of rat polymodal gastric vagal afferent in vitro. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2000;279:E695.
202. Holzer HH, Turkelson CM, Solomon TE, Raybould HE. Intestinal lipid inhibits gastric emptying via CCK and a vagal capsaicinsensitive afferent pathway in rats. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G625.
203. Reidelberger RD, Kelsey L, Heimann D, Hulce M. Effects of peripheral CCK receptor blockade on gastric emptying in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2003;284:R66.
204. Varga G, Kordas K, Burghardt B, et al. Effect of deramciclane, a new 5-HT receptor antagonist, on cholecystokinin-induced changes in rat gastrointestinal function. Eur J Pharmacol 1999; 367:315.
205. Takahashi T, Owyang C. Mechanism of cholecystokinin-induced relaxation of the rat stomach. J Auton Nerv Sys 1999;75:123.
206. Holtmann G, Singer MV, Kriebel R, et al. Differential effects of acute mental stress on interdigestive secretion of gastric acid, pancreatic enzymes, and gastroduodenal motility. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34:1701.

207. Nakae Y, Kagaya M, Takagi R, et al. Cold pain prolongs gastric emptying of liquid but not solid meal: an electrical impedance tomography (EIT) study. J Gastroenterol 2000;35:593.
208. Lenz HJ. Neurohumoral pathways mediating stress-induced changes in rat gastrointestinal transit. Gastroenterology 1989;97:216.
209. Monnikes H, Schmidt BG, Raybould HE, Tache Y. CRF in the paraventricular nucleus mediates gastric and colonic motor response to restraint stress. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G137.
210. Lewis MW, Hermann GE, Rogers RC, Travagli RA. In vitro and in vivo analysis of the effects of corticotropin releasing factor on rat dorsal vagal complex. J Physiol 2002;543:135.
211. Kihara N, Fujimura M, Yamamoto I, et al. Effect of central and peripheral urocortin on fed and fasted gastroduodenal motor activity in conscious rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G406.
212. Nakade Y, Tsuchida D, Fukuda H, et al. Restraint stress delays solid gastric emptying via a central CRF and peripheral sympathetic neuron in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2005;288:R427.
213. Czimmer J, Million M, Tache Y. Urocortin 2 acts centrally to delay gastric emptying through sympathetic pathways while CRF and urocortin 1 inhibitory actions are vagal dependent in rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G511.
214. Chen CY, Million M, Adelson DW, et al. Intracisternal urocortin inhibits vagally stimulated gastric motility in rats: role of CRF2. Br J Pharmacol 2002;136:237.
215. Nakade Y, Tsukamoto K, Pappas TN, Takahashi T. Central glucagon like peptide-1 delays solid gastric emptying via central CRF and peripheral sympathetic pathway in rats. Brain Res 2006;1111:117.
216. Suto G, Kiraly A, Tache Y. Interleukin-1 inhibits gastric emptying in rats: mediation through prostaglandin and corticotropinreleasing factor. Gastroenterology 1994;106:1568.
217. Smedh U, Kaplan JM, Uvnas-Moberg K. Corticotropin-releasing factor-induced suppression of gastric emptying in the rat is blocked by cyclo [7-aminoheptanoyl-phe-D-TRP-LYS-THR[BZL]), an in vivo somatostatin antagonist. Neurosci Lett 1999;260:41.
218. Broccardo M, Scaccianoce S, Del Bianco P, et al. Nociceptin/ orphanin FQ-induced delay in gastric emptying: role of central corticotropin-releasing factor and glucocorticoid receptors. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:871.
219. Chatzaki E, Murphy BJ, Wang L, et al. Differential profile of CRF receptor distribution in the rat stomach and duodenum assessed by newly developed CRF receptor antibodies. J Neurochem 2004;88:1.
220. Porcher C, Peinnequin A, Pellissier S, et al. Endogenous expression and in vitro study of CRF-related peptides and CRF receptors in the rat gastric antrum. Peptides 2006;27:1464.
221. Su YC, Doran S, Wittert G, et al. Effects of exogenous corticotropinreleasing factor on antropyloroduodenal motility and appetite in humans. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:49.
222. Luckey A, Wang L, Jamieson PM, et al. Corticotropin-releasing factor receptor 1-deficient mice do not develop postoperative gastric ileus. Gastroenterology 2003;125:654.
223. Ohta D, Lee CW, Sarna SK, et al. Central inhibition of nitric oxide synthase modulates upper gastrointestinal motor activity. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G417.
224. Yuan PQ, Kimura H, Million M, et al. Central vagal stimulation activates enteric cholinergic neurons in the stomach and VIP neurons in the duodenum in conscious rats. Peptides 2005;26:653.
225. Tache Y, Yang H, Miampamba M, et al. Role of brainstem TRH/TRHR1 receptors in the vagal gastric cholinergic response to various stimuli including sham-feeding. Auton Neurosci 2006;125:42.
226. Martinez V, Wang LX, Tache Y. Central TRH receptor 1 antisense blocks cold-induced gastric emptying but not brain c-Fos induction. Peptides 2001;22:81.
227. Flanagan LM, Olson BR, Sved AF, et al. Gastric motility in conscious rats given oxytocin and an oxytocin antagonist centrally. Brain Res 1992;578:256.
228. Martinez V, Cuttitta F, Tache Y. Central action of adrenomedullin to inhibit gastric emptying in rats. Endocrinology 1997;138:3749.

229

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

229. Smedh U, Moran TH. The dorsal vagal complex as a site for cocaineand amphetamine-regulated transcript peptide to suppress gastric emptying. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2006;291:R124.
230. Tsuchida D, Fukuda H, Koda K, et al. Central effect of mu-opioid agonists on antral motility in conscious rats. Brain Res 2004; 1024:244.
231. Bray GA. Afferent signals regulating food intake. Proc Nutr Soc 2000;59:373.
232. Hayes MR, Moore RL, Shah SM, Covasa M. 5-HT3 receptors participate in CCK-induced suppression of food intake by delaying gastric emptying. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2004;287:R817.
233. Covasa M, Hung CY, Ritter RC, Burns GA. Intracerebroventricular administration of MK-801 increases food intake through mechanisms independent of gastric emptying. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2004;287:R1462.
234. Smedh U, Hakansson ML, Meister B, Uvnas-Moberg K. Leptin injected into the fourth ventricle inhibits gastric emptying. Neuroreport 1998;9:297.
235. Kiely JM, Noh JH, Graewin SJ, et al. Altered intestinal motility in leptin-deficient obese mice. J Surg Res 2005;124:98.
236. Yuan CS, Attele AS, Dey L, Xie JT. Gastric effects of cholecystokinin and its interaction with leptin on brainstem neuronal activity in neonatal rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2000;295:177.
237. Gaige S, Abysique A, Bouvier M. Effects of leptin on cat intestinal motility. J Physiol 2003;546:267.
238. Asakawa A, Inui A, Kaga T, et al. Ghrelin is an appetite-stimulatory signal from stomach with structural resemblance to motilin. Gastroenterology 2001;120:337.
239. Kitazawa T, De Smet B, Verbeke K, et al. Gastric motor effects of peptide and non-peptide ghrelin agonists in mice in vivo and in vitro. Gut 2005;54:1078.
240. Levin F, Edholm T, Schmidt PT, et al. Ghrelin stimulates gastric emptying and hunger in normal-weight humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:3296.
241. Fujino K, Inui A, Asakawa A, et al. Ghrelin induces fasted motor activity of the gastrointestinal tract in conscious fed rats. J Physiol 2003;550:227.
242. Tack J, Depoortere I, Bisschops R, et al. Influence of ghrelin on interdigestive gastrointestinal motility in humans. Gut 2006;55:327.
243. Chen CY, Inui A, Asakawa A, et al. Des-acyl ghrelin acts by CRF type 2 receptors to disrupt fasted stomach motility in conscious rats. Gastroenterology 2005;129:8.
244. Wang L, Saint-Pierre DH, Taché Y. Peripheral ghrelin selectively increases Fos expression in neuropeptide Y-synthesizing neurons in mouse hypothalamic arcuate nucleus. Neurosci Lett 2002;325:47.
245. Naslund E, Ehrstrom M, Ma J, et al. Localization and effects of orexin on fasting motility in the rat duodenum. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G470.

246. Kobashi M, Furudono Y, Matsuo R, Yamamoto T. Central orexin facilitates gastric relaxation and contractility in rats. Neurosci Lett 2002;332:171.
247. Ehrstrom M, Gustafsson T, Finn A, et al. Inhibitory effect of exogenous orexin A on gastric emptying, plasma leptin, and the distribution of orexin and orexin receptors in the gut and pancreas in man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:2370.
248. Krowicki ZK, Burmeister MA, Berthoud HR, et al. Orexins in rat dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus potently stimulate gastric motor function. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G465.
249. Watanabe T, Tomomasa T, Kaneko H, et al. Involvement of serotonin and nitric oxide in endotoxin-induced gastric motility changes in conscious rats. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:1284.
250. Quintana E, Hernandez C, Alvarez-Barrientos A, et al. Synthesis of nitric oxide in postganglionic myenteric neurons during endotoxemia: implications for gastric motor function in rats. FASEB J 2004;18:531.
251. De Winter BY, Bredenoord AJ, De Man JG, et al. Effect of inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase and guanylyl cyclase on endotoxininduced delay in gastric emptying and intestinal transit in mice. Shock 2002;18:125.
252. Calatayud S, Garcia-Zaragoza E, Hernandez C, et al. Downregulation of nNOS and synthesis of PGs associated with endotoxininduced delay in gastric emptying. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G1360.
253. De Winter BY, Van Nassauw L, De Man JG, et al. Role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of septic ileus in mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:251.
254. Hermann GE, Tovar CA, Rogers RC. LPS-induced suppression of gastric motility relieved by TNFR: Fc construct in dorsal vagal complex. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G634.
255. Guerrero-Lindner E, Castro M, Munoz JM, et al. Central tumor necrosis factor-alpha mediates the early gastrointestinal motor disturbances induced by lipopolysaccharide in sheep. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:307.
256. Wang L, Basa NR, Shaikh A, et al. LPS inhibits fasted plasma ghrelin levels in rats: role of IL-1 and PGs and functional implications. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;291:G611.
257. De Jonge WJ, Van den Wijngaard RM, The FO, et al. Postoperative ileus is maintained by intestinal immune infiltrates that activate inhibitory neural pathways in mice. Gastroenterology 2003;125: 1137.
258. The FO, De Jonge WJ, Bennink RJ, et al. The ICAM-1 antisense oligonucleotide ISIS-3082 prevents the development of postoperative ileus in mice. Br J Pharmacol 2005;146:252.

230

11

B MOTILITY
Motility of the small intestine and colon
William L. Hasler

Anatomic and functional considerations, 231 Small intestinal and colonic transit, 231 Specialized small intestinal and colonic cell types, 232 Coupling of small intestinal and colonic contractions, 236 Control of small intestinal and colonic peristalsis, 237

Stereotypical motor patterns, 239 Sphincteric motor function, 246 Extended reflexes involving the small intestine and colon, 247 External influences on motor activity, 249

Contractile patterns in the small intestine and colon serve the functions of each organ. During fasting, undigested solids and sloughed enterocytes are cleared from the small intestine by mixing and propulsion. After eating, triturated chyme from the stomach is mixed with bile and pancreatic juice for digestion and is propelled aborally over variable distances. Thus, motor function of the small intestine regulates nutrient absorption rates. The small intestine terminates at the ileocolonic junction (ICJ), a sphincteric structure that prevents reflux of cecal contents into the ileum. In the colon, prominent mixing patterns with less uniform aboral propagating waves provide time for the slow process of fecal desiccation. The internal and external anal sphincters in concert with pelvic floor muscles permit volitional control of solid waste evacuation. High-pressure zones have been reported at the duodenojejunal junction, the cecocolonic junction, the colosigmoid junction, and the rectosigmoid junction, suggesting that several regions of tubular bowel serve additional sphincter-like functions [1­3].
Anatomic and functional considerations
The small intestinal wall has two regions of smooth muscle, the muscularis mucosae and the muscularis externa. The muscularis externa, which comprises an outer longitudinal layer and an inner circular layer, is the major effector of mixing and propulsion. The role of the muscularis mucosa is poorly defined. Most mixing and propulsion is mediated by circular muscle, as lumenal occlusion and displacement of gut contents require contraction of this layer. Segmentation is produced by reciprocal inhibition and disinhibition of adja-
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

cent circular muscle. Longitudinal contraction shortens the gut and increases lumenal diameter to facilitate bolus transit.
The colonic anatomy is strikingly different from that of the small intestine. The cecum is a sac-like structure that serves a storage function. The ascending, transverse, and descending regions possess a circumferential circular muscle layer with three overlying longitudinal muscle strips, the taeniae coli, 120 degrees apart. Haustra in these regions are produced by circular and longitudinal muscle contractions that narrow the lumen and shorten the colon. The longitudinal muscle spreads to envelop the rectosigmoid colon. Transverse folds in the rectum extending beyond the midline and containing mucosa and smooth muscle provide a shelving function to retard fecal passage and promote storage in the rectosigmoid region.
The anus possesses both smooth and striated muscle. The internal anal sphincter (IAS) is a thickened extension of the rectal circular smooth muscle. Rectal longitudinal fibers fan out at the anal verge, pass through the sphincter muscles, and terminate in subcutaneous perianal tissue. The external anal sphincter (EAS) comprises three striated muscles: the deep external sphincter, the superficial external sphincter, and the subcutaneous external sphincter. The levator ani muscles (puborectalis, pubococcygeus, iliococcygeus) form a sling to surround the rectum and maintain continence when tonically contracted.
Small intestinal and colonic transit
Small intestinal transit ranges from 78 to 264 min in healthy humans and is slower in women, especially those who are postmenopausal or obese [4,5]. Transit time is unaffected by age, although one study observed accelerated transit in older persons [6]. Most flow events, measured by impedance, propagate aborally for only short distances ( 10 cm) [7]. In rats, transit is more rapid in the proximal (30 min) than in

231

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Barostat volume (mL)

1400 1200 1000
800 600 400 200
0 1

Lag phase
601 1201 1801 2401 3001 3601 4201 4801 5401 6001 6601 Time (s)

Figure 11.1 A rectal gas evacuation profile from a healthy volunteer during jejunal perfusion of a physiological gas mixture. Before gas perfusion, the barostat cylinder used to collect the expelled gas was emptied (starting volume = 1170 mL). After initiation of gas perfusion, there was a lag of about 1900 s when no gas was evacuated at the level of the rectum. Thereafter, gas evacuation into the barostat cylinder was pulsatile, with passage of discrete boluses (arrows) totaling about 900 mL over 2 h. From Gonlachanvit et al. [13].

the distal intestine (2.5 h) [8]. In contrast to the stomach, in which solids and liquids are handled differently, iodine 131labeled solids and technetium 99m-DTPA-labeled water are propelled at similar speeds in the small intestine [9]. The ileum selectively retains indigestible solids while permitting the passage of liquids into the colon. Small intestinal nutrient transit depends on caloric density and nutrient class. Transit of protein and lipid solutions is slowed in proportion to the number of calories, which promotes more efficient digestion and absorption.
Lumenal contents in the colon advance slowly from the cecum to the rectum, over 1­2 days in healthy individuals. Transit time is slightly faster in men with consequent increases in fecal weight [5]. Middle-aged women exhibit slower transit than younger women. Transit is slower during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle than in the earlier luteal phase [10]. Colonic transit is modulated by alterations in lumenal microflora; for example, the administration of Bifidobacterium animalis shortens the colonic transit time in women [11]. Ascending colon transit may be retrograde at times; however, higher fecal volumes elicit lumenally occlusive, aborally propagating contractions. Solid residue is initially retained in the ascending colon, while liquids are propelled aborally. In contrast, solids and liquids are propelled similarly in the transverse colon. Efficiency of fecal evacuation with defecation varies by colonic region, with the right colon exhibiting 20% emptying, the left colon showing 32% emptying, and the rectum evacuating 66% of content [12].
Lumenal gas is handled in a distinct manner by the small intestine and colon. In healthy humans, jejunal perfusion of physiological gas mixtures produces steady state flow with little distention and few symptoms. Gas collected from the rectum in such studies is expelled in a pulsatile fashion, indicating that flow is regulated by intrinsic motor patterns in the distal gut (Fig. 11.1) [13]. Gas transit is accelerated by caloric liquid or solid meals, whereas noncaloric liquids have no stimulatory effects, findings that correlate with the observa-

tion of increased postprandial gas passage [14]. Conversely, intestinal lipid perfusion retards gas propulsion, demonstrating nutrient-induced reflex modulation of gas transit [15]. Consuming a high-fiber diet retards evacuation of jejunally perfused gas mixtures, reflecting regulation by lumenal contents [13]. Assuming an upright posture expedites gas flow [16]. Likewise, physical activity accelerates gas transit and reduces gas retention in healthy individuals [17].
Specialized small intestinal and colonic cell types
Motor function in the small intestine and colon is controlled by smooth muscle cells, nervous tissues, interstitial cells of Cajal (ICCs), and supporting tissues.
Smooth muscle Small intestinal and colonic myocytes are uninucleate spindle-shaped cells that are electrically active with resting membrane potentials of ­40 to ­80 mV maintained by Na+,K+-ATPase activity. In the small intestine, ubiquitous membrane potential fluctuations of 3­15 mV oscillating at 11­12 cycles per minute (cpm) are demonstrable in the duodenum and at lower frequencies more distally. Extracellular recordings of these slow waves show sinusoidal morphology or rapid biphasic deflections from zero potential. Intracellular recordings demonstrate rapid depolarizations followed by partial repolarizations to prolonged plateau phases of depolarization and then to full repolarization. Frequencies and propagation directions of phasic contractions are controlled by the slow wave, although tonic contractions lasting from 10 s to 8 min have been recorded from circular muscle. By themselves, slow waves produce insufficient depolarization to initiate contraction. Intestinal stimulants induce motor activity by increasing the duration and amplitude of the slow wave plateau potential or by inducing spike potentials of brief duration (10­100 ms) but high amplitude (50 mV) in

232

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

phase with the slow wave. Spike potentials generated in isolated longitudinal and circular muscle propagate only a few millimeters. Intestinal relaxation results from stimuli that inhibit spike potentials, reduce plateau potential amplitude or duration, or induce hyperpolarization.
Slow wave activity in the colon cycles in two frequency ranges, from 2 to 6 cpm and from 9 to 13 cpm, and correlates with short-duration contractions. Additional rapid electrical oscillations at 25­ 40 cpm, termed myenteric potential oscillations, regulate long-duration colon contractions [18]. Excised human colonic circular muscle strips exhibit spontaneous slow waves with an amplitude of 12 mV, a duration of 9.4 s, and a frequency of 2­4 cpm [19]. However, near the myenteric edge of these strips, rapid membrane potential fluctuations at 18 cpm are observed. In colonic circular muscle, slow wave activity generated along the submucosal border is summed with myenteric potential oscillations generated along the myenteric border [20]. Contraction occurs as a consequence of increased amplitude of the myenteric potential oscillation, enhanced duration and amplitude of the slow wave plateau potential, or the generation of spike potentials [21].
Nervous tissues Small intestinal and colonic smooth muscle is innervated by intrinsic nerves within the gut wall and by extrinsic nerves connecting to the extraintestinal ganglia, the spinal cord, and the central nervous system (CNS). The myenteric plexus is the major intrinsic neural regulator of motor function in the small intestine and colon, although the submucous plexus may participate in some motor reflexes. The vagus and splanchnic nerves supply the small intestine, ileocecal junction, and proximal colon, whereas the pelvic nerves provide input to the colon and IAS. The EAS and pelvic floor muscles receive sacral spinal input by way of the pudendal nerves. There is bilateral cerebral motor cortex representation in the innervation of the anus and rectum (Fig. 11.2) [22]. Intrinsic neurons greatly exceed vagal or splanchnic fibers in number; thus, most motor activities are directed by intrinsic neural programs, with extrinsic innervation providing a modulatory function.
Intrinsic innervation The density of myenteric neurons approximates that of the spinal cord. An additional deep muscular plexus innervates the interface of the inner and outer circular muscle layers and receives input from the myenteric plexus. Most submucous plexus neurons project to the mucosa where they regulate secretion and absorption. However, some submucous plexus neurons innervate both the circular and longitudinal muscle layers [23]. Similarly, in the colons of some species, the outer submucous plexus provides input to the circular muscle. The enteric nervous system possesses afferent neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons, and thus can initiate physiological motor activity in the absence of extrinsic input.

As in the CNS, myenteric ganglia consist only of neurons and glial cells. Blood vessels and connective tissue are absent, thus neuronal nourishment is received by diffusion in the interstitial fluid. Axonal varicosities release neurotransmitters that diffuse 20­100 nm to specific receptors on muscle cells or neurons. In the small intestine, most motor neurons project 1­2 mm longitudinally although some fibers extend more than 30 mm. Excitatory fibers run cephalad, whereas inhibitory fibers project in a caudad direction. Extensive interneuronal connections mediate extended reflexes, which in some cases project 100 cm or more.
Most myenteric neurons (80%­90%) contain tachykinins (40%­45%) or vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) (40%­45%), with no overlap between the two groups. Substance P, neurokinin A, and acetylcholine released by tachykinin neurons mediate most excitatory functions of intestinal smooth muscle. Both neurokinin 1 (NK1) and M2 muscarinic receptors are prominent on smooth muscle cells [24,25]. Neurokinin 1 receptors are also expressed on myenteric neurons [26]. Atropine-resistant contractions evoked by neural stimulation of the small intestine in porcine ileum are abolished by NK1 antagonists [27]. Nitric oxide (NO)- and VIP-containing myenteric neurons provide the inhibitory supply to the small intestine and colon. Inhibitors of NO synthesis block ileal relaxations evoked by electrical depolarization, serotonin, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and -aminobutyric acid (GABA), and elicit duodenal contractions, reflecting a basal NO-mediated tone [28]. Conversely, enhanced nitrergic action reduces contractile amplitudes in canine small intestine [29]. Mice with a knockout of the caveolin-1 gene exhibit impaired NO function, indicating participation of membrane caveolae in nitrergic neurotransmission [30]. Carbon monoxide activates L-type calcium channels by activating a pathway that involves NO synthase [31]. Antagonists or antisera to VIP prevent many neurally mediated relaxations [32]. NO synthase colocalizes with VIP in selected neurons [33]. In some models, VIP evokes NOdependent relaxations by acting through an intermediate transmitter such as GABA [34]. Some VIP neurons contain neuropeptide Y (NPY), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), and galanin. A related transmitter, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), acts as a physiological relaxant in some regions through action on PACAP1/VIP receptors [35]. PACAP immunoreactivity is prominent in myenteric neuronal cell bodies and in nerve fibers in the muscle layers and mucosa [36]. In rat colon, most ATP-containing myenteric neurons synthesize NO [37]. NO pathways also interact with some contractile pathways. In guinea pig small intestine, NK1 receptor activation inhibits distention-evoked contractions by releasing NO [38]. Inhibitors of NO synthase and guanylate cyclase increase acetylcholine release and cholinergically mediated contractions in mouse ileum, effects not observed in mutant mice lacking NO synthase [39].

233

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Left Right leg leg

Figure 11.2 Magnetic resonance images from a healthy volunteer after stimulation of the left and right legs, the anus, and the rectum. Responses from all four muscle groups localize to the superomedial motor cortex; however, each stimulus produces responses of differing morphology and extent. In this individual, cortical representations of anal and rectal stimulation are bilateral, whereas Anal Rectal leg responses localize to the contralateral hemisphere. From Turnbull et al. [22].

Other intrinsic neurons modulate gut motor activity. Serotonin 5-HT4 receptors are demonstrable on enteric neurons [40]. 5-HT4 agonists activate presynaptic receptors to stimulate motor function. Inhibition of serotonin reuptake with citalopram increases phasic colonic contractions in healthy humans [41]. However, in mice, the serotonin reuptake inhibitor paroxetine slows gastrointestinal transit and decreases stool output [42]. Opioid neurons regulate both excitatory and inhibitory transmission. Enkephalinergic neurons project orally to both muscle layers, whereas neurons containing GRP and NPY project aborally [43]. Orphanin FQ immunoreactivity is expressed in excitatory neurons projecting to both muscle layers and to some interneurons [44]. Receptor proteins for dopamine receptor subtypes 1, 2, 3, and 5 are expressed in mouse colon [45]. Colonic smooth muscle from mutant mice lacking the dopamine transporter exhibits impaired contractions to electrical stimulation, whereas mice lacking the D2 receptor show accelerated colon transit, indicating a physiological role for endogenous dopamine [45]. An inhibitory action of endogenous cannabinoid pathways on small intestinal and colonic motility through action on CB1 cannabinoid receptors has been proposed [46,47]. Cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) and COX-2 iso-

forms are demonstrable in myenteric ganglia and modulate cholinergic excitation of colonic motor activity [48].
Extrinsic innervation Efferent extrinsic fibers are carried in parasympathetic and sympathetic tracts. Most efferent fibers terminate in the myenteric plexus and form connections with enteric ganglia, although some sympathetic axons terminate directly on sphincteric smooth muscle. The vagus nerves contain preganglionic parasympathetic excitatory cholinergic nerves projecting to the enteric plexuses, preganglionic inhibitory cholinergic nerves projecting to the myenteric plexus, and sympathetic fibers from the cervical ganglia. Excitatory efferent vagal cholinergic neurons activate nicotinic receptors in enteric ganglia. The cell bodies of these efferent nerves reside in the brainstem dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. Other fibers exhibiting high thresholds to electrical stimulation are inhibitory to motor activity through NO and VIP release. The efferent vagus supplies the upper gut, although anterograde tracing studies from the rat dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus show vagal innervation to much of the colon as well [49]. Pelvic nerve fibers arise from the sacral spinal cord and enter the colon at the rectosigmoid junction, where they travel in

234

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

shunt fascicles to innervate the myenteric plexus. Pelvic nerve stimulation evokes colorectal contractions, accelerates colonic transit, and elicits anal relaxation [50]. Stimulation of the hypogastric nerve increases anal pressure through action on the IAS, whereas pudendal nerve stimulation increases EAS activity [50]. Neuronal cell bodies providing the sympathetic splanchnic innervation reside outside the gut in the prevertebral ganglia (celiac and superior mesenteric ganglia). Preganglionic cholinergic neurons project from the spinal cord to the prevertebral ganglia. Noradrenergic postganglionic neurons then project to the enteric ganglia. This sympathetic innervation inhibits excitatory myenteric cholinergic transmission. Experiments that quantify c-Fos protein expression show that neuronal activity in the distal gut is under tonic inhibitory control by the sympathetic nervous system [51].
Afferent fibers greatly outnumber efferent fibers in the vagus and splanchnic nerves. Vagal afferent fibers terminate in the brainstem nucleus tractus solitarius. Neurons in the nucleus tractus solitarius project to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and the nucleus ambiguus. Sensory information is transmitted to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord by way of the splanchnic nerves. From there, second-order neurons project to the brainstem and cerebral cortex. The anus is served by sensory fibers that project by way of the pudendal nerve. Free mucosal nerve endings respond to stroking or to chemical stimuli such as hydrochloric acid. Small intestinal thermoreceptor activation elicits reflex motor responses in the stomach. Mechanoreceptors are stimulated by passive distention or active contractions. Pelvic nerve afferent fibers respond to distention, heat, and bile salts, reflecting their polymodal nature. Excision of the mucosa, submucosa, and inner circular muscle does not abolish responses to stretch, localizing mechanoreceptors to the outer muscle layers or the myenteric plexus [52]. Mesenteric and serosal receptors respond to tension or to forceful contraction and may mediate visceral pain perception. Intrinsic afferent neurons that mediate local reflexes project within the enteric plexuses, whereas vagal and splanchnic afferents participate in extended reflexes. Mechanosensory afferent nerves project to the superior mesenteric ganglion and monitor intracolonic pressures in mice [53]. Perception of nonnoxious stimulation is mediated by afferent vagal, pelvic, or splanchnic pathways, whereas nociceptive input is carried mainly by the splanchnic nerves. Plasticity of sensory nerve activity is indicated by experiments that show reductions in ileal vagal afferent sensitivity with previous exposure of the distal ileum to short-chain fatty acids [54].
Interstitial cells of Cajal The ICCs are the third major cell type that participate in the regulation of small intestinal and colonic motor function. ICCs are uninucleate with numerous mitochondria, reflecting high metabolic activity, and abundant surface membrane

caveoli with prominent endoplasmic reticula, indicating active ion transport. Immunohistochemical studies measuring immunoreactivitiy to c-Kit, a receptor tyrosine kinase, identify at least six distinct populations of ICCs in the small intestine, including intramuscular ICCs, ICCs within the myenteric plexus (ICC-MY), and ICCs in the deep muscular plexus [55]. ICCs in the submucosal region are prominent in the colon. Specialized ICCs form dense networks at the submucosal and myenteric borders of the rectum and along muscle bundles in the IAS [56]. ICCs are also observed in the EAS, a somatic muscle structure [57].
ICCs are important mediators of neurotransmission. In the small intestine, ICCs located in the deep muscular plexus are closely associated with excitatory muscarinic tachykinin neurons and inhibitory nitrergic neurons [58]. In neonatal mice, excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission is not demonstrable until ICCs in the smooth muscle layers are developed [59]. In mutant mice lacking intramuscular ICCs, cholinergic neural responses to electrical stimulation are reduced and peristalsis is inhibited [60]. ICCs in the deep muscular plexus exhibit NO synthase activity and substance P-like immunoreactive axonal varicosities [61]. Both cholinergic and nitrergic nerves form synapses with intramuscular ICCs [62]. ICCs express M2 and M3 muscarinic receptors, NK1 and NK3 neurokinin receptors, VIP1 receptors, and stem cell factor (steel factor), indicating modulation by neuronal pathways [63].
A second function of ICCs is the generation of electrical pacemaker activity, which is measured as the slow wave in smooth muscle tissues. Selective injury of ICCs with methylene blue plus intense illumination disrupts slow wave cycling [64]. In cat small intestine, rhythmic oscillations are generated only by tissue containing ICC-MY [65]. Intrauterine initiation of electrical rhythmicity occurs only after maturation of ICCs [66]. The membrane-bound form of steel factor, the ligand for c-Kit, increases the expression of c-Kit-immunoreactive ICCs [67]. In animals with steel factor mutations, ICCs are absent in the myenteric plexus of the small intestine and slow wave cycling is not detected [68]. In neonatal mice, administration of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to c-Kit abolishes small intestinal rhythmicity and reduces the number of ICCs, which then assume the appearance of smooth muscle cells [69]. Electrical recordings from small intestinal ICC-MY exhibit pacesetter potentials characterized by initial upstroke depolarizations followed by plateau phases [70]. In contrast to the small intestine, colonic slow waves are maximal at the submucosal border and become weaker in the myenteric region, reflecting the importance of submucosal ICCs in this organ. Intracellular recordings from submucosal ICCs in canine colon show cyclic oscillations [71]. In mouse colon, high-frequency, lowamplitude contractions cycle in phase with the slow wave and are abolished if the submucous plexus is removed [72,73]. However, exogenous NO elicits electrical oscillations

235

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Control
­64 mV + 0.5 mM Xestospongin C
­64 mV + 1 mM Xestospongin C

cation channels that activate at the frequency of the pacemaker currents, as well as a mechanosensitive sodium channel current that may modulate slow wave frequency [83]. ICC-MY potassium channels regulate membrane potentials and may control intestinal pacemaking activities [84]. Blockade of ether-a-go-go (ERG) potassium channels increases slow wave duration [85]. High-conductance chloride channels are rhythmically active at the slow wave frequency and likely participate in pacemaking as well [86,87]. The sodium/potassium/chloride cotransporter NKCC1 is differentially expressed in mutant and wild-type mice [88]. Inhibition of NKCC1 with bumetanide alters slow wave shape, amplitude, and frequency, suggesting an important role for this transporter.

­64 mV

10 mV

5s

Figure 11.3 Small intestinal slow wave recordings under control conditions and with different concentrations of xestospongin C, a reversible, membrane-permeable inhibitor of inositol triphosphate-sensitive calcium release. Increasing concentrations of xestospongin C disrupt and then abolish intestinal slow wave activity. From Malysz et al. [77].

Other cell types Other cell types in the smooth muscle and myenteric plexus have less defined roles in modulating small intestinal and colonic motor function. However, calcium-activated potassium channels are present in the fibroblast-like cells that form gap junctions with small intestinal smooth muscle cells in mice, suggesting a role in the control of motility [89].
Coupling of small intestinal and colonic contractions

near the myenteric plexus in colonic circular muscle indicating that this region also has pacemaker capability in the colon [74]. Furthermore, rhythmic depolarizations generated by colonic longitudinal muscle tissue propagate over short distances (< 1 mm) in a manner dependent on L-type calcium channels [75].
Cyclic ion fluctuations are associated with pacemaker activity. ICC-generated pacesetter potentials are reduced by the removal of extracellular calcium and by depolarization with a high potassium solution, but L-type calcium channel antagonists have no effect [70,76]. Rather, electrical rhythm depends on calcium release from inositol triphosphatesensitive intracellular stores and the rate of sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium refilling (Fig. 11.3) [77]. Caveolin-1 is present in the plasma membranes of all ICCs [78]. Disruption of the caveolae in small intestinal ICC-MY alters pacing frequency, showing the importance of these structures [79]. Dihydropyridine-insensitive calcium oscillations are observed that also depend on calcium influx through nonselective cation channels, which is mediated by the melastatintype transient receptor potential-like channel 4 (TRPM4) in the caveolae of ICC-MY [80]. Treatment of cultured ICCs with TRPM7-specific small interfering RNA disrupts their pacemaking [81]. The plateau component of the pacesetter potential is maintained by calcium-activated chloride channels [82]. ICCs also express calcium-inhibited nonselective

Propagation of small intestinal myoelectric and motor activity is regulated by intrinsic coupling in both smooth muscle layers. Slow wave propagation is reduced to distances of 3­ 6 mm after the excision of a 1-mm band of circular muscle and is abolished by removal of more than 5 mm of longitudinal muscle [90]. In circular muscle, gap junctions or nexuses provide low-resistance pathways for electrical conduction and for the passage of low-molecular-weight, secondmessenger compounds. Tight coupling is also observed in the longitudinal layer, which possesses few or no nexuses. In this layer, other structures such as peg-and-socket junctions may mediate intercellular communication. Interconnecting bridges between the circular and longitudinal layers may provide low-resistance coupling across the myenteric region.
Small intestinal ICC-MY are mutually connected to as many as 35 other ICC-MY, most likely by gap junctions, permitting extended propagation of pacing currents [91]. Synchrony of rhythmic calcium transients in ICC-MY and longitudinal muscle indicates coupling of these two structures [92]. The gap junction uncoupler glycyrrhetinic acid disrupts ICC coupling [93]. L-type calcium channel antagonists prevent the propagation of calcium transient wavefronts in longitudinal muscle, but have no effect on propagation in ICC-MY [94]. Mitochondrial uncouplers and inhibitors of the inositol triphosphate receptor abolish cycling and propagation in ICC-MY. Similarly, slow wave propagation depends on inositol triphosphate receptor activation and

236

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

mitochondrial calcium uptake in colonic muscle [95]. Mixing movements in the longitudinal layer result from spontaneous calcium waves generated by pacemaker sites that spread in all directions and terminate by colliding with calcium waves from other pacing sites [96]. In mutant mice lacking ICCs, regular contractions are observed in the longitudinal layer but contractions are uncoordinated in the circular muscle, suggesting that ICC control of neurotransmission differs in the two layers [97]. ICCs in the deep muscular plexus and smooth muscle are extensively innervated and form close electrical contact with smooth muscle cells from both layers. In the circular layer, ICCs interface with smooth muscle cells through gap junctions and further interact with one to five ICCs in the deep muscular plexus [98]. Gap junction proteins such as connexin 43 and connexin 40 are prominent in this region [78].
Electrically active regions with the highest slow wave frequency in the small intestine entrain adjacent regions in a phenomenon termed phase lock. In humans, the dominant pacemaker extends from the pylorus to the ligament of Treitz. Circumferential slow wave propagation is more rapid than axial propagation. Conversely, spike potential migration is faster axially than circumferentially. Retrograde slow wave propagation into the stomach is rare because of an electrically insulating septum in the pylorus. In the small intestine, slow wave uncoupling over long distances occurs and is more pronounced in the ileum than in the duodenum [99]. As a consequence, slow wave frequencies decrease from 11­12 cpm in human duodenum to 7­8 cpm in the distal ileum. In most species, this decrease in frequency occurs in a stepwise fashion, with alternating frequency plateaus and regions of variable frequency. Frequency plateaus are more prominent in the proximal intestine than in the ileum [99]. This tighter coupling in the proximal intestine promotes propagation of contractions over long distances in this region, whereas poor ileal coupling limits contractile propagation and slows transit. In addition, slow wave propagation velocities decrease by 50% from the duodenum to the distal ileum. These phenomena promote efficient digestion by distributing nutrients over a large mucosal surface area in the proximal intestine where they can be rapidly digested and absorbed, and by retarding propulsion in the distal intestine to permit the more deliberate assimilation of slowly digested and absorbed substances such as fats and bile.
In the colon, slow wave migration requires continuity of the submucosal aspect of the circular muscle. The colonic slow wave is less well entrained across the different regions than the small intestinal complexes because of a lesser degree of intercellular electrical coupling. Colonic slow wave frequencies and propagation velocities are variable, in part because of the reduction in circular muscle nexus density in the colon compared with the small intestine [100]. Several dominant pacemakers in different colonic regions have been documented in humans, including a rectosigmoid pacemaker

that may control motor activities of the distal colon [101­ 103]. Anesthetization of each pacemaker abolishes slow waves in that segment, but does not affect oscillations in other regions [104]. Circumferential colonic slow wave propagation is more rapid than longitudinal propagation.
Control of small intestinal and colonic peristalsis
The peristaltic reflex in the small intestine and colon produces aboral propulsion of lumenal contents and comprises an excitatory response proximal to stimulation (ascending contraction) and a distal response, which includes an initial relaxation (descending relaxation) followed in some cases by contraction. Radial stretch is the most potent stimulus for inducing peristalsis, although the reflex is also activated by mucosal stimulation. The threshold for peristalsis is lowered by more rapid stretching and by using longer intestinal preparations. Ascending contractions result from simultaneous circular muscle shortening and longitudinal muscle relaxation, whereas descending relaxations are consequences of simultaneous longitudinal muscle contraction and circular muscle relaxation. Lumenal distention with oil or cellulose increases the length of contraction but decreases clearance from an isolated intestinal segment, and cellulose but not oil slows propagation velocity (Fig. 11.4) [105]. Distention with air produces short contraction segments with rapid propagation velocities. The ascending contraction in isolated rat colon is sensitized by repeated radial distention, leading to enhanced responsiveness [106].
Coordinated actions of the major cell types are necessary for generation of the peristaltic reflex. Peristaltic activity is inhibited by smooth muscle relaxants [107]. Jejunal distention evokes initial nerve-mediated pressure elevations through stretch-activated generation of circular muscle contractions, which are followed by pressure decreases secondary to the inherent viscoelastic properties of intestinal smooth muscle [108]. Tetrodotoxin and a solution with a low calcium concentration and a high magnesium concentration abolish peristaltic propagation, indicating neural mediation, whereas the L-type calcium channel antagonist nifedipine attenuates contractile amplitudes but does not prevent peristaltic propagation [109]. Cell bodies of primary sensory neurons initiating the peristaltic reflex are intrinsic to the intestinal wall. Capsaicin-sensitive afferent neurons mediate both ascending and descending components of the reflex. Stripping the mucosa or applying lumenal anesthetics abolishes the reflex to radial stretch, localizing receptors to the mucosa. Nonmucosal receptors are also suggested by the observation that blunted reflexes persist despite chemical destruction of the mucosa by silver nitrate or tannic acid [110]. Mutant mice lacking ICCs exhibit loss of both the ascending and the descending arms of the small intestinal reflex,

237

Pressure (mmHg)

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Contraction length (mm)

(a) 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Pressure (mmHg)

(b)
16 100
14 90 80
12 70
10 60
8 50
6 40 30
4 20
2 10
00

Contraction length (mm)

16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.5 2.1 2.5 3.1 3.5 3.9 4.4 4.9 5.4 8.0

0 0.3 0.7 1.1 1.7 2.1 2.4 2.7 3.4 3.9 4.4 4.7 5.9 6.6

Time (s)

Time (s)

Contraction length (mm) 0.0 0.6 1.1 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.3 3.7 4.3 4.7 5.2 5.9 6.9 7.4

(c) 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Length Pressure

16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0

Pressure (mmHg)

Contraction length (mm)

(d)
100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0

0.0 0.4 1.4 3.0 3.2 4.2 5.8 6.5 8.2 10.3 12.7 13.7 16.2 18.9

Time (s)

Time (s)

Figure 11.4 Contraction length (solid lines) and pressure (dashed lines) are plotted as a function of time during activation of peristalsis with intralumenal Krebs buffer (a), air (b), oil (c), and cellulose (d). Both contraction length and pressure increase and decrease in parallel over the duration of the peristaltic contraction. From Larson and Schulze [105].

Pressure (mmHg)

indicating the importance of the ICC network [111,112]. However, the preservation of the peristaltic reflex in the colons of these mice suggests a lesser role for the ICCs in this organ [113].
The peristaltic reflex is mediated by the activation of several neurotransmitter pathways. Acetylcholine, substance P, and neurokinin A are released by radial stretch [114]. Atropine partly inhibits ascending contractions induced by low-level stimulation, whereas tachykinin antagonists or antisera block contractions induced by intense radial stretching. Muscarinic M1 receptors are involved in neuronal transmission, whereas M3 receptor activation elicits smooth muscle contraction [115]. NK1, NK2, and NK3 receptors all participate in peristalsis in concert with cholinergic pathways [116]. NK1 receptor activation increases action potentials in circular muscle, superimposed on the intestinal slow wave frequency [117]. NO and VIP are released during peristalsis and likely mediate descending relaxations [118]. NO synthase inhibitors inhibit descending relaxations elicited by colonic distention.

Serotonin is an important mediator of peristaltic reflex
activity. Serotonin is released with gut distention and lowers
the threshold for eliciting peristalsis [119]. 5-HT4 receptors are present on intrinsic primary afferent neurons [120].
Mucosal stimulation initiates peristalsis by activating 5-
HT4/5-HT1P receptors on sensory neurons in human intestine and 5-HT4/5-HT1P and 5-HT3 receptors in other species [121]. 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 agonists elicit colonic propagation [122­124]; however, in human colon, the 5-HT3 antagonist granisetron has no effect on the ascending contraction or
descending relaxation [125]. In guinea pig colon, 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptor antagonists are additive in their inhibition of colonic peristalsis, indicating dual mediation in this spe-
cies [126]. In marmoset small intestine, 5-HT4 receptors are activated by low concentrations of serotonin, whereas
higher concentrations activate 5-HT3 receptors [127]. In isolated colonic tissue, 5-HT4 agonists activate CGRP pathways, which then evoke ascending substance P release and
descending VIP release [128]. Prolonged exposure of colonic
tissues to a 5-HT4 agonist desensitizes the peristaltic reflex

238

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

response to mucosal stroking, which is accompanied by a decrease in CGRP release [129]. 5-HT7 receptor immunoreactivity is also detected in myenteric neurons [130]. Investigations have characterized an inhibitory effect of serotonin on peristalsis that is blocked by a 5-HT7 antagonist [131]. Research suggests that serotonin modulates circular muscle accommodation during the preparatory phase of peristalsis by action on 5-HT7 receptors [130].
Peristalsis is modulated by other neurohumoral substances. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor enhances both limbs of the reflex by increasing serotonin and CGRP release [132]. Opioids acting on  and  receptors blunt peristalsis in guinea pig small intestine, whereas somatostatin inhibits peristalsis in rat and mouse jejunum through somatostatin type 2 receptor (SSR2) activation [133]. Stretch activates aborally projecting somatostatin neurons, which inhibit the activity of opioid neurons and reduce [Met]enkephalin release [134]. This decrease in [Met]enkephalin then elicits relaxation through the release of VIP and NO. Thresholds for eliciting peristalsis are increased by clonidine, indicating inhibitory effects of 2-adrenergic receptor pathways [135]. Endogenous purinergic pathways suppress peristalsis through the activation of P2 receptors [136]. In rats, ascending responses are augmented by the activation of adenosine A1 receptors and are inhibited by A2 receptor stimulation, whereas A1 receptor activation inhibits descending relaxations [137]. Inhibition of the tonic influence of NPY neurons by graded stretch contributes to the ascending contraction [138]. GRP acts on bombesin type 2 receptors to enhance the descending response [139]. Stimulation of cannabinoid CB1 receptor pathways inhibits peristalsis in guinea pig ileum and mouse colon [140]. The demonstration that a CB1 antagonist increases activity in mouse colon suggests that endogenous cannabinoids may physiologically modulate peristalsis [141]. In rat duodenum and ileum, ascending contractions are blocked by cholecystokinin (CCK) by action on CCK1 and CCK2 receptors [142]. In mouse jejunum, orexin A enhances both the ascending and descending limbs of the peristaltic reflex [143]. Endothelin ETA receptor activation stimulates peristalsis in guinea pig small intestine, whereas ETB receptor activation inhibits, and ETB antagonists enhance, peristaltic activity [144]. The ability of ETB antagonists to enhance peristalsis suggests a physiological modulatory role for ETB receptors. Estradiol and progesterone increase the threshold for eliciting the peristaltic reflex in guinea pig small intestine [145]. Different prostanoids have receptor-selective effects on peristaltic activity. Interleukin (IL)-1 increases substance P release and circular muscle contraction during the ascending contraction [146]. Bradykinin acting on bradykinin B2 receptors inhibits peristalsis [147].
Extrinsic neural pathways may also modulate peristaltic activity. In guinea pig colon, sympathetic nerve stimulation inhibits cholinergic components of the reflex. In isolated

tissue, extrinsic denervation decreases basal CGRP levels and abolishes peristaltic reflexes activated by muscle stretch but not mucosal stimulation [148]. CGRP antagonists abolish peristalsis with both stimuli, indicating CGRP involvement in reflexes activated by both extrinsic and intrinsic pathways.
Stereotypical motor patterns
Several stereotypical motor patterns have been characterized that control propulsion in the small intestine and colon under physiological and pathophysiological conditions.
Small intestine Migrating motor complex Physiological characteristics The migrating motor complex (MMC) is an organized fasting contractile pattern that propels undigested food residue and sloughed enterocytes from the proximal gut. It is controlled by the migrating myoelectric complex [149]. The development of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in rats given morphine disrupts MMC cycling, showing the importance of the complex. The MMC lasts for 84­112 min on average and consists of three phases. Phase I (40%­60% of the cycle) is a period of motor quiescence. Phase II (20%­30% of the cycle) is characterized by irregular phasic contractions in phase with about half of the slow wave cycles. Duodenal crosssectional area is greater during phase II than phase I, possibly to accommodate pancreaticobiliary secretions [150]. Phase III is a 5- to 10-min period of lumenally occlusive contractions, most of which propagate aborally. Some duodenal phase III contractions propagate orally, indicative of a physiological retroperistaltic pump (Fig. 11.5) [151]. This retroperistaltic activity promotes duodenogastric reflux of bicarbonate and immunoglobulin A, which may reconstitute the antral mucosa during fasting. Retrograde duodenal contractions may also increase fasting duodenal pH and nocturnal antral pH, serving to protect both regions [152]. The maximal phase III contractile frequency is determined by the slow wave frequency (11­12 cpm in the duodenum, 7­8 cpm in the ileum). Individual contractions during phase III propagate over longer distances than during phase II. The length of intestine in a given phase III complex is 40­60 cm in the duodenum, compared with 5­10 cm in the ileum. Intestinal transit of inert substances is four times faster in phase III than in phase I [153]. Transit also occurs in phase II, with rapid propulsion occurring during the transition from phases II to III. Cineradiography shows that transit during phase III is characterized by intermittent boluses of 4­5 cm in length separated by 1- to 2-cm ring contractions [154]. In most healthy subjects, at least one phase III develops during 6 h of fasting. In total, 71% of phase III complexes originate in the stomach, with 28% beginning in the duodenum and 1% in the proximal jejunum [155]. The MMC cycle period is

239

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

(a) (b)

S A 45 mmHg 1 min A D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 D9 D10 D11 D12 D13

30 mmHg

5s

Figure 11.5 (a) An antroduodenal phase III complex (A, antrum; D, duodenum). (b) Highresolution manometry of phase III contractions shows retrograde propagation in the proximal duodenum and antegrade propagation more distally. From Castedal and Abrahamsson [152].

twice as long if the previous phase III complex originated in the stomach compared with the duodenum [156]. In total, 50% of the MMCs in humans propagate beyond the midjejunum and only 10% reach the distal ileum. There are few differences in MMC properties between young and older individuals, although phase III propagation velocity may decrease after age 80 [157]. Phase III propagation velocities are slower and contractile amplitudes are increased during both the follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle [158].
Neural regulation Enteric neural function coordinates small intestinal MMC propagation. Isolated denervated intestinal segments exhibit spontaneous phase III complexes that propagate aborally; however, cycling in the excluded segment is out of phase with the main segment, showing that continuity of enteric neural connections is needed for synchronized propagation [159]. Enteric nerve connections regenerate 28 days after transection and coordinated MMC cycling resumes after 45 days [159]. Interposition of a colonic segment between two small intestinal segments or construction of end-to-side or side-to-side anastomoses prevents resumption of normal MMC propagation [160]. MMC cycling is disrupted but not abolished by serosal application of benzalkonium hydrochloride, which selectively destroys myenteric ganglia, suggesting

that the deep muscular plexus and submucous plexus participate in the maintenance of the MMC [161]. In mutant mice lacking ICC-MY, generation and propagation of the MMC is preserved indicating that the enteric nervous system possesses the requisite program for the complex and that slow waves are not needed [162].
The small intestinal MMC is modulated by extrinsic neural input. Bilateral truncal vagotomy, removal of the superior and inferior mesenteric ganglia, total sympathectomy, and complete extrinsic denervation of the small intestine do not prevent MMC cycling [163]. However, bilateral vagotomy increases cycle periodicity, whereas sectioning extrinsic nerves to the jejunum and ileum decreases MMC cycle length, reduces phase III propagation to the ileum, and disrupts duodenojejunal phase III. Vagal cooling in dogs has no effect on intestinal phase III but it shortens phase II activity, suggesting that vagal dependence varies between the different MMC phases [164].
Selected neurotransmitters modify MMC propagation. In dogs, atropine, the ganglionic blocker hexamethonium, and the neural toxin tetrodotoxin all eliminate MMC cycling. Close intraarterial injection of these agents disrupts MMC propagation distal to the site of infusion [165]. Adrenergic receptor antagonists disrupt but do not abolish MMC cycling. NO synthase inhibitors elicit premature MMC activity in humans, whereas NO donors disrupt MMC activity in rats,

240

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

inducing a postprandial-like pattern [166]. Similarly, the phosphodiesterase inhibitor sildenafil, which enhances NO actions by preventing cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP) degradation, disrupts MMC cycling [167]. VIP antagonists block the disruptive effects of NO donors, indicating that NO may act by stimulating VIP release [168]. Serotonin shortens the MMC cycle length, accelerates propagation velocities, and converts mixing patterns to propulsive patterns [169]. Ablation of myenteric serotonin neurons in rats with 5,6and 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine prolongs MMC periodicity and decreases propagation velocities [170]. 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 antagonists inhibit phase III or prolong cycle length [171]. The 5-HT1 agonist sumatriptan prolongs MMC duration by increasing phase II activity [172]. Neurokinin A evokes phase II-like activity in rats, an effect that can be augmented by an NO synthase inhibitor [173]. Morphine induces premature intestinal phase III activity, whereas the -opioid antagonist naloxone prolongs MMC duration [174]. -Opioid antagonists do not inhibit MMC cycling, but they decrease motility indices during fasting [175]. Orexin A prolongs MMC cycle duration, an effect blocked by NO synthase inhibitors, indicating mediation by nitrergic pathways [176]. Orexin A and NO synthase colocalize in duodenal myenteric neurons. Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and GLP-2 prolong MMC cycle duration and slow transit by way of NO-dependent pathways [177]. Ileal resections reduce phase I duration, shorten MMC cycles, and induce intestinal clusters, suggesting the presence of modulator peptides released by the distal small intestine [178]. After small intestinal transection and reanastomosis in guinea pigs, immunoreactivities for VIP, GRP, and somatostatin are decreased distal to the anastomosis [159]. MMC recovery is associated with normalization of these peptides, suggesting that peptidergic enteric nerves contribute to MMC coordination.
Neurohumoral mediators that cycle with the MMC Phase III complexes in the antrum and proximal intestine are elicited by motilin release from the duodenal mucosa [179]. Motilin receptors are expressed in human antroduodenal enteric neurons and smooth muscle [180]. Motilin is also localized to the hippocampus, thalamus, hypothalamus, amygdala, cerebellum, and vagus, although its physiological function in the CNS is uncertain [181]. Motilin release is evoked by vagal stimulation, cholinergic agonists, opioid agents, and duodenal pH changes; however, the importance of these stimuli in the physiological regulation of motilin release is undefined [182]. Cyclic motilin fluctuations are blocked by atropine and hexamethonium, suggesting regulation by cholinergic pathways. Antral phase III complexes correlate temporally with plasma motilin elevations in healthy humans, and premature antral phase III in dogs is inducible by motilin infusion [183]. Motilin-evoked phase III is identical in duration, amplitude, and propagation velocity to spontaneous complexes [184]. In dogs, antroduodenal phase III is

abolished for several hours after the administration of motilin antisera [185]. Similarly, excision of motilin-secreting duodenal tissue disrupts fasting antroduodenal motility in dogs [186]. Gastroduodenal MMC-like activity recovers 1­4 months after duodenectomy in dogs, an effect that is vagally mediated and dependent on cholinergic and adrenergic efferent pathways, indicating the adaptation and recruitment of new motilin-independent neural pathways to maintain normal upper gut function [187].
Ectopic MMC cycles originating distal to the ligament of Treitz are not usually associated with motilin release [188]. The effects of motilin antisera on distal jejunal and ileal phase III complexes are minimal [185]. Initiation of ectopic phase III activity in the jejunum and ileum are unaffected by duodenectomy [186]. These findings suggest that "programming" of phase III activity in the mid- and distal intestine is a motilin-independent phenomenon that is entrained by the actions of motilin on the antrum and duodenum.
Other peptides that cycle in phase with the MMC are somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide, and xenin. Exogenous somatostatin evokes intestinal phase III complexes every 20­30 min [189]. However, somatostatin is not a regulator of physiological proximal gut motor activity, as gastric contractions are suppressed, duodenal phase II is abolished, and transit is delayed rather than accelerated. Somatostatin has been proposed to participate in motilin-independent cycling in the distal intestine. Plasma levels of pancreatic polypeptide, a peptide produced by the pancreas, peak just before phase III. Motilin infusion stimulates pancreatic polypeptide release by way of vagal cholinergic pathways involving 5-HT3 receptors [190]. However, pancreatic polypeptide infusion has no effect on fasting intestinal motor activity and pancreatic autotransplantation has no effect on intestinal phase III, despite disrupting the cyclic secretion of pancreatic polypeptide [191]. Peak levels of xenin in plasma are associated with phase III and xenin infusion evokes premature phase III in healthy humans, suggesting a modulatory role for xenin in regulating fasting motor activity [192].
Other associated synchronous cyclic phenomena The MMC cycles in phase with motor activity of the gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi, as well as with several secretory functions [193]. Gastric acid and pepsin production, intestinal bicarbonate secretion, bile acid release, pancreatic enzyme release, and lumenal secretion of immunoglobulin A peak just before or during phase III [194]. In healthy humans, intestinal absorptive flux is twice as high as secretory flux during phase I, but four times as high later in the MMC cycle [195]. Duodenectomy also disrupts cyclic sphincter of Oddi motility and increases total sphincteric contractile activity throughout the cycle [193]. However, duodenectomy and diseases such as chronic pancreatitis disrupt the synchrony of MMC and pancreatic exocrine cycling, suggesting differential regulation of the two phenomena [186].

241

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Cyclic release of bile into the duodenum modulates MMC periodicity. Plasma motilin is released after exposing the duodenal mucosa to bile [196]. Furthermore, biliary diversion from the duodenum disrupts motilin cycling with loss of duodenal phase III and induction of ectopic jejunoileal complexes ­ effects that are reversed with bile flow restoration or exogenous bile acid perfusion [197]. In addition, ileal mixed micelle perfusion evokes premature phase III [198]. However, despite these observations, the role of bile in MMC generation remains in dispute.
Fed motor pattern Physiological characteristics After eating, the MMC is replaced by a fed pattern of intermittent phasic contractions of varying amplitude at all levels of the small intestine [199]. Myoelectric recordings show random bursts of spike potentials in phase with the slow wave. The fed pattern both mixes and propels intestinal contents. Postprandial transit is more rapid and fluctuates less than transit during fasting [153]. In total, 44% of fed contractions do not propagate. Of those that propagate, 90% migrate less than 30 cm and 66% migrate less than 9 cm. In the proximal duodenum, 40%­50% of fed contractions are retrograde [200]. Occasionally, a transitional motor pattern occurs immediately after eating, characterized by highly propagative contractile clusters that rapidly distribute nutrients over an extended mucosal surface area [201]. Intense individual migrating contractions may occur postprandially, with amplitudes twice those of normal fed phasic contractions and durations of two slow wave cycles [105]. Highamplitude pressure waves at frequencies of 19­24 cpm develop in the distal ileum 1­ 4 h after eating, when chyme reaches the colon [202]. Myoelectric recordings show that this activity is associated with spike bursts similar to colonic myenteric potential oscillations. Delayed tonic relaxations of the ileum are induced by local exposure to bile acids and triglycerides that are not absorbed in the proximal intestine [203].
The duration of the fed motor pattern depends on the caloric content and other properties of the meal. In dogs, a 450-kcal meal induces a fed pattern that lasts for longer than 3 h. The threshold for inducing the fed state in humans is not defined, although a 345-kcal meal disrupts MMC cycling for more than 90 min [204]. Duodenal nutrient perfusions at 0.5 kcal/min can disrupt MMC activity in dogs [205]. Peanut oil, consisting of 18-carbon triglycerides, induces fed contractions for longer periods than equicaloric sucrose or milk protein meals [206]. In humans, a 400-kcal meal with 9% fat disrupts MMC activity for 294 ± 21 min, whereas a meal with 50% fat prolongs the fed period to 410 ± 42 min [207]. Long-chain triglycerides elicit a postprandial pattern, whereas equicaloric medium-chain triglycerides have no effect [208]. The addition of guar to a glucose drink prolongs the duration of the fed pattern [209]. Intravenous adminis-

tration of amino acids shortens the MMC cycle length but does not induce a fed motor pattern, confirming that participation of the gut lumen is requisite [210].
Neurohumoral regulation Extrinsic and intrinsic small intestinal nerves are important for modulation of the fed pattern. In dogs, the presence of a cephalic phase is suggested by the observation that the sight or smell of food disrupts MMC cycling [211]. Bilateral vagotomy, splanchnicectomy, mesenteric ganglionectomy, and total extrinsic denervation do not prevent induction of the fed state. However, bilateral vagotomy shortens the duration of the fed state and increases the latency from the time of eating to the onset of fed contractions, whereas complete denervation reduces the number of fed contractions, shortens the mean propagation distance, slows intestinal transit, and increases the threshold number of calories needed to initiate the pattern [163]. Vagal cooling converts the fed pattern to one of intermittent phase III activity [164]. If nutrients are perfused into an isolated, but extrinsically innervated, intestinal loop, the MMC is disrupted in the unconnected main portion of the intestine, showing that extrinsic nerves alone are sufficient for suppression of fasting motility [212]. Intestinal transection with reanastomosis decreases the frequency and amplitude of fed contractions in dogs and impairs propagation [213]. Atropine and hexamethonium abolish fed motor and spike potential activity, demonstrating cholinergic dependence of the fed pattern [214]. NO synthase inhibition in healthy humans delays fed duodenocecal transit in association with increases in frequency and amplitude of duodenal pressure waves, indicating modulation by nitrergic pathways [215].
The specific neurohumoral mediators responsible for inducing the fed state are undefined. CCK has an uncertain role in the initiation of the postprandial motor pattern. CCK levels increase five- to tenfold after eating. CCK increases intestinal contractile activity that exhibits characteristics dissimilar to the fed state, such as prominent retrograde propagation and a preferential stimulation of the proximal intestine [216]. CCK inhibits MMC activity but does not prevent motilin cycling. In rats, duodenal perfusion of trypsin inhibitor releases endogenous CCK, which activates vagal afferent CCK2 receptors to stimulate a central CCK1 pathway to disrupt MMC cycling [217]. Intravenous CCK2 blockade or central administration of a CCK1 antagonist in rats prevents disruption of MMC activity in response to nutrients [218]. However, in dogs, CCK antagonists reduce but do not prevent the fed response or the interruption of MMC cycling after eating [219]. Other compounds inhibit the MMC and induce complexes similar to the fed pattern, including gastrin, insulin, glucagon, neurotensin, neuromedin N, enkephalins, and prostaglandin E2. Gastrin increases proximal intestinal motility; however, stimuli that produce a fed pattern, such as peanut oil, do not evoke gastrin release

242

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

[216]. Glucose promotes insulin release but does not induce a fed pattern. Neurotensin converts fasting motility to a fed pattern along the entire small intestine in rats and humans [220], and, in rats, the fed pattern duration is reduced by neurotensin antagonists [221]. The decrease in plasma motilin levels may contribute to postprandial motility, as suggested by the observation that the administration of motilin antisera generates motor patterns that are similar to the fed state [185].
Reversion to the MMC Reversion to MMC cycling after completion of the fed pattern is poorly understood. The initiation of duodenal phase III correlates with the completion of gastric emptying of digestible solids [222]. However, the first postprandial MMC begins ectopically distal to the duodenum, implying that factors that initiate more proximal complexes are not yet operational [223]. In dogs and humans, continuous duodenal feedings produce persistence of the fed pattern for only a finite time, after which phase III activity resumes [224]. The ability of NO synthase inhibitors to convert fed duodenal motor patterns to phase III-like activity in healthy humans suggests involvement of nitrergic pathways [225].
Giant migrating contractions Intense pressure waves that propagate aborally for long distances in the small intestine, termed giant migrating contractions (GMCs), are observed experimentally during hypoxia, anemia, gangrene, after laparotomy, and after death. GMCs are two to three times greater in amplitude and four to five times longer in duration than individual phasic contractions and they propagate at 1 cm/s (Fig. 11.6) [226,227]. GMCs typically are more prolonged than a single slow wave cycle, indicating slow wave independence. Myoelectric recordings of GMCs measure intense spike potential bursts that last

4­16 s, obscuring the slow wave. GMCs commonly originate in the jejunum or ileum during fasting, propagate to the ICJ, and are intensely propulsive of ileal contents. Nearly half of ileal GMCs are associated with propagating sequences in the cecum [228]. Consequently, intestinal GMCs are proposed to clear ileal debris and prevent coloileal reflux. Intestinal GMCs, rare (0.03/h) in health, may be induced by intravenous morphine, intragastric vinegar, ileal perfusion of feces or short-chain fatty acids, ionizing radiation, and infection with Vibrio cholerae, Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile, noninvasive Escherichia coli, Shigella, and Trichinella spiralis [227]. The initiation of GMCs is associated with decreased ileal pH, suggesting that coloileal reflux may be a physiological stimulant of this motor pattern [229]. Intestinal GMC propagation is controlled by enteric neural pathways, whereas extrinsic nerves regulate inhibition of motor activity orad to the complex [230]. GMCs elicited by arterial CGRP infusion are blocked by atropine, hexamethonium, and tetrodotoxin [231]. NK3 receptors on presynaptic neurons may also participate in small intestinal GMCs [232].
Other aborally migrating patterns Other aborally migrating patterns occur at irregular intervals. Discrete clustered contractions (DCCs) are intensely propulsive contractions that occur during fasting and after eating, comprising 3­10 contractions followed by 1 min of motor quiescence [226,233]. DCCs migrate at 5­10 cm/min over distances of 2­40 cm and are proposed, along with GMCs, to be a physiological means of emptying the ileum. Unlike GMCs, DCCs rarely extend into the proximal colon [228]. An extremely propagative pattern, called the rapidly migrating contraction, migrates for 200 cm at more than 30 cm/s [234]. In contrast to intestinal GMCs, rapidly migrating contractions occur predominantly in the proximal small intestine and are associated with disruption of slow wave activity.

SG1 ­ 15 SG2 ­ 73

SG3 ­ 133 SG4 ­ 191 SG5 ­ 249

Figure 11.6 A spontaneous giant migrating contraction in canine small intestine. The labels before each tracing reflect the strain gauge number and distance in centimeters from the pylorus. From Sarna [227].

SG6 ­ 307 SG7 ­ 365 SG8 ­ 423

2 min 1 mV 8/12/83
243

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Retrograde peristaltic contractions After administration of emetic agents, retrograde peristaltic contractions (RPCs) migrate orally from the mid-small intestine, moving lumenal contents into the stomach so that they may be expelled during vomiting. RPCs exhibit motor inhibition immediately before and after the complex and are followed by several phasic contractions and a second inhibitory period [235]. They exhibit contractile amplitudes that are 1.3­1.8 times greater than those of normal intestinal contractions, with durations that are 2­ 4 times longer, and they migrate rapidly (8­10 cm/s) over distances of more than 100 cm [153]. RPCs are preceded by slow wave obliteration prior to the generation of electrical bursts that migrate orally [236]. The entire phenomenon is abolished by vagotomy, but only the RPC itself is prevented by atropine, hexamethonium, and tetrodotoxin [231,235]. Although commonly associated with retching or vomiting, RPCs occur in their absence. Retching and vomiting also occur without RPCs. Investigations involving autotransplantation of small intestinal segments in dogs indicate that retrograde motor activity is controlled by extrinsic neural pathways [237].
Colon Local contractile activity Under basal conditions, the colon exhibits poorly organized local contractions that may be of short or long duration. Stationary short-duration contractions (SDCs) mix fecal material to effect water extraction. The myoelectric pattern underlying SDCs consists of short spike bursts that occur in phase with colonic slow waves. SDCs persist for a mean of 8 s, occur at 4­6 cpm in dogs and 2­13 cpm in humans, and are recorded from in vitro circular muscle preparations [238]. Long-duration contractions (LDCs) are of greater amplitude than SDCs and can be stationary or propagate for short distances in either direction, thus promoting both mixing and local fecal propulsion [239]. LDCs typically propagate orally in the ascending and transverse colon, whereas they migrate aborally in the distal colon [240]. The myoelectrical correlates of LDCs, long spike bursts, are action potentials generated by myenteric potential oscillations that are asynchronous with colonic slow waves. Although long spike bursts oscillate at 25­40 cpm, a single tetanic LDC persists for the duration of the electrical complex because of temporal limitations in relaxation rates of colonic smooth muscle. In contrast to SDCs, LDCs are recorded from in vitro longitudinal muscle preparations [238]. Most LDCs occur during the day and are increased on awakening and after meals [241]. Propagating contractions in the proximal human colon are enhanced by NO synthase inhibitors, suggesting the presence of tonic inhibitory nitrergic control of colonic motor activity [242].
Gastrocolonic response As in the small intestine, eating elicits increased motor activity throughout the colon. Greater in the sigmoid than in the

Terminal ileum Cecum
Hepatic flexure
Splenic flexure
Sigmoid colon
(a)

Wake up

1000-kCal meal

80 mmHg 1 min

Terminal ileum
Cecum Hepatic flexure
Splenic flexure
40 mmHg (b) 10 min
Figure 11.7 Manometric recordings of colonic motor activity in a healthy human. (a) On awakening, motor activity increases and a propagating sequence is initiated. (b) Ingestion of a 1000-kcal meal elicits a pronounced increase in motor activity at all recording sites. From Bampton et al. [259].

transverse colon, this increased activity is termed the gastrocolonic response (Fig. 11.7) [243]. In addition to enhanced phasic activity, meal ingestion increases colonic tone. Myoelectric recordings show increases in propagative and stationary long spike bursts peaking 15 min after eating. In some instances, mass fecal movements occur during the gastrocolonic response with subsequent defecation. Differences in meal composition likely influence the magnitude of the gastrocolonic response, although responses to low- and high-fat meals are reportedly similar [244].
The gastrocolonic response is regulated by several neurohumoral factors. Extrinsic denervation prevents its induction [245]. In dogs, paraaortic and presacral denervation reduces the colonic responses to intragastric lipids, suggesting modulation by the pelvic plexus [246]. Gastrocolonic responses are also blunted by the anticholinergic agent clidinium and the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron, indicating involvement of both cholinergic and serotonergic innervation [247]. The gastrocolonic response in humans consists of gastric mechanoreceptor and small intestinal chemoreceptor components

244

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

that are partly mediated by 5-HT3 pathways [125]. Neurotensin antagonists suppress the early fed response in rat distal colon and block late responses in the proximal colon [221]. CCK increases colonic motor and myoelectrical activity in some models, but does not elicit colonic contractions in humans at doses that stimulate pancreatic enzyme secretion and gallbladder contraction [248]. In dogs, responses to meals and exogenous CCK differ in that CCK reduces rather than increases colonic tone [249]. However, the CCK antagonist loxiglumide blunts meal-evoked increases in colonic motor activity, indicating some CCK-dependent involvement in the response [250]. Similar studies in rats using selective antagonists have shown potential roles for both CCK1 and CCK2 receptor mediation of the gastrocolonic response.
High-amplitude propagated contractions High-amplitude propagated contractions (HAPCs) propagate aborally over extended distances and elicit mass movements of feces that may precede defecation. The myoelectrical correlates of HAPCs are migrating, long spike bursts generated from myenteric potential oscillations. In ambulatory manometric studies of unprepared colons in healthy humans, HAPCs of high amplitude (> 105 mmHg) and prolonged duration (> 14 s) occur 6­10 times daily, often after awakening and after meals, or up to 1 h before defecation (Fig. 11.8) [251]. The time to defecation after the development of a HAPC correlates negatively with the amplitude of the contractile complex. Most HAPCs in humans originate in the cecum, whereas 90% of HAPCs associated with defecation in dogs propagate to the rectum and induce IAS relaxation

[252]. HAPCs may be experimentally evoked by colonic distention, stimulant laxatives, abdominal irradiation, intracolonic acetic acid or oleic acid, and orphanin FQ administration [253]. Substance P-evoked HAPCs are enhanced by experimental colonic inflammation [254]. HAPCs elicited by intracolonic glycerol are reduced by lidocaine, hexamethonium, and atropine, indicating mediation by mucosally activated cholinergic pathways [255]. HAPCs are mediated by neural acetylcholine release acting on M3 receptors and by the activation of NK1 receptors on smooth muscle, and they are partially inhibited by NO release [256].
Rectal motor complexes Ambulatory manometric studies demonstrate rectal motor complexes that occur about 16 times per day with mean durations of 5­15 min and which may facilitate the storage function of the rectum [257]. Rectal complexes occur more commonly in the distal than in the proximal rectum and comprise two to three contractions per minute with a mean amplitude of 58 mmHg. Such rectal motor activity occurs during the day and nocturnally and is not related to meal ingestion, whereas the timing of most rectal events relates to contractions more proximally in the colon [258]. Rectal motor complexes usually do not propagate either orally or aborally [259]. Anal relaxations are not observed during rectal motor complexes, consistent with a role in the maintenance of fecal continence.
Migrating motor complexes Colonic MMCs are observed in some species but not in humans. The myoelectrical correlates, migrating myoelectric

1 2

3
4 5

6

7 8

Figure 11.8 A cluster of high-amplitude propagating contractions (H) prior to defecation. The complex is most prominent in recording leads two to six. From Hagger et al. [251].

9 10
8 min

H HH

H

Urge

Defecate 245

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

complexes, cycle every 40­50 min in dogs. Colonic MMCs propagate over more than half of the length of the colon with durations of 30­120 s [260]. Colonic MMCs do not cycle in phase with small intestinal MMCs.
Sphincteric motor function
Ileocolonic junction The ICJ is a sphincteric region possessing a localized highpressure zone that is not abolished by neural toxins. In dogs, the ICJ has a basal pressure of 30­40 cmH2O with phasic contractions of more than 100 cmH2O [261]. In humans, a high-pressure zone is less reliably observed, although phasic contractions are common. Slow waves and spike potentials migrate across the ICJ into the colon in cats and dogs. In dogs, more than half of the MMCs traverse the ICJ and may elicit colonic contractions; however, in humans, the structure participates in very few MMC cycles [262]. Scintigraphy studies show that fasting flow across the canine ICJ is maximal before phase III, whereas, in humans, changes in flow do not correlate with MMC phases. In dogs, meal consumption increases motor activity and flow across the ICJ, which peaks 4 h after eating [263]. In humans, meals increase ICJ tone and phasic activity [264]. Small intestinal GMCs and DCCs traverse the ICJ and decrease phasic and tonic activity in the structure [262,264]. Both intrinsic and extrinsic nerves control ICJ responses. Colonic distention evokes reflex ICJ contraction, which is not blocked by transection of vagal or pelvic nerves [265]. Conversely, splanchnic nerve transection blocks the reflex, indicating the importance of extrinsic sympathetic pathways. Similarly, total extrinsic denervation increases phasic ICJ pressures as a result of increased muscarinic receptor sensitivity [266].
The ICJ safeguards against coloileal fecal reflux. The acute angulation of the ICJ at its insertion into the cecum likely plays an important role in this response. If the fibrous tissue sustaining this angulation is severed, the ICJ cannot prevent retrograde reflux [267]. Similarly, excision of the ICJ increases ileal fecal bacterial counts [268]. The role of the ICJ as a barrier to aboral flow is less well defined. Some studies observe reflex ICJ relaxations with ileal distention, whereas others note reflex contractions. In a dog study, ICJ relaxations in response to ileal distention were abolished by extrinsic denervation [269]. Colonic filling from the ileum is characterized by bolus movements alternating with periods of stasis, suggesting that the ileum regulates cecal delivery [270]. Studies with Heidelberg capsules show lag times of 0.8­2.5 h for the passage of solids across the ICJ, but other investigations show no differences in solid and liquid transit into the cecum [271]. Patients who have undergone ICJ resection exhibit normal transit of radiolabeled beads, suggesting little role for the structure as a regulator of forward flow [272]. However, with extensive small intestinal resec-

tion, excision of the ICJ further accelerates transit, showing that the structure can restrict aboral propagation during conditions of high flow.
Anus and pelvic floor The anal canal is 2.8 cm in length, with a smaller circumference in women than in men [273]. An additional functional region of elevated pressure extending 6 cm into the rectum helps maintain fecal continence. The IAS provides 85% of resting tone, which in humans is 40­80 mmHg. Three regions of spontaneous electrical activity are observed in the IAS: an upper region 15­20 mm from the anal verge with a frequency of 6.8 cpm, a transitional region with a frequency of 15.9 cpm, and a lower region within 5 mm of the anal verge with a frequency of 24.1 cpm [274]. Tone is generated in the two lower regions, whereas relaxant responses are observed in all regions with electrical depolarization. Voluntary contraction of the EAS increases pressures to more than 150 mmHg. With sudden and constant rectal distention, the IAS contribution to resting tone decreases to 40% while the EAS provides the remaining 60% [275]. Ambulatory manometry reveals 14­19 spontaneous anal relaxations per hour while awake and 4 per hour during sleep, some of which correlate with flatus passage [257]. Tone is similar in men and women, but maximal squeeze pressures and durations are higher in men [276]. Both tone and maximal squeeze pressures decrease with aging. With advanced age, EAS thickness decreases and IAS thickness increases [273].
Fecal dehydration occurs during colonic transit such that the stool which reaches the rectum is semisolid to solid. The compliance of the rectal wall permits the rectum to serve as a reservoir for fecal material until it can be expelled. The tone of the IAS prevents inadvertent leakage, whereas the EAS voluntarily contracts if unwanted fecal expulsion is impending. In contrast to other striated muscle structures, the EAS and puborectalis exhibit spontaneous tone to promote fecal continence. Maximal squeeze pressures are observed where the puborectalis overlaps the EAS. The uppermost loop of the EAS, formed from the deep external sphincter muscle, attaches anteriorly on the pubis. The intermediate loop, formed from the superficial external sphincter, attaches posteriorly to the coccyx. The base loop, formed from the subcutaneous external sphincter, attaches to the perianal skin. Tight contraction of the three loops produces anal occlusion. Electromyographic studies indicate that the pelvic floor musculature behaves as a single unit, with all muscle groups activating in response to local stimulation [277]. An anorectal angle of 90° created by the puborectalis muscle provides a functional obstruction to accidental loss of stool at rest.
Defecation involves coordinated interaction of the different structures in and around the rectum and anus. The transitional zone above the pectinate line, the anal crypt region, and the anal canal possess many free and organized nerve

246

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

endings that sense the contents of the anal canal, thereby permitting the differentiation of solids, liquids, and gases. Sitting upright contributes to continence by tightening the anorectal angle [278]. Fecal evacuation is aided by assuming a position in which the hips are flexed to open the anorectal angle. Comparisons of different positions report that assuming a squatting posture promotes less straining effort than sitting upright [279]. With voluntary defecation, puborectalis relaxation further opens the anorectal angle (110°) and elicits IAS relaxation. Rectal contraction increases lumenal pressure to provide a propulsive force for defecation. Contraction of the rectus abdominus muscles, diaphragm, and terminal aspects of the other levator ani muscles increases intraabdominal pressure to provide additional force. With straining, the pelvic musculature descends about 1 cm. After fecal passage, a rebound contraction of the EAS and pelvic floor muscles occurs. In contrast, flatus passage is not associated with opening of the anorectal angle. Rapid abdominal pressure increases and pelvic floor muscle contractions, coupled with colonic contractions and increased rectal pressure, force gas past the acutely angled anorectum while retaining solid and liquid feces [280].
Extended reflexes involving the small intestine and colon
The small intestine and colon participate in several nervemediated reflex responses locally, within the organs themselves, as well as in more distant regions of the gastrointestinal tract.
Intestinointestinal reflex The inhibitory intestinointestinal reflex is the profound motor inhibition of up to several hundred centimeters of intestine in response to abrupt stretching or dilation of a

localized intestinal segment. It is proposed to serve a protective role when there is bowel distention resulting from mechanical obstruction or with adynamic ileus. In humans, the inhibitory effects of distention are more pronounced in the proximal intestine than in the ileum [281]. The reflex produces slow wave disruption and uncoupling on both sides of the distended segment [282]. Removal of the longitudinal muscle prevents activation of the reflex, whereas excision of the mucosa and submucosa has no effect. In dogs, abrupt distention of an excluded but extrinsically innervated intestinal segment abolishes spike activity in the excluded loop and in the intact intestine through the splanchnic pathways [283]. The reflex is abolished by spinal cord transection below T7, indicating a need for intact thoracolumbar spinal pathways.
Nutrient-evoked small intestinal reflexes The ileal and jejunal brakes are the inhibitors of proximal motor activity in response to nutrient stimulation of the ileum and jejunum that protect the distal intestine from being overwhelmed by massive caloric loads. Ileal glucose or lipid perfusion more potently inhibits gastric and proximal intestinal motor activity than duodenal perfusion [284]. Similarly, ileal short-chain fatty acid perfusion reduces antral contractions and reduces transpyloric flow [285]. Lipids are most effective at activating the ileal brake; ileal oleate is 20fold more potent than glucose at inhibiting gastric emptying [286]. Lipase inhibition with tetrahydrolipstatin attenuates the inhibitory effects of triglyceride on proximal function, indicating that products of fat hydrolysis mediate lipidinduced intestinal braking (Fig. 11.9) [287]. More proximal intestinal stimulation also has inhibitory effects on gastric emptying. Duodenal peptone administration is more potent than equicaloric glucose perfusion [288].
Several neurohumoral factors participate in nutrient inhibition of proximal gut activity. Extrinsic innervation is necessary for the inhibition of duodenal and jejunal motility

A

Figure 11.9 High-resolution antro(A)pyloro(P)-duodenal(D) pressure patterns. (a) Duodenal triglyceride perfusion (Fat) elicits isolated pyloric contractions with inhibition of the antrum and duodenum. (b) The lipase inhibitor tetrahydrolipstatin (THL) prevents reflex induction of pyloric contractions. Instead, a normal fed pattern of increased contractions occurs in both the antrum and the duodenum. From Feinle et al. [287].

P D

(a)

Fat 40 s

Fat-THL (b)

90 70 50 30
10 ­10 mmHg

247

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

evoked by ileal triglycerides but not oleic acid [289]. Capsaicin abolishes the inhibitory effects of ileal lipids on gastric emptying, indicating participation of extrinsic sensory neurons [290]. Similarly, delays in gastric emptying evoked by duodenal carbohydrate and protein perfusion are associated with increased vagal afferent activity and are inhibited by capsaicin administration through the vagus nerve and the spinal cord [291]. Antagonists of 1- and 1-adrenergic, opioid, and 5-HT3 receptors blunt intestinal nutrient-induced proximal motor inhibition [292]. Inhibition of the ileal brake by the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron or the -opioid antagonist naloxone is observed only when the agent is given in the proximal intestine, suggesting that the action occurs on the efferent limb of the reflex [293]. Enterogastric reflexes are blocked by CCK antagonists in some models [291]. In dogs, the lipid-induced jejunal brake is slowed initially by the CCK1 antagonist devazepide with later acceleration by naloxone, indicating dual mediation by CCK and opioid pathways [294]. Knockout mice without CCK1 receptors exhibit a blunted ileal brake, suggesting that ileal lipids act through CCK1 receptor-dependent mechanisms [295]. Apolipoprotein A-IV, released by enterocytes in response to triglyceride absorption, stimulates duodenal vagal afferents through CCK-dependent mechanisms [296]. Similarly, chylous lymph increases discharge of CCK-responsive duodenal fibers, which elicits vagovagal inhibition of gastric motility [297]. Ileal lipids and short-chain fatty acids release peptide YY (PYY), GLP-1, and neurotensin [298]. Conversely, PYY release is not stimulated by ileal triglycerides [289]. PYY2 receptor mRNA localizes to the ileum and colon in humans [299]. Intravenous PYY prolongs the duodenal MMC cycle length and delays intestinal transit, mimicking the effects of ileal nutrients [300]. PYY immunoneutralization accelerates intestinal transit inhibited by ileal lipids, showing dependence of the ileal brake on endogenous PYY [301]. Slowing of intestinal transit by PYY is blocked by propranolol, indicating mediation of -adrenoceptor pathways [302]. Similarly, slowing of intestinal transit by PYY is abolished when ondansetron or naloxone is administered to the proximal intestine, mimicking the response to ileal lipids [303]. Inhibition of duodenal motility by ileal protein is reversed by a GLP-1 antagonist [304]. Endogenous melatonin exerts a modulatory influence to decrease the action of the ileal brake [305]. Finally, nutrient-evoked intestinal brakes may be modulated by nonnutrient stimuli. Slowing of intestinal transit by jejunal oleate is reversed by distending the ileum with a perfusion of buffer solution [306].
Reflexes activated by nonnutrient small intestinal stimulation Nonnutrient small intestinal stimuli also elicit reflex motor effects on other gastrointestinal regions. Intraduodenal application of capsaicin inhibits plasma motilin cycling with abolition of gastric MMCs [307]. Intraileal capsaicin inhibits

gastrointestinal contractions by way of NO, 5-HT3, and opiate pathways [308]. Duodenal distention reduces intragastric pressure, inhibits antral motility, and induces pyloric contractions. Capsaicin-sensitive vagal afferents mediate the inhibitory response to low volumes, whereas spinal afferents mediate responses to high-volume distention of the duodenum [309]. Duodenal transection prevents duodenal distention-evoked pyloric contractile responses, reflecting the importance of intrinsic pathways. Conversely, duodenal transection does not block the inhibition of antral contractions or the delay in gastric emptying induced by duodenal distention, showing the involvement of pathways other than ascending intraduodenal nerves. The exposure of 15 cm of duodenum to hydrochloric acid inhibits gastric emptying, whereas lactic acid has no effect [310].
Colocolonic reflexes Colonic stimulation evokes reflex responses within the colon. Inflation of a distal colonic balloon inhibits contractions in a proximal colonic loop by 2-adrenergic receptormediated pathways [311]. In humans, rectal distention reduces proximal colonic tone and propagating contractions, whereas rectal perfusion of chenodeoxycholic acid promotes such propagating sequences [312,313]. Distention of the rectosigmoid junction elicits increased rectal pressure and IAS relaxation, with resultant expulsion of a rectal balloon. Conversely, distention of the sigmoid colon increases pressure in the rectosigmoid junction by activating the mucosal receptors, which may promote fecal continence and retention [314]. Both inhibitory rectocolonic and excitatory colorectal reflexes are blunted by neurotensin [315]. Colonic perfusion of short-chain fatty acids accelerates colonic transit by stimulating serotonin release from enterochromaffin cells [316]. Increases in colonic smooth muscle contraction with short-chain fatty acid exposure are mediated by the activation of calcium influx [317].
Rectoanal inhibitory reflex Rectal distention or electrical stimulation produces a volume-dependent decrease in IAS pressure, a response termed the rectoanal inhibitory reflex. In contrast, EAS pressure increases on rectal distention. The rectoanal inhibitory reflex permits efficient defecation on rectal filling, whereas reflex EAS contraction prevents accidental leakage of rectal contents. The reflex also participates in anal canal sampling to discriminate between solids, liquids, and gas. Intrinsic neural pathways between the rectum and the IAS mediate the rectoanal inhibitory reflex, although a role for spinal pathways has been proposed. The reflex is abolished by rectal transection at the anal verge, but it can regenerate within 2 years of surgery in humans [318]. IAS relaxation in response to rectal stimulation is a consequence of VIP and NO release [319]. In neuronal NO synthase-deficient mice, the reflex is absent, indicating the importance of nitrergic innervation [320]. The

248

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

rectoanal inhibitory reflex is diminished in mutant mice lacking ICCs [321].
Other small intestinal and colonic reflexes Stimulation of the small intestine and colon elicits additional reflex responses in other regions of the gastrointestinal tract. Fluid distention of the duodenum increases sphincter of Oddi motor activity, a reflex that may prevent duodenobiliary and duodenopancreatic reflux [322]. Ileal distention elicits colonic relaxation by way of the splanchnic nerves and prevertebral ganglia [323]. Colonic distention retards intestinal transit, reduces ileal motility, and disrupts intestinal slow wave cycling by way of the extrinsic sympathetic pathways within the splanchnic nerves. Colonic perfusion of mixed nutrients inhibits duodenal fasting activity, whereas colonic distention prolongs MMC cycling by activating nicotinic ganglionic receptors [324]. Topical anesthesia of the rectum prevents the inhibition of small intestinal contractions by rectal distention, indicating the participation of mucosal receptors [325]. Colonic perfusion of lactose and short-chain fatty acids reduces gastric tone, indicative of a colonic brake [326]. Colonic perfusion of short-chain fatty acids releases PYY; however, the role of this peptide in the colonic brake is unproved [327].
Small intestinal and colonic motor functions are reflexively modulated by stimulation of other structures. In dogs, gastric distention abolishes fasting duodenojejunal motor activity and delays intestinal transit ­ a reflex unaffected by vagotomy but reduced by celiac plexus sectioning or small intestinal denervation [328]. Other investigations report mediation of this reflex by NO release in the celiac plexus [329]. Distention of the vagina promotes rectal relaxation and increased IAS tone, a reflex purported to prevent fecal leakage during coitus [330]. Urine passage through the urethra increases EAS activity, preventing inadvertent defecation while urinating [331].
External influences on motor activity
Motor function during sleep Small intestinal and colonic motor patterns exhibit subtle differences during wakefulness and sleep. MMCs migrate faster during the day but exhibit higher contractile amplitudes at night. MMC periodicity and phase II duration are shorter during sleep, whereas phase I duration is prolonged [332]. Prolonged manometric recordings show no correlation of the sleep stage with MMC cycling nor any synchrony of rapid eye movement sleep with intestinal phase III [333]. In contrast to fasting activity, fed small intestinal patterns in humans who fall asleep soon after eating are not different from complexes recorded while awake [334]. Propagating contractions in the colon are infrequent during sleep but increase after awakening. Awakening evokes a threefold increase in colonic motil-

ity, including high-amplitude events in isolated segments as well as propagated complexes over extended distances in the colon (see Fig. 11.7) [251,335]. Nocturnal suppression of colonic motility correlates with the depth of sleep. Propagated contractions are absent during slow wave sleep, but contraction frequencies increase during rapid eye movement sleep [336].
Central nervous system modulation CNS modulation of small intestinal and colonic function is evidenced by studies of the effects of stress on motor activity. Phases II and III of the MMC and the DCCs are suppressed by acoustic and mental stress, whereas the fed pattern is prolonged by acoustic stress [337]. Stress-induced effects on small intestinal motility are usually associated with delayed transit. In contrast, abrupt noxious night-time awakening has no effect on MMC cycling, suggesting possible diurnal variability in gut sensitivity to stress. Stressful interviews elicit increased rectal motor activity in healthy humans. Similarly, in rats, conditioned fear increases colonic spike bursts. Different forms of stress elicit distinct effects on colonic motility, with psychological stress inducing propagated contractions and physical stress evoking simultaneous contractions [338]. In rats, tail shock suppresses proximal colonic motility but increases fecal output from the distal colon [339]. The delay in intestinal transit evoked by cold stress is attenuated by -adrenergic receptor blockade [340]. In rats, the effects of restraint stress on small intestinal motility are reversed by 3-adrenergic receptor antagonists [341].
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is the physiological mediator of many stress effects on the small intestine and colon. Stress is associated with intracerebral CRF release. The effects of cold stress on intestinal transit in mice are mimicked by intracerebroventricular (ICV) administration of CRF [342]. In rats, modulation of intestinal transit by ICV CRF and the CRF-related peptide urocortin is prevented by vagotomy and naloxone administration [343]. MMC suppression by ICV CRF in dogs is associated with suppression of motilin cycling [344]. ICV CRF, ICV urocortin, and stress increase colonic activity in rats by acting on the locus caeruleus and the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus [345]. CRF antagonists reverse the effects of stress, supporting a physiological role for this peptide (Fig. 11.10). Neither urocortin antisera nor CRF antagonists affect small intestinal motility in the absence of stress, indicating that endogenous urocortin and CRF do not modulate basal motor activity [343]. Stimulatory effects of CRF on motor activity are mediated by activation of CRF1 receptors, whereas inhibition of motor function relies on stimulation of CRF2 receptor pathways [346,347].
CRF mediation of stress effects on the gut involves the participation of other neuroactive agents. The increase in colonic transit elicited by NPY infusion into the paraventricular nucleus is blocked by CRF antagonist administration [348]. Ghrelin stimulates colonic propulsion through actions

249

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

10 No stress

Water avoidance stress

9

8* 7

Fecal pellet output (Nb/h)

6

5 4#

3

2

1
0 0

20

0 20

NBI 35965 (mg/kg, sc)
Figure 11.10 Fecal pellet output during periods of no stress (open bars) and water avoidance stress (filled bars). Water avoidance stress significantly increased fecal output. Subcutaneous (sc) administration of the corticotropin-releasing factor antagonist NBI 35965 blunted the increase in output during stressful stimulation. From Million et al. [346].

in the paraventricular nucleus controlled by NPY1 and CRF1 receptor-dependent mechanisms [349,350]. Kainate injec-
tion into the arcuate nucleus stimulates colonic motility,
an effect blocked by the injection of CRF antagonists into
the paraventricular nucleus [351]. Vasopressin may be an
intermediate transmitter as vasopressin antagonists block the
effects of stress and ICV CRF on colonic motility in rats [352].
CRF-stimulated defecation in rats may be mediated by sero-
tonin release, with action on 5-HT3 receptors [353]. The ability of CRF antagonists to block the increase in colonic contractions evoked by IL-1 suggests that central CRF mediates the motor effects of cytokine release in inflammatory
states [354].
The effects of peripheral administration of CRF differ from
those achieved by central administration. Both CRF1 and CRF2 receptors are expressed in rat small intestine and colon, whereas the CRF2 receptor ligand urocortin-3 is detected in the human colonic myenteric and submucosal plexuses
[355,356]. CRF elicits calcium currents in myenteric neurons
through the activation of CRF1 receptors [357]. In rats, peripheral CRF1 receptor activation elicits duodenal contractions, whereas CRF2 receptor stimulation inhibits ileal motility [358]. Intraperitoneal CRF acting on CRF1 receptors elicits spike bursts in rat colon by stimulating myenteric cholinergic
neurons [359,360]. However, peripheral effects of CRF may
be mediated by the activation of afferent pathways projecting
to several brain nuclei (amygdala, area postrema, nucleus

tractus solitarius, locus caeruleus, and hypothalamus), which then activate the efferent pathways to the viscera [361]. In rats, subcutaneous administration of CRF elicits colonic contractions by way of vagal cholinergic pathways and activation of CRF receptors in the brain [362].
CNS transmitters other than CRF may function independently to regulate small intestinal and colonic motility. The inhibition of NO synthase in the brain suppresses duodenal phase III in dogs through vagal pathways [363]. NO synthase inhibitors suppress colonic activity when given centrally, but increase colonic contractions when given peripherally. Destruction of hypothalamic and locus caeruleus adrenergic pathways with 6-hydroxydopamine prolongs the MMC cycle [364]. ICV CCK increases whereas ICV somatostatin decreases MMC cycle duration. CCK infusion into the paraventricular nucleus slows colonic transit by acting on CCK2 receptors [365]. ICV calcitonin, CGRP, neurotensin, and opioids evoke intestinal phase III activity. ICV neurotensin delays MMC disruption by a meal, whereas ICV atropine or substance P shortens the duration of the fed state [366]. ICV galanin restores MMC cycling during the fed state by way of opioid pathways [367]. Injection of a GABA antagonist into the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus increases jejunal contractions in rats [368]. ICV GLP-1 increases fecal output, whereas orphanin FQ retards colonic transit [369]. ICV thyrotropin-releasing hormone accelerates intestinal transit and evokes colonic contractions in rats by way of cholinergic and serotonergic pathways [370]. ICV ghrelin induces fasting duodenal motor activity in fed rats, an effect blocked by ICV injection of growth hormone secretagogue receptor and by NPY immunoneutralization in the brain [371]. ICV injections of 2-adrenoceptor agonists, morphine, and [Leu]enkephalin blunt the increase in EAS activity elicited by pudendal nerve stimulation [372].
Immune and inflammatory modulation Activation of the immune system elicits profound changes in the motor activity of the small intestine and colon, as evidenced in several animal models. In rats that are antigen sensitized by intraperitoneal egg albumin injection, subsequent oral albumin evokes diarrhea associated with MMC disruption and induction of propagating clustered contractions, whereas colonic antigen challenge increases colonic myoelectric activity [373]. In animal models of postoperative ileus, intestinal manipulation leads to acute disruption of ICC networks, altered slow wave rhythmicity, suppressed jejunal contractions, and delayed transit (Fig. 11.11) [374]. In a rat model of peritonitis and sepsis induced by cecal puncture, intestinal transit is delayed and in vivo jejunal muscle contractility is impaired [375]. Ileal muscle strips from these animals exhibit reduced contractile responses to potassium, substance P, and cholinergic stimulation. Responses to specific organisms have been characterized. In rats, Yersinia enterocolitica and E. coli alter MMC cycling by free-radical

250

Figure 11.11 Transit histograms for control animals (light bars) and animals undergoing colonic manipulation (CM) to induce postoperative ileus (dark bars). Colonic manipulation led to marker accumulation in the stomach and proximal small intestine, whereas markers passed to the distal small intestine and cecum in the control animals. From Turler et al. [398].

Fluorescein-labeled dextran (%)

40 CM
35 Control 30 25 20 15 10
5 0

Col 3 Col 2 Col 1 Cecum SB 10 SB 9
SB 8
SB 7
SB 6
SB 5
SB 4
SB 3
SB 2
SB 1 Stomach

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11
Gastrointestinal segments

generation [376]. In germ-free rats, Clostridium tabificum vp 4 promotes intestinal spike burst activity [377]. C. tabificum vp 4, Lactobacillus acidophilus A10, and Bifidobacterium bifidum B11 reduce MMC periodicity and accelerate small intestinal transit, whereas Micrococcus luteus increases MMC duration [377]. The heat-labile enterotoxin of E. coli prolongs phase II, increases the MMC period, and accelerates phase III propagation in pigs [378]. In vitro, E. coli endotoxin modifies peristalsis and blunts the inhibitory effects of adrenergic receptors on motor function in the guinea pig small intestine [379]. Similarly, lipopolysaccharide reduces spontaneous and acetylcholine-evoked contractions in isolated rabbit small intestine. In pigs, endotoxin accelerates jejunal MMC migration and shortens MMC duration [380]. In rats given Serratia marcescens endotoxin, ileal responses are suppressed [381]. Rats infected with Hymenolepis diminuta exhibit an increase in fasting intestinal myoelectric activity and the generation of spike potential bursts, responses mediated by the myenteric plexus [382]. Gastrointestinal transit is slowed and ileal smooth muscle is thickened in mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni [383]. Nippostrongylus brasiliensis enhances jejunal motor responses to carbamylcholine and neurokinin A [384]. Increased responses to CCK after infection with this organism are blocked by vagotomy [385]. With peak inflammation at day 14 of infection with N. brasiliensis, there is a loss of NK1 receptors in myenteric neurons and in substance P-immunoreactive nerve endings [386]. By day 30 of infection there is loss of deep muscular plexus ICCs.
Significant insight into immune modulation of gut function has been provided by study of the nematode Trichinella spiralis. This organism induces GMCs in the small intestine, inhibits myenteric nerve activity, decreases neuron mem-

brane potential, and reduces acetylcholine and norepinephrine (noradrenaline) release, with peak effects 6 days after infection [387]. T. spiralis reduces intestinal substance P levels by 73% and VIP levels by 59% and inhibits NO synthase gene transcription, protein expression, and enzyme activity [388]. Damage to ICCs with slow wave destabilization, impaired distention-evoked peristalsis, and the loss of contact between ICCs and smooth muscle are observed [389,390]. Jejunal muscle from rats infected with T. spiralis exhibits increased responses to muscarinic agonists, CCK, and serotonin [391]. Nerve and smooth muscle effects of T. spiralis persist after resolution of acute infection [392]. In mice previously infected, frequencies and propagation velocities of intestinal contractions decrease and retroperistaltic contractions increase more than 40 days after eradication of infection [393].
A hallmark of all of these animal models is the recruitment of inflammatory cell infiltrates that contribute to gut motor impairment. Intestines from egg albumin-sensitized rats exhibit increased numbers of mast cells and increased levels of mast cell protease [394]. Mast cell stabilizers and degranulation inhibitors blunt antigen-induced motor responses and diarrhea, and granulated mast cells are reduced at sites of antigen challenge [395]. In rat colon longitudinal muscle, antigen-induced contraction results from immunoglobulin E-mediated mast cell activation, which then evokes release of contractile stimulants [396]. Similarly, the motor effects caused by infection with N. brasiliensis are prevented by mast cell degranulation inhibitors and mast cell stabilizers [384]. In animal models of postoperative ileus, intestinal and colonic manipulation increases intestinal permeability and promotes extravasation of leukocytes and macrophages into

251

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

0.25 Mean + SEM
0.2

*** **

0.15 *

Myeloperoxidase activity (Units/mg wet tissue)

0.1

0.05
13 0
Uninfected

12 12 36
Days postinfection with T. spiralis

14 10

Figure 11.12 Myeloperoxidase activity, a reflection of inflammation intensity, before and after infection with Trichinella spiralis in rat. Infection elicited a marked increase in myeloperoxidase activity, which peaked 6 days after infection and persisted for at least 10 days. From Palmer et al. [387].

the intestinal smooth muscle layers [397,398]. Similarly, experimental peritonitis induces prominent mononuclear smooth muscle infiltrates, whereas T. spiralis causes transient inflammatory cell infiltration into the longitudinal muscle (Fig. 11.12) [387,389]. The inhibition of myenteric nerve activity that accompanies infection with T. spiralis is preserved in athymic rats, suggesting the involvement of T-cell independent pathways [399]. Conversely, athymic animals do not exhibit increased contractions to muscarinic agonists and serotonin, indicating T-cell dependent responses as well. Furthermore, reconstitution of CD4 T cells to mice that are athymic, or deficient in CD4 cells, or major histocompatibility complex II deficient reverses the enhanced muscle contractility [400].
Many of the motor effects of experimental inflammation are postulated to result from release of proinflammatory cytokines and other mediators. Models of postoperative ileus are associated with up-regulation of IL-6 mRNA, tumor necrosis factor- (TNF-), COX-2, and NO synthase, as well as activation of signal transducer and activation of transcription (STAT) proteins in the smooth muscle layers, responses that are blunted by dexamethasone or by a protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor [398,401,402]. Human gut smooth muscle tissues harvested at various times after laparotomy demonstrate time-dependent increases in IL-6, IL-1, TNF-, NO synthase, and COX-2, which are localized to macrophages [403]. Experimental peritonitis is associated with increases in IL-6, IL-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and inducible NO synthase. Mononuclear cells may be recruited by monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, a chemokine secreted by macrophages [404]. In a model of hemorrhagic shock, increases in intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), IL-6, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor con-

tribute to neutrophil recruitment with subsequent tissue injury [405]. ICAM-1 antisense oligonucleotides prevent postoperative ileus in mice and reduce manipulationinduced inflammation [406]. In other models, COX-2 predominates over COX-1 in maintaining inhibition of colonic neuromuscular function [407]. The effects of endotoxin on intestinal motility are reversed by polyethylene glycol­ superoxide dismutase, indicating a role for oxidative stress in the development of septic ileus [408]. TNF- plays a crucial role in impairing motor activity in other models. In contrast to wild-type animals, knockout mice lacking TNF- do not show suppressed colonic contractile responses to motor stimulants in animals with experimental colitis induced by intracolonic administration of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulphonic acid [409]. Cytokine responses evoked by infection with T. spiralis are affected by CD40­CD40 ligand interactions with the T helper cell response [410]. Acute T. spiralis infection increases levels of IL-4, IL-13, transforming growth factor-1 (TGF-1), and COX-2 in muscle tissue [411]. The effects of this organism on nerves are blocked by an IL-1 antagonist, whereas increases in muscle contractility are blunted in IL-5deficient mice [412]. IL-4 and IL-13 induce smooth muscle hypercontractility through activation of STAT-6 [413]. Many cytokine responses observed on infection with T. spiralis (i.e., increased levels of TGF-1, COX-2, prostaglandin E2) are reversed by administration of probiotics containing L. paracasei, indicating modulation of the immune response by changes in the enteric microbiota [414].
Interactions between cytokines and neurohumoral pathways underlie many of the modulatory effects of the immune system on motor function in the small intestine and colon. Capsaicin prevents egg albumin antigen effects in the small intestine, reflecting the participation of afferent pathways

252

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

[415]. Antigen-induced motor responses in the colon are prevented by the serotonin antagonists methysergide and cinanserin and the prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor indomethacin (indometacin) [416]. In sensitized rats, egg albumin MMC disruption is associated with increased c-Fos expression in the nucleus tractus solitarius and lateral parabrachial and paraventricular hypothalamic nuclei by way of vagal afferent pathways [417]. Inflammatory changes in experimental postoperative ileus occur in association with increased Fos expression in the spinal cord, suggesting activation of primary afferent pathways [418]. Neurotransmitter defects in ileus are prominent. 2-Adrenergic receptor activation aggravates postoperative ileus in rats by enhancing NO synthase induction, thereby increasing NO release [419]. Mice deficient in inducible NO synthase have nearly normal intestinal transit and in vitro smooth muscle contractility after intestinal manipulation, supporting a role for NO pathways in ileus [420]. Similarly, in hemorrhagic shock and with bacterial infection or infection with T. spiralis, inhibition of inducible NO synthase reduces cytokine production, limits inflammatory cell infiltration, normalizes intestinal transit, and restores muscle contractility [405,421,422]. In a model of ileus induced by intraperitoneal acetic acid, endocannabinoid CB1 receptors are overexpressed; acetic acid-induced ileus is reversed by CB1 antagonists [423]. Carbon monoxide, a purported gaseous transmitter, prevents postoperative ileus by modulating cytokine levels within the inflammatory cascade [424,425]. The motor effects evoked by infection with S. marcescens are reversed by lipoxygenase inhibition, indicating mediation by peptidoleukotrienes. In rats, lipopolysaccharide-induced acceleration of intestinal transit is blocked by CB2 antagonists [426]. Lipopolysaccharide-evoked disruption of small intestinal motor function is also partially blocked by an antagonist to adrenomedullin [427]. In previously infected rats, subsequent exposure to T. spiralis larvae evokes muscle contraction, which can be blocked by a serotonin antagonist and the mast cell stabilizer doxantrazole [428]. Motor responses to T. spiralis are prevented by treatment with an antibody to nerve growth factor, although the inflammatory infiltrate is unaffected by this therapy [429].
References
1. Shafik A, El Sibai O, Shafik AA, Shafik IA. Demonstration of a physiologic sphincter at the duodeno-jejunal junction. Front Biosci 2006;11:2790.
2. Shafik A, Mostafa RM, Shafik AA, Ahmed I. Study of the functional activity of the cecocolonic junction with identification of a "physiologic sphincter", a "cecocolonic inhibitory reflex" and "colocecal excitatory reflex". Surg Radiol Anat 2003;25:16.
3. Shafik A, Shafik AA, El Sibai O, Ahmed I. Colosigmoid junction: a study of its functional activity with identification of a physiologic sphincter and involvement in reflex actions. J Invest Surg 2003; 16:29.

4. Argenyi EE, Soffer EE, Madsen MT, et al. Scintigraphic evaluation of small bowel transit in healthy subjects: inter- and intrasubject variability. Am J Gastroenterol 1995;90:938.
5. Sadik R, Abrahamsson H, Stotzer PO. Gender differences in gut transit shown with a newly developed radiological procedure. Scand J Gastroenterol 2003;38:36.
6. Graff J, Brinch K, Madsen JL. Gastrointestinal mean transit times in young and middle-aged healthy subjects. Clin Physiol 2001;21:253.
7. Imam H, Sanmiguel C, Larive B, et al. Study of intestinal flow by combined videofluoroscopy, manometry, and multiple intraluminal impedance. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004; 286:G263.
8. Lundqvist H, Jung B, Gustavsson S, et al. Analyses of small bowel propulsion, ileo-caecal passage and serum gastrin after truncal vagotomy. A methodological study in the rat with continuous intraduodenal infusion. Acta Chir Scand 1975;141:298.
9. Malagelada JR, Robertson JS, Brown ML, et al. Intestinal transit of solid and liquid components of a meal in health. Gastroenterology 1984;87:1255.
10. Cordova-Fraga T, Huerta-Franco R, Gutierrez-Juarez G, et al. The colon transit time in different phases of the menstrual cycle: assessed with biomagnetic technique. Neurol Clin Neurophysiol 2004;2004:31.
11. Marteau P, Cuillerier E, Meance S, et al. Bifidobacterium animalis strain DN-173 010 shortens the colonic transit time in healthy women: a double-blind, randomized, controlled study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2002;16:587.
12. Lubowski DZ, Meagher AP, Smart RC, Butler SP. Scintigraphic assessment of colonic function during defaecation. Int J Colorectal Dis 1995;10:91.
13. Gonlachanvit S, Coleski R, Owyang C, Hasler WL. Inhibitory actions of a high fiber diet on intestinal gas transit in healthy humans. Gut 2004;53:1577.
14. Gonlachanvit S, Coleski R, Owyang C, Hasler WL. Nutrient modulation of intestinal gas dynamics in healthy humans: dependence on caloric content and meal consistency. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;291:G389.
15. Hernando-Harder AC, Serra J, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Sites of symptomatic gas retention during intestinal lipid perfusion in healthy subjects. Gut 2004;53:661.
16. Dianese R, Serra J, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Influence of body posture on intestinal transit of gas. Gut 2003;52:971.
17. Dianese R, Serra J, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Effects of physical activity on intestinal gas transit and evacuation in healthy subjects. Am J Med 2004;116:536.
18. Sarna SK. Myoelectric correlates of colonic motor complexes and contractile activity. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G213.
19. Rae MG, Fleming N, McGregor DB, et al. Control of motility patterns in the human colonic circular muscle layer by pacemaker activity. J Physiol 1998;510:309.
20. Smith TK, Reed JB, Sanders KM. Interaction of two electrical pacemakers in muscularis of canine proximal colon. Am J Physiol 1987;252:C290.
21. Huizinga JD, Chang NE, Diamant NE, El-Sharkawy TY. Electrophysiological basis of excitation of canine colonic circular muscle by cholinergic agents and substance P. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1984;231:692.
22. Turnbull GK, Hamdy S, Aziz Q, et al. The cortical topography of human anorectal musculature. Gastroenterology 1999;117:32.
23. Hens J, Gajda M, Scheuermann DW, et al. The longitudinal smooth muscle layer of the pig small intestine is innervated by both myenteric and submucous neurons. Histochem Cell Biol 2002;117:481.
24. Harrington AM, Hutson JM, Southwell BR. Immunohistochemical localization of substance P NK1 receptor in guinea pig distal colon. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:727.
25. Iino S, Nojyo Y. Muscarinic M2 acetylcholine receptor distribution in the guinea-pig gastrointestinal tract. Neuroscience 2006; 138:549.

253

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

26. Boutaghou-Cherid H, Porcher C, Liberge M, et al. Expression of the neurokinin 1 type receptor in the human colon. Auton Neurosci 2006;124:9.
27. Schmidt PT, Hoist JJ. Tachykinin NK1 receptors mediate atropineresistant net aboral propulsive complexes in porcine ileum. Scand J Gastroenterol 2002;37:531.
28. Boeckxstaens GE, Pelckmans PA, Bult H, et al. Evidence for nitric oxide as mediator of non-adrenergic non-cholinergic relaxations induced by ATP and GABA in the canine gut. Br J Pharmacol 1991;102:434.
29. Xu X, Chen JD. Inhibitory effects of sildenafil on small intestinal motility and myoelectrical activity in dogs. Dig Dis Sci 2006;51:671.
30. El-Yazbi AF, Cho WF, Boddy G, Daniel EE. Caveolin-1 gene knockout impairs nitrergic function in mouse small intestine. Br J Pharmacol 2005;145:1017.
31. Lim I, Gibbons SJ, Lyford GL, et al. Carbon monoxide activates human intestinal smooth muscle L-type Ca2+ channels through a nitric oxide-dependent mechanism. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G7.
32. Grider JR, Makhlouf GM. Prejunctional inhibition of vasoactive intestinal peptide release. Am J Physiol 1987;253:G7.
33. Furness JB, Pompolo S, Shuttleworth CW, Burleigh DE. Light- and electron-microscopic immunochemical analysis of nerve fibre types innervating the taenia of the guinea-pig caecum. Cell Tissue Res 1992;270:125.
34. Krantis A, Mattar K, Glasgow I. Rat gastroduodenal motility in vivo: interaction of GABA and VIP in control of spontaneous relaxations. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G897.
35. Matsuda NM, Miller SM, Sha L, et al. Mediators of non-adrenergic non-cholinergic inhibitory neurotransmission in porcine jejunum. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:605.
36. Mianpamba M, Germano PM, Arli S, et al. Expression of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide and PACAP type 1 receptor in the rat gastric and colonic myenteric neurons. Regul Pep 2002;105:145.
37. Belai A, Burnstock G. Evidence for coexistence of ATP and nitric oxide in non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic (NANC) inhibitory neurones in the rat ileum, colon and anococcygeus muscle. Cell Tissue Res 1994;278:197.
38. Lecci A, DeGiorgio R, Bartho L, et al. Tachykinin NK1 receptormediated inhibitory responses in the guinea-pig small intestine. Neuropeptides 1999;33:91.
39. Mang CF, Truempler S, Erbelding D, Kilbinger H. Modulation by NO of acetylcholine release in the ileum of wild-type and NOS gene knockout mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G1132.
40. Liu M, Geddis MS, Wen Y, et al. Expression and function of 5-HT4 receptors in the mouse enteric nervous system. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G1148.
41. Tack J, Broekaert D, Corsetti M, et al. Influence of acute serotonin reuptake inhibition on colonic sensorimotor function in man. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;23:265.
42. Coates MD, Johnson AC, Greenwood-Van Meerveld B, Mawe GM. Effects of serotonin transporter inhibition on gastrointestinal motility and colonic sensitivity in the mouse. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2006;18:464.
43. Porcher C, Jule Y, Henry M. A qualitative and quantitative study on the enkephalinergic innervation of the pig gastrointestinal tract. J Histochem Cytochem 2000;48:333.
44. O'Donnell AM, Ellis LM, Riedl MS, et al. Distribution and chemical coding of orphanin FQ/nociceptin-immunoreactive neurons in the myenteric plexus of guinea pig intestines and sphincter of Oddi. J Comp Neurol 2001;430:1.
45. Li ZS, Schmauss C, Cuenca A, et al. Physiological modulation of intestinal motility by enteric dopaminergic neurons and the D2 receptor: analysis of dopamine receptor expression, location, development, and function in wild-type and knock-out mice. J Neurosci 2006;26:2798.

46. Manara L, Croci T, Guagnini F, et al. Functional assessment of neuronal cannabinoid receptors in the muscular layers of human ileum and colon. Dig Liver Dis 2002;34:262.
47. Casu MA, Porcella A, Ruiu S, et al. Differential distribution of functional cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the mouse gastroenteric tract. Eur J Pharmacol 2003;459:97.
48. Fornai M, Blandizzi C, Colucci R, et al. Role of cyclooxygenases 1 and 2 in the modulation of neuromuscular functions in the distal colon of humans and mice. Gut 2005;54:608.
49. Berthoud HR, Carlson NR, Powley TL. Topography of efferent vagal innervation of the rat gastrointestinal tract. Am J Physiol 1991;260: R200.
50. Andersen IS, Buntzen S, Rijkhoff NJ, et al. Ano-rectal motility responses to pelvic, hypogastric and pudendal nerve stimulation in the Gottingen minipig. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2006;18:153.
51. Yuyama N, Mizuno J, Tsuzuki H, et al. Effects of extrinsic autonomic inputs on expression of c-Fos immunoreactivity in myenteric neurons of the guinea pig distal colon. Brain Res 2002;948:8.
52. Smith TK, Bornstein JC, Furness JB. Distension-evoked ascending and descending reflexes in the circular muscle of the guinea-pig ileum. J Auton Nerv Syst 1990;29:203.
53. Miller SM, Szurszewski JH. Relationship between colonic motility and cholinergic mechanosensory afferent synaptic input to mouse superior mesenteric ganglion. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:339.
54. Cuche G, Blat S, Malbert CH. Desensitization of ileal vagal receptors by short-chain fatty acids in pigs. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G1013.
55. Burns AJ, Herbert TM, Ward SM, Sanders KM. Interstitial cells of Cajal in the guinea-pig gastrointestinal tract as revealed by c-Kit immunohistochemistry. Cell Tissue Res 1997;290:11.
56. Horiguchi K, Keef KD, Ward SM. Distribution of interstitial cells of Cajal in tunica muscularis of the canine rectoanal region. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G756.
57. Shafik A, El Sibai O, Ahmed I. The identification of specialized pacemaking cells in the anal sphincters. Int J Colorect Dis 2006;21:453.
58. Wang XY, Ward SM, Gerthoffer WT, Sanders KM. PKC-epsilon translocation in enteric neurons and interstitial cells of Cajal in response to muscarinic stimulation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;285:G593.
59. Ward SM, McLaren GJ, Sanders KM. Interstitial cells of Cajal in the deep muscular plexus mediate enteric motor neurotransmission in the mouse small intestine. J Physiol 2006;573:147.
60. Huizinga JD, Thuneberg L, Kluppel M, et al. W/kit gene required for interstitial cells of Cajal and for intestinal pacemaker activity. Nature 1995;373:347.
61. Mazzia C, Porcher C, Jule Y, et al. Ultrastructural study of relationships between c-kit immunoreactive interstitial cells and other cellular elements in the human colon. Histochem Cell Biol 2000;113:401.
62. Wang XY, Paterson C, Huizinga JD. Cholinergic and nitrergic innervation of ICC-DMP and ICC-IM in the human small intestine. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:531.
63. Epperson A, Hatton WJ, Callaghan B, et al. Molecular markers expressed in cultured and freshly isolated interstitial cells of Cajal. Am J Physiol 2000;279:C529.
64. Liu LW, Thuneberg L, Huizinga JD. Selective lesioning of interstitial cells of Cajal by methylene blue and light leads to loss of slow waves. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G485.
65. Suzuki N, Prosser CL, Dahms V. Boundary cells between longitudinal and circular layers: essential for electrical slow waves in cat intestine. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G287.
66. Der-Silaphet T, Malysz J, Hagel S, et al. Interstitial cells of cajal direct normal propulsive contractile activity in the mouse small intestine. Gastroenterology 1998;114:724.
67. Rich A, Miller SM, Gibbons SJ, et al. Local presentation of Steel factor increases expression of c-kit immunoreactive interstitial cells of Cajal in culture. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G313.

254

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

68. Ward SM, Burns AJ, Torihashi S, et al. Impaired development of interstitial cells and intestinal electrical rhythmicity in steel mutants. Am J Physiol 1995;269:C1577.
69. Torihashi S, Nishi K, Tokutomi Y, et al. Blockade of kit signaling induces transdifferentiation of interstitial cells of Cajal to a smooth muscle phenotype. Gastroenterology 1999;117:140.
70. Lee JC, Thuneberg L, Berezin I, Huizinga JD. Generation of slow waves in membrane potential is an intrinsic property of interstitial cells of Cajal. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G409.
71. Barajas-Lopez C, Berezin I, Daniel EE, Huizinga JD. Pacemaker activity recorded in interstitial cells of Cajal of the gastrointestinal tract. Am J Physiol 1989;257:C830.
72. Yoneda S, Fukui H, Takaki M. Pacemaker activity from submucosal interstitial cells of Cajal drives high-frequency and low-amplitude circular muscle contractions in the mouse proximal colon. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:621.
73. Alberti E, Mikkelsen HB, Larsen JO, Jimenez M. Motility patterns and distribution of interstitial cells of Cajal and nitrergic neurons in the proximal, mid- and distal-colon of the rat. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:133.
74. Keef KD, Anderson U, O'Driscoll K, et al. Electrical activity induced by nitric oxide in canine colonic circular muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G123.
75. Spencer NJ, Hennig GW, Smith TK. Electrical rhythmicity and spread of action potentials in longitudinal muscle of guinea pig distal colon. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282: G904.
76. Kim YC, Koh SD, Sanders KM. Voltage-dependent inward currents of interstitial cells of Cajal from murine colon and small intestine. J Physiol 2002;541:797.
77. Malysz J, Donnelly G, Huizinga JD. Regulation of slow wave frequency by IP3-sensitive calcium release in the murine small intestine. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G439.
78. Cho WJ, Daniel EE. Proteins of interstitial cells of Cajal and intestinal smooth muscle, colocalized with caveolin-1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G571.
79. Daniel EE, Bodie G, Mannarino M, et al. Changes in membrane cholesterol affect caveolin-1 localization and ICC-pacing in mouse jejunum. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G202.
80. Torihashi S, Fujimoto T, Trost C, Nakayama S. Calcium oscillation linked to pacemaking of interstitial cells of Cajal: requirement of calcium influx and localization of TRP4 in caveolae. J Biol Chem 2002;277:19191.
81. Kim BJ, Lim HH, Yang DK, et al. Melastatin-type transient receptor potential channel 7 is required for intestinal pacemaking activity. Gastroenterology 2005;129:1504.
82. Kito Y, Suzuki H. Properties of pacemaker potentials recorded from myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal distributed in the mouse small intestine. J Physiol 2003;553:803.
83. Koh SD, Jun JY, Kim TW, Sanders KM. A Ca2+-inhibited nonselective cation conductance contributes to pacemaker currents in mouse interstitial cells of Cajal. J Physiol 2002;540:803.
84. Zhu Y, Golden CM, Ye J, et al. ERG K+ currents regulate pacemaker activity in ICC. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;285: G1249.
85. McKay CM, Ye J, Huizinga JD. Characterization of depolarizationevoked ERG K currents in interstitial cells of Cajal. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2006;18:324.
86. Huizinga JD, Zhu Y, Ye J, Molleman A. High-conductance chloride channels generate pacemaker currents in interstitial cells of Cajal. Gastroenterology 2002;123:1627.
87. Zhu Y, Mucci A, Huizinga JD. Inwardly rectifying chloride channel activity in intestinal pacemaker cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G809.
88. Wouters M, De Laet A, Donck LV, et al. Subtractive hybridization unravels a role for the ion cotransporter NKCC1 in the murine intestinal pacemaker. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G1219.

89. Fujita A, Takeuchi T, Jun H, Hata F. Localization of Ca2+-activated K+ channel, SK3, in fibroblast-like cells forming gap junctions with smooth muscle cells in the mouse small intestine. J Pharmacol Sci 2003;92:35.
90. Connor JA, Mangel AW, Nelson B. Propagation and entrainment of slow waves in cat small intestine. Am J Physiol 1979;237:C237.
91. Belzer V, Kobilo T, Rich A, Hanani M. Intercellular coupling among interstitial cells of Cajal in the guinea pig small intestine. Cell Tissue Res 2002;307:15.
92. Yamazawa T, Iino M. Simultaneous imaging of Ca2+ signals in interstitial cells of Cajal and longitudinal smooth muscle cells during rhythmic activity in mouse ileum. J Physiol 2002;538:823.
93. Takeda Y, Ward SM, Sanders KM, Koh SD. Effects of the gap junction blocker glycyrrhetinic acid on gastrointestinal smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G832.
94. Park KJ, Hennig GW, Lee HT, et al. Spatial and temporal mapping of pacemaker activity in interstitial cells of Cajal in mouse ileum in situ. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2006;290:C1411.
95. Ward SM, Baker SA, De Faoite A, Sanders KM. Propagation of slow waves requires IP3 receptors and mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake in canine colonic muscles. J Physiol 2003;549:207.
96. Stevens RJ, Publicover NG, Smith TK. Induction and organization of Ca2+ waves by enteric neural reflexes. Nature 1999;399:62.
97. Daniel EE, Boddy G, Bong A, Cho W. A new model of pacing in the mouse intestine. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G253.
98. Schultz T, Daniel V, Daniel EE. Does ICC pacing require functional gap junctions between ICC and smooth muscle in mouse intestine? Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:129.
99. Diamant NE, Bortoff A. Nature of the intestinal slow-wave frequency gradient. Am J Physiol 1969;216:301.
100. Gabella G, Blundell D. Gap junctions of the muscles of the small and large intestine. Cell Tissue Res 1981;219:469.
101. Shafik A, El-Sibai O, Shafik AA. Electrophysiologic identification of the location of the colonic pacemakers. A human study. Front Biosci 2002;7:1.
102. Shafik A, Mostafa RM, Ahmed I, El-Sibai O. Role of the rectosigmoid pacemaker and electric activity in rectal motility: mechanism and clinical significance. Electromyo Clin Neurophysiol 2002;42: 377.
103. Shafik A, Mostafa RM, El-Sibai O, Shafik IA. Electromotor activity of the cecum and ascending colon:the concept of "individual pacemakers". Eur Surg Res 2004;36:308.
104. Shafik A, Shafik AA, El-Sibai O, Ahmed I. Electrophysiologic identification of the location of the colonic pacemakers in humans: further study. J Invest Surg 2003;16:289.
105. Larson M, Schulze K. Appearance of peristaltic reflex in isolated guinea pig ileum in response to boluses of air, water, oil, and cellulose. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:2644.
106. Furness JB, Kumano K, Larsson H, et al. Sensitization of enteric reflexes in the rat colon in vitro. Auton Neurosci 2002;97:19.
107. Smith TK, Oliver GR, Hennig GW, et al. A smooth muscle tonedependent stretch-activated migrating motor pattern in isolated guinea-pig distal colon. J Physiol 2003;551:955.
108. Bogeski G, Lean NP, Kitchener PD, et al. Analysis of factors that determine the compliance of rat jejunum to distension in vivo. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:417.
109. Spencer NJ, Smith CB, Smith TK. Role of muscle tone in peristalsis in guinea-pig small intestine. J Physiol 2001;530:295.
110. Ginzel KH. Investigations concerning the initiation of the peristaltic reflex in the guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol 1979;148:75P.
111. Fujita A, Okishio Y, Fujinami K, et al. Role of the interstitial cells distributed in the myenteric plexus in neural reflexes in the mouse ileum. J Pharmacol Sci 2004;96:483.
112. Nakagawa T, Misawa H, Nakajima Y, Takaki M. Absence of peristalsis in the ileum of W/Wv mutant mice that are selectively deficient in myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal. J Smooth Muscle Res 2005;41:141.

255

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

113. Okishio Y, Takeuchi T, Fujita A, et al. Ascending contraction and descending relaxation in the distal colon of mice lacking interstitial cells of Cajal. J Smooth Muscle Res 2005;41:163.
114. Grider JR. Tachykinins as transmitters of ascending contractile component of the peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G709.
115. Izzo AA, Mascolo N, Di Carlo G, Capasso F. Ascending neural pathways in the isolated guinea-pig ileum: effect of muscarinic M1, M2 and M3 cholinergic antagonists. Neuroscience 1999;91:1575.
116. Tonini M, Spelta V, De Ponti F, et al. Tachykinin-dependent and -independent components of peristalsis in the guinea pig isolated distal colon. Gastroenterology 2001;120:938.
117. Nieuwmeyer F, Ye H, Huizinga JD. Ava [L-Pro9, N-MeLeu10] substance P [7-11] (GR 73632) and Sar9, Met(O2)11 increase distention-induced peristalsis through activation of neurokinin-1 receptors on smooth muscle and interstitial cells of Cajal. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;317:439.
118. Grider JR. Interplay of VIP and nitric oxide in regulation of the descending relaxation phase of peristalsis. Am J Physiol 1993;264: G334.
119. Costall B, Naylor RJ, Tuladhar BR. 5-HT4 receptor mediated facilitation of the emptying phase of the peristaltic reflex in the guinea-pig isolated ileum. Br J Pharmacol 1993;110:1572.
120. Poole DP, Xu B, Koh SL, et al. Identification of neurons that express 5-hydroxytryptamine4 receptors in intestine. Cell Tissue Res 2006;325:413.
121. Grider JR, Kuemmerle JF, Jin JG. 5-HT released by mucosal stimuli initiates peristalsis by activating 5-HT4/5-HT1P receptors on sensory CGRP neurons. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G778.
122. Kagakura Y, Kiso T, Miyata K, et al. The effect of the selective 5-HT3 receptor agonist on ferret gut motility. Life Sci 2002;71:1313.
123. Kadowaki M, Wang XO, Shimatani H, et al. 5-HT4 receptor enhances the propulsive power of the peristaltic reflex in the rat distal colon. Auton Neurosci 2002;99:62.
124. De Schryver AM, Andriesse GI, Samsom M, et al. The effects of the specific 5-HT4 agonist, prucalopride, on colonic motility in healthy volunteers. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2002;16:603.
125. Bjornsson E, Chey WD, Ladabaum U, et al. Differential 5-HT3 mediation of human gastrocolonic response and colonic peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G498.
126. Jin JG, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Grider JR. Propulsion in guinea pig colon induced by 5-hydroxytryptamine (HT) via 5-HT4 and 5-HT3 receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;288:93.
127. Tuladhar BR, Costall B, Naylor RJ. 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptor-mediated facilitation of the emptying phase of the peristaltic reflex in the marmoset isolated ileum. Br J Pharmacol 1996;117:1679.
128. Grider JR, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Jin JG. 5-Hydroxytryptamine4 receptor agonists initiate the peristaltic reflex in human, rat, and guinea pig intestine. Gastroenterology 1998;115:370.
129. Grider JR. Desensitization of the peristaltic reflex induced by mucosal stimulation with the selective 5-HT4 agonist tegaserod. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G319.
130. Tonini M, Vicini R, Cervio E, et al. 5-HT7 receptors modulate peristalsis and accommodation in the guinea pig ileum. Gastroenterology 2005;129:1557.
131. Tuladhar BR, Ge L, Naylor RL. 5-HT7 receptors mediate the inhibitory effect of 5-HT on peristalsis in the isolated guinea-pig ileum. Br J Pharmacol 2003;138:1210.
132. Grider JR, Piland BE, Gulick MA, Qiao LY. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor augments peristalsis by augmenting 5-HT and calcitonin gene-related peptide release. Gastroenterology 2006;130:771.
133. Abdu F, Hicks GA, Hennig G, et al. Somatostatin sst2 receptors inhibit peristalsis in the rat and mouse jejunum. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G624.
134. Grider JR. Neurotransmitters mediating the intestinal peristaltic reflex in the mouse. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;307:460.
135. Herbert MK, Roth-Goldbrunner S, Holzer P, Roewer N. Clonidine and dexmedetomidine potently inhibit peristalsis in the guinea pig ileum in vitro. Anesthesiology 2002;97:1491.

136. Heinemann A, Shahbazian A, Bartho L, Holzer P. Different receptors mediating the inhibitory action of exogenous ATP and endogenously released purines on guinea-pig intestinal peristalsis. Br J Pharmacol 1999;128:313.
137. Storr M, Thammer J, Dunkel R, et al. Modulatory effect of adenosine receptors on the ascending and descending neural reflex responses of rat ileum. BMC Neurosci 2002;3:21.
138. Grider JR, Langdon LE. Physiologic role of neuropeptide Y in the regulation of the ascending phase of the peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;285:G1139.
139. Grider JR. Gastrin-releasing peptide is a modulatory neurotransmitter of the descending phase of the peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G1109.
140. Pinto L, Izzo AA, Cascio MG, et al. Endocannabinoids as physiological regulators of colonic propulsion in mice. Gastroenterology 2002;123:227.
141. Mancinelli R, Fabrizi A, Del Monaco S, et al. Inhibition of peristaltic activity by cannabinoids in the isolated distal colon of mouse. Life Sci 2001;69:101.
142. Storr M, Sattler D, Hahn A, et al. Endogenous CCK depresses contractile activity within the ascending myenteric reflex pathways of rat ileum. Neuropharmacology 2003;44:524.
143. Satoh Y, Okishio Y, Azuma YT, et al. Orexin A affects ascending contraction depending on downstream cholinergic neurons and descending relaxation through independent pathways in mouse jejunum. Neuropharmacology 2006;51:466.
144. Shahbazian A, Holzer P. Regulation of guinea pig intestinal peristalsis by endogenous endothelin acting at ETB receptors. Gastroenterology 2000;119:80.
145. Heinemann A, Pieber D, Holzer P. Inhibition by female sex steroids of peristalsis in the guinea pig small intestine. Digestion 2002; 65:213.
146. Grider JR. Interleukin-1 beta selectively increases substance P release and augments the ascending phase of the peristaltic reflex. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:607.
147. Chan SK, Rudd JA. Role of bradykinin B2 receptors in the modulation of the peristaltic reflex of the guinea pig isolated ileum. Eur J Pharmacol 2006;539:108.
148. Grider JR. CGRP as a transmitter in the sensory pathway mediating peristaltic reflex. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G1139.
149. Szurszewski JH. A migrating electric complex of the canine small intestine. Am J Physiol 1969;217:1757.
150. Gregersen H, Kraglund K, Djurhuus JC. Variations in duodenal cross-sectional area during the interdigestive migrating motility complex. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G26.
151. Bjornsson ES, Abrahamsson H. Interdigestive gastroduodenal manometry in humans. Indication of duodenal phase III as a retroperistaltic pump. Acta Physiol Scand 1995;153:221.
152. Castedal M, Abrahamsson H. High-resolution analysis of the duodenal interdigestive phase III in humans. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2001;13:473.
153. Kerlin P, Zinsmeister A, Phillips S. Relationship of motility to flow of contents in the human small intestine. Gastroenterology 1982; 82:701.
154. Stevenson GW, Collins SM, Somers S. Radiological appearance of migrating motor complex of the small intestine. Gastrointest Radiol 1988;13:215.
155. Dooley CP, Di Lorenzo C, Valenzuela JE. Variability of migrating motor complex in humans. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37:723.
156. Luiking YC, Van der Reijden AC, Van Berge Henegouwen GP, Akkermans LM. Migrating motor complex cycle duration is determined by gastric or duodenal origin of phase III. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G1246.
157. Fich A, Camilleri M, Phillips SF. Effect of age on human gastric and small bowel motility. J Clin Gastroenterol 1989;11:416.
158. Aytug N, Giral A, Imeryuz N, et al. Gender influence on jejunal migrating motor complex. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G255.

256

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

159. Galligan JJ, Furness JB, Costa M. Migration of the myoelectric complex after interruption of the myenteric plexus: intestinal transection and regeneration of enteric nerves in the guinea pig. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1135.
160. Arnold JH, Alevizatos CA, Cox SE, Richards WO. Propagation of small bowel migrating motor complex activity fronts varies with anastamosis type. J Surg Res 1991;51:506.
161. Fox DA, Bass P. Selective myenteric neuronal denervation of the rat jejunum. Differential control of the propagation of migrating myoelectric complex and basic electric rhythm. Gastroenterology 1984;87:572.
162. Spencer NJ, Sanders KM, Smith TK. Migrating motor complexes do not require electrical slow waves in the mouse small intestine. J Physiol 2003;553:881.
163. Marik F, Code CF. Control of the interdigestive myoelectric activity in dogs by the vagus nerves and pentagastrin. Gastroenterology 1975;69:387.
164. Chung SA, Diamant NE. Small intestinal motility in fasted and postprandial states: effect of transient vagosympathetic blockade. Am J Physiol 1987;252:G301.
165. Sarna S, Stoddard C, Belbeck L, McWade D. Intrinsic nervous control of migrating myoelectric complex. Am J Physiol 1981;241: G16.
166. Russo A, Fraser R, Adachi K, et al. Evidence that nitric oxide mechanisms regulate small intestinal motility in humans. Gut 1999;44:72.
167. Bortolotti M, Mari C, Lopilato C, et al. Sildenafil inhibits gastroduodenal motility. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2001;15:157.
168. Hellstrom PM, Ljung T. Nitrergic inhibition of migrating myoelectric complex in the rat is mediated by vasoactive intestinal peptide. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1996;8:299.
169. Lordal M, Wallen H, Hjemdahl P, et al. Concentration-dependent stimulation of intestinal phase III of migrating motor complex by circulating serotonin in humans. Clin Sci 1998;94:663.
170. Pineiro-Carrero VM, Clench MH, Davis RH, et al. Intestinal motility changes in rats after enteric serotonergic neuron destruction. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G232.
171. Bush TG, Spencer NJ, Watters N, et al. Effects of alosetron on spontaneous migrating motor complexes in murine small and large bowel in vitro. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001; 281:G974.
172. Calvert EL, Whorwell PJ, Houghton LA. Inter-digestive and postprandial antro-pyloro-duodenal motor activity in humans: effect of 5-hydroxytryptamine 1 receptor agonism. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:805.
173. Schmidt PT, Bozkurt A, Hellstrom PM. Tachykinin-stimulated small bowel myoelecrric pattern: sensitization by NO inhibition, reversal by neurokinin receptor blockade. Regul Pept 2002;105:15.
174. Matsumoto T, Sarna SK, Condon RE, et al. Differential sensitivities of morphine and motilin to initiate migrating motor complex in isolated intestinal segments. Regeneration of intrinsic nerves. Gastroenterology 1986;90:61.
175. Holle GE, Steinbach E. Different endogenous opioid effects on delta- and mu-receptor subtypes in antral and duodenal motility of conscious dogs. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:1027.
176. Ehrstrom M, Naslund E, Ma J, et al. Physiological regulation and NO-dependent inhibition of migrating myoelectric complex in the rat small bowel by OXA. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;285:G688.
177. Bozkurt A, Naslund E, Holst JJ, Hellstrom PM. GLP-1 and GLP-2 act in concert to inhibit fasted, but not fed, small bowel motility in the rat. Regul Pept 2002;107:129.
178. Quigley EM, Thompson JS. The motor response to intestinal resection: motor activity in the canine small intestine following distal resection. Gastroenterology 1993;105:791.
179. Heitz PU, Kasper M, Krey G, et al. Immunoelectron cytochemical localization of motilin in human duodenal enterochromaffin cells. Gastroenterology 1978;74:713.

180. Feighner SD, Tan CP, McKee KK, et al. Receptor for motilin identified in the human gastrointestinal system. Science 1999;284:2184.
181. Depoortere I, Van Assche G, Peeters TL. Distribution and subcellular localization of motilin binding sites in the rabbit brain. Brain Res 1997;777:103.
182. Lee KY, Hyoung JP, Chang TM, Chey WY. Cholinergic role on release and action of motilin. Peptides 1983;4:375.
183. Itoh Z, Takeuchi S, Aizawa I, et al. Changes in plasma motilin concentration and gastrointestinal contractile activity in conscious dogs. Am J Dig Dis 1978;23:929.
184. Itoh Z, Honda R, Hiwatashi K, et al. Motilin-induced mechanical activity in the canine alimentary tract. Scand J Gastroenterol 1976;11(Suppl 39):93.
185. Lee KY, Chang T-M, Chey WY. Effect of rabbit antimotilin serum on myoelectric activity and plasma motilin concentration in fasting dog. Am J Physiol 1983;245:G547.
186. Malfertheiner P, Sarr MG, Spencer MP, DiMagno EP. Effect of duodenectomy on interdigestive pancreatic secretion, gastrointestinal motility, and hormones in dogs. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G415.
187. Chung SA, Rotstein O, Greenberg GR, Diamant NE. Mechanisms coordinating gastric and small intestinal MMC: role of extrinsic innervation rather than motilin. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G800.
188. Poitras P, Steinbach JH, VanDeventer G, et al. Motilin-independent ectopic fronts of the interdigestive myoelectric complex in dogs. Am J Physiol 1980;239:G215.
189. Aizawa I, Itoh Z, Harris V, Unger RH. Plasma somatostatin-like immunoreactivity during the interdigestive period in the dog. J Clin Invest 1981;68:206.
190. Mochiki E, Inui A, Satoh M, et al. Motilin is a biosignal controlling cyclic release of pancreatic polypeptide via the vagus in fasted dogs. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G224.
191. Zimmerman DW, Sarr MG, Smith CD, et al. Cyclic interdigestive pancreatic exocrine secretion: is it mediated by neural or hormonal mechanisms? Gastroenterology 1992;102:1378.
192. Feurle GE, Pfeiffer A, Schmidt T, et al. Phase III of the migrating motor complex: associated with endogenous xenin plasma peaks and induced by exogenous xenin. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2001;13:237.
193. Sonoda Y, Dong M, Konomi H, et al. Role of duodenum on sphincter of Oddi motility in conscious dogs. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1693.
194. Keller J, Layer P. Circadian pancreatic enzyme pattern and relationship between secretory and motor activity in fasting humans. J Appl Physiol 2002;93:592.
195. Mellander A, Jarbur K, Hemlin M, Sjovall H. Effects of motility on epithelial transport in the human descending duodenum. Acta Physiol Scand 2001;172:69.
196. Nilsson I, Svenberg T, Hellstrom PM, et al. Pancreaticobiliary juice releases motilin during phase I of the migrating motor complex in man. Scand J Gastroenterol 1993;28:80.
197. Kajiyama Y, Irie M, Enjoji A, et al. Role of bile acids in duodenal migrating motor complexes in dogs. Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:2278.
198. Van Ooteghem NA, Van Erpecum KJ, Van Berge-Henegouwen GP. Effects of ileal bile salts on fasting small intestinal and gallbladder motility. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:527.
199. McCoy EJ, Baker RD. Effect of feeding on electrical activity of dog's small intestine. Am J Physiol 1968;214:1291.
200. Castedal M, Bjornsson E, Abrahamsson H. Postprandial peristalsis in the human duodenum. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1998;10:227.
201. Schulze-Delrieu K. The load-to-length principle in the inhibition of gastric emptying by intestinal feedback. Gastroenterology 1990; 98:1387.
202. Fich A, Phillips SF, Hanson RB, Zinsmeister AR. Rapid frequency rhythmic postprandial motility in the canine ileum. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G766.
203. Coffin B, Lemann M, Flourie B, et al. Local regulation of ileal tone in healthy humans. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G147.
204. Kumar D, Wingate D, Ruckebusch Y. Circadian variation in the propagation velocity of the migrating motor complex. Gastroenterology 1986;91:926.

257

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

205. Defilippi C. Canine small bowel motor activity in response to intraduodenal infusion of nutrient mixtures of increasing caloric load in dogs. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1482.
206. De Wever I, Eeckhout C, Vantrappen G, Hellemans J. Disruptive effect of test meals on interdigestive motor complex in dogs. Am J Physiol 1978;235:E661.
207. Soffer EE, Adrian TE. Effect of meal composition and sham feeding on duodenojejunal motility in humans. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37:1009.
208. Verkijk M, Vecht J, Gielkens HA, et al. Effects of medium-chain and long-chain triglycerides on antroduodenal motility and small bowel transit time in man. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42:1933.
209. Schonfeld J, Evans DF, Wingate DL. Effect of viscous fiber (guar) on postprandial motor activity in human small bowel. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42:1613.
210. Gielkens HA, Van den Biggelaar A, Vecht J, et al. Effect of intravenous amino acids on interdigestive antroduodenal motility and small bowel transit time. Gut 1999;44:240.
211. Pouderoux P, Veyrac M, Michel H. Sham feeding disrupts phase III of the duodenal migrating motor complex in humans. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1995;7:139.
212. Schang JC, Angel F, Lambert A, et al. Inhibition of canine duodenal interdigestive myoelectric complex by nutrient perfusion of jejunal and ileal Thiry-Vella loops. Gut 1981;22:738.
213. Johnson CP, Sarna SK, Cowles VE, et al. Effects of transection and reanastomosis on postprandial jejunal transit and contractile activity. Surgery 1995;117:531.
214. Qian LW, Peters LJ, Chen JD. Postprandial response of jejunal slow waves and mediation via cholinergic mechanism. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:1506.
215. Fraser R, Vozzo R, DiMatteo AC, et al. Endogenous nitric oxide modulates small intestinal nutrient transit and activity in healthy adult humans. Scand J Gastroenterol 2005;40:1290.
216. Wingate DL, Pearce EA, Hutton M, et al. Quantitative comparison of the effects of cholecystokinin, secretin, and pentagastrin on gastrointestinal myoelectric activity in the conscious dog. Gut 1978;19:593.
217. Rodriguez-Membrilla A, Vergara P. Endogenous CCK disrupts the MMC pattern via capsaicin-sensitive vagal afferent fibers in the rat. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G100.
218. Rodriguez-Membrilla A, Martinez V, Vergara P. Peripheral and central cholecystokinin receptors regulate postprandial intestinal motility in the rat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995;275:486.
219. Niederau C, Karaus M. Effects of CCK receptor blockade on intestinal motor activity in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G315.
220. Al-Saffar A, Rosell S. Effects of neurotensin and neurotensin analogues on the migrating myoelectrical complexes in the small intestine of rats. Acta Physiol Scand 1981;112:203.
221. Pellissier S, Eribon O, Chabert J, et al. Peripheral neurotensin participates in the modulation of pre- and postprandial intestinal motility in rats. Neuropeptides 1996;30:412.
222. Madsen JL, Dahl K. Human migrating myoelectric complex in relation to gastrointestinal transit of a meal. Gut 1990;31:1003.
223. Bueno L, Rayner V, Ruckebusch Y. Initiation of the migrating myoelectric complex in dogs. J Physiol 1981;316:309.
224. Ledeboer M, Masclee AA, Coenraad M, et al. Antroduodenal motility and small bowel transit during continuous intraduodenal or intragastric administration of enteral nutrition. Eur J Clin Invest 1999;29:615.
225. Kuiken SD, Tytgat GN, Boeckxstaens GE. Role of endogenous nitric oxide in regulating antropyloroduodenal motility in humans. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:1661.
226. Kruis W, Azpiroz F, Phillips SF. Contractile patterns and transit of fluid in canine terminal ileum. Am J Physiol 1985;249:G264.
227. Sarna SK. Giant migrating contractions and their myoelectric correlates in the small intestine. Am J Physiol 1987;253:G697.
228. Dinning PG, Bampton PA, Kennedy ML, Cook IJ. Relationship between terminal ileal pressure waves and propagating proximal colonic pressure waves. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G983.

229. Cuche G, Malbert CH. Relationships betwen cecoileal reflux and ileal motor patterns in conscious pigs. Am J Physiol 1998;274: G35.
230. Otterson MF, Sarna SK. Neural control of small intestinal giant migrating contractions. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G576.
231. Sarna SK. Neuronal locus and cellular signaling for stimulation of ileal giant migrating and phasic contractions. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G789.
232. Sarna SK. Tachykinins and in vivo gut motility. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:114S.
233. Summers RW, Anuras S, Green J. Jejunal manometry patterns in health, partial intestinal obstruction, and pseudoobstruction. Gastroenterology 1983;85:1290.
234. Sarna SK, Otterson MF. Small intestinal amyogenesia and dysmyogenesia induced by morphine and loperamide. Am J Physiol 1990;258:G282.
235. Lang IM, Sarna SK, Condon RE. Gastrointestinal motor correlates of vomiting in the dog: quantification and characterization as an independent phenomenon. Gastroenterology 1986;90:40.
236. Lang IM, Marvig J, Sarna SK, Condon RE. Gastrointestinal myoelectric correlates of vomiting in the dog. Am J Physiol 1986; 251:G830.
237. Sha S, Matsushima Y, Habu S, et al. Extrinsic nervous control of retrograde giant contraction during vomiting in conscious dogs. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41:1546.
238. Huizinga JD, Stern HS, Chow E, et al. Electrophysiologic control of motility in human colon. Gastroenterology 1985;88:500.
239. McRorie J, Greenwood-Van Meerveld B, Rudolph C. Characterization of propagating contractions in proximal colon of ambulatory mini pigs. Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:957.
240. Dapoigny M, Trolese JF, Bommelaer G, et al. Myoelectric spiking activity of right colon, left colon, and rectosigmoid of healthy humans. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33:1007.
241. Bassotti G, Clementi M, Antonelli E, et al. Low-amplitude propagated contractile waves: a relevant propulsive mechanism of human colon. Dig Liver Dis 2001;33:36.
242. Dinning PG, Szczesniak M, Cook IJ. Removal of tonic nitrergic inhibition is a potent stimulus for human proximal colonic propagating sequences. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2006;18:37.
243. Ford MJ, Camilleri M, Wiste JA, Hanson RB. Differences in colonic tone and phasic response to a meal in the transverse and sigmoid human colon. Gut 1995;37:264.
244. Steed KP, Bohemen EK, Lamont GM, et al. Proximal colonic response and gastrointestinal transit after high and low fat meals. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:1793.
245. Tanabe Y, Hotokezaka M, Mibu R, Tanaka M. Effects of extrinsic autonomic denervation and myenteric plexus transection on colonic motility in conscious dogs. Surgery 2002;132:471.
246. Ishikawa M, Mibu R, Iwamoto T et al. Change in colonic motility after extrinsic autonomic denervation in dogs. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42: 1950.
247. Von der Ohe MR, Hanson RB, Camilleri M. Serotonergic mediation of postprandial colonic tonic and phasic responses in humans. Gut 1994;35:536.
248. O'Brien MD, Camilleri M, Thomforde GM, et al. Effect of cholecystokinin octapeptide and atropine on human colonic motility, tone, and transit. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42:26.
249. Coffin B, Fossati S, Flourie B, et al. Regional effects of cholecystokinin octapeptide on colonic phasic and tonic motility in healthy humans. Am J Physiol 1999;276:G767.
250. Karaus M, Niederau C. Effects of CCK-receptor antagonist on colonic motor activity in dogs. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1995;7: 63.
251. Hagger R, Kumar D, Benson M, Grundy A. Periodic colonic motor activity identified by 24-h pancolonic ambulatory manometry in humans. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:271.
252. Matsufuji H, Yokoyama J. Neural control of the internal anal sphincter motility. J Smooth Muscle Res 2003;39:11.

258

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

253. Otterson MF, Sarna SK, Leming S, et al. Effects of fractionated doses of ionizing radiation on colonic motor activity. Am J Physiol 1992;263:G518.
254. Tsukamoto M, Sarna SK, Condon RE. A novel motility effect of tachykinins in normal and inflamed colon. Am J Physiol 1997; 272:G1607.
255. Tomaru A, Ishii A, Kishibayashi N, Karasawa A. Colonic giant migrating contractions induced by glycerol enema in anesthetized rats. Jpn J Pharmacol 1993;63:525.
256. Li M, Johnson CP, Adams MB, Sarna SK. Cholinergic and nitrergic regulation of in vivo giant migrating contractions in rat colon. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G544.
257. Ronholt C, Rasmussen OO, Christiansen J. Ambulatory manometric recording of anorectal activity. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:1551.
258. Rao SS, Welcher K. Periodic rectal motor activity: the intrinsic colonic gatekeeper? Am J Gastroenterol 1996;91:890.
259. Bampton PA, Dinning PG, Kennedy ML, et al. Prolonged multipoint recording of colonic manometry in the unprepared human colon: providing insight into potentially relevant pressure wave parameters. Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96:1838.
260. Flourie B, Phillips S, Richter HI. Cyclic motility in canine colon: responses to feeding and perfusion. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34:1185.
261. Kelley ML, Gordon EA, DeWeese JA. Pressure studies of the ileocolonic junctional zone of dogs. Am J Physiol 1965;209:333.
262. Quigley EM, Borody TJ, Phillips SF, et al. Motility of the terminal ileum and ileocecal sphincter in healthy humans. Gastroenterology 1984;87:857.
263. Kelley ML, DeWeese JA. Effects of eating and intraluminal filling on ileocolonic junctional zone pressures. Am J Physiol 1969;216:1491.
264. Dinning PG, Bampton PA, Kennedy ML, et al. Basal pressure patterns and reflexive motor responses in the human ileocolonic junction. Am J Physiol 1999;276:G331.
265. Pahlin PE, Kewenter J. Reflexogenic contraction of the ileocecal sphincter in the cat following small or large intestine distention. Acta Physiol Scand 1975;95:126.
266. Leelakusolvong S, Bharucha AE, Sarr MG, et al. Effect of extrinsic denervation on muscarinic neurotransmission in the canine ileocolonic region. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:173.
267. Kumar D, Phillips SF. The contribution of external ligamentous attachments to function of the ileocecal junction. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:410.
268. Richardson JD, Griffin WO. Ileocecal valve substitutes as bacteriologic barriers. Am J Surg 1972;123:149.
269. Leelakusolvong S, Sarr MG, Miller SM, et al. Role of extrinsic innervation in modulating nitrergic transmission in the canine ileocolonic region. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002; 283:G230.
270. Camilleri M, Colemont LJ, Phillips SF, et al. Human gastric emptying and colonic filling of solids characterized by a new method. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G284.
271. Mojaverian P, Chan K, Desai A, John V. Gastrointestinal transit of a solid indigestible capsule as measured by radiotelemetry and dual gamma scintigraphy. Pharmacol Res 1989;6:719.
272. Fich A, Steadman CJ, Phillips SF, et al. Ileocolonic transit does not change after right hemicolectomy. Gastroenterology 1992;103:794.
273. Rociu E, Stoker J, Eijkemans MJ, Lameris JS. Normal anal sphincter anatomy and age- and sex-related variations at high-spatial-resolution endoanal MR imaging. Radiology 2000;217:395.
274. Kubota M, Suita S, Szurszewski JH. Membrane properties and the neuro-effector transmission of smooth muscle cells in the canine internal anal sphincter. J Smooth Muscle Res 1998;34:173.
275. Frenckner B, Ihre T. Inflence of pudendal block on the function of the anal sphincters. Gut 1975;16:482.
276. Rao SS, Hatfield R, Soffer E, et al. Manometric tests of anorectal function in healthy adults. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:773.
277. Shafik A. A new concept of the anatomy of the anal sphincter mechanism and the physiology of defecation: mass contraction of the pelvic floor muscles. Int Urogynecol J Pelv Floor Dys 1998;9:28.

278. Altomare DF, Rinaldi M, Veglia A, et al. Contribution of posture to the maintenance of anal continence. Int J Colorect Dis 2001; 16:51.
279. Sikirov D. Comparison of straining during defecation in three positions: results and implications for human health. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1201.
280. Bassotti G, Germani U, Morelli A. Flatus-related colorectal and anal motor events. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41:335.
281. Rouillon JM, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Sensorial and intestinointestinal reflex pathways in the human jejunum. Gastroenterology 1991;101:1606.
282. Abo M, Kono T, Wang ZS, Chen JD. Intestinointestinal inhibitory reflexes ­ effect of distension on intestinal slow waves. Dig Dis Sci 2001;46:1177.
283. Da Cunha Melo J, Summers RW, Thompson HH, et al. Effects of intestinal secretagogues and distension on small bowel myoelectric activity in fasted and fed conscious dogs. J Physiol 1981;321:483.
284. Lin HC, Kim BH, Elashoff JD, et al. Gastric emptying of solid food is most potently inhibited by carbohydrate in the canine distal ileum. Gastroenterology 1992;102:793.
285. Cuche G, Malbert CH. Ileal short-chain fatty acids inhibit transpyloric flow in pigs. Scand J Gastroenterol 1999;34:149.
286. Lin HC, Doty JE, Reedy TJ, Meyer JH. Inhibition of gastric emptying by sodium oleate depends on the length of intestine exposed to nutrient. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G1031.
287. Feinle C, O'Donovan D, Doran S, et al. Effects of fat digestion on appetite, APD motility, and gut hormones in response to duodenal fat infusion in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G798.
288. Schwartz GJ, Moran TH. Duodenal nutrient exposure elicits nutrient-specific gut motility and vagal afferent signals in rat. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 1998;274:R1236.
289. Ohtani N, Sasaki I, Naito H, et al. Mediators for fat-induced ileal brake are different between stomach and proximal small intestine in conscious dogs. J Gastrointest Surg 2001;5:377.
290. Topcu T, Gulpinar MA, Isman CA, et al. Enterogastric brake in rats with segmental bowel resection: role of capsaicin-sensitive nerves. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2002;29:68.
291. Raybould HE, Holzer H. Dual capsaicin-sensitive afferent pathways mediate inhibition of gastric emptying in rat induced by intestinal carbohydrate. Neurosci Lett 1992;141:236.
292. Raybould HE, Glatzle J, Robin C, et al. Expression of 5-HT3 receptors by extrinsic duodenal afferents contribute to intestinal inhibition of gastric emptying. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G367.
293. Lin HC, Chen JH. Slowing of intestinal transit by fat depends on an ondansetron-sensitive, efferent serotonergic pathway. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:317.
294. Lin HC, Zaidel O, Hum S. Intestinal transit of fat depends on accelerating effect of cholecystokinin and slowing effect of an opioid pathway. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:2217.
295. Whited KL, Thao D, Lloyd KC, et al. Targeted disruption of the murine CCK1 receptor gene reduces intestinal lipid-induced feedback inhibition of gastric function. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;291:G156.
296. Glatzle J, Darcel N, Rechs AJ, et al. Apolipoprotein A-IV stimulates duodenal vagal afferent activity to inhibit gastric motility via a CCK1 pathway. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:R354.
297. Glatzle J, Wang Y, Adelson DW, et al. Chylomicron components activate duodenal vagal afferents via a cholecystokinin A receptor mediated pathway to inhibit gastric motor function in the rat. J Physiol 2003;550:657.
298. Cuche G, Cuber JC, Malbert CH. Ileal short-chain fatty acids inhibit gastric motility by a humoral pathway. Am J Physiol 2000; 279:G925.
299. Ferrier L, Segain JP, Bonnet C, et al. Functional mapping of NPY/ PYY receptors in rat and human gastro-intestinal tract. Peptides 2002;23:1765.

259

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

300. Wen J, Phillips SF, Sarr MG, et al. PYY and GLP-1 contribute to feedback inhibition from the canine ileum and colon. Am J Physiol 1995;269:G945.
301. Lin HC, Zhao XT, Wang L, Wong H. Fat-induced ileal brake in the dog depends on peptide YY. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1491.
302. Lin HC, Neevel C, Chen PS, et al. Slowing of intestinal transit by fat or peptide YY depends on beta-adrenergic pathway. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;285:G1310.
303. Lin HC, Neevel C, Chen JH. Slowing intestinal transit by PYY depends on serotonergic and opioid pathways. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G558.
304. Giralt M, Vergara P. Glucagonlike peptide-1 (GLP-1) participation in ileal brake induced by intraluminal peptones in rat. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:322.
305. Teresa Martin M, Azpiroz F, Malagelada JR. Melatonin as a modulator of the ileal brake mechanism. Scand J Gastroenterol 2005;40:559.
306. Lin HC, Perdomo OL, Zhao XT. Intestinal transit in dogs is accelerated by volume distension during fat-induced jejunal brake. Dig Dis Sci 2001;46:19.
307. Shibata C, Naito H, Ueno T, et al. Intraduodenal capsaicin inhibits gastric migrating motor complex via an extrinsic neural reflex in conscious dogs. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:543.
308. Shibata C, Jin XL, Naito H, et al. Intraileal capsaicin inhibits gastrointestinal contractions via a neural reflex in conscious dogs. Gastroenterology 2002;123:1904.
309. Treacy PJ, Jamieson GG, Dent J. The effect of duodenal distension upon antro-pyloric motility and liquid gastric emptying in pigs. Aust NZ J Surg 1996;66:37.
310. Lin HC, Doty JE, Reedy TJ, Meyer JH. Inhibition of gastric emptying by acids depends on pH, titratable acidity, and length of intestine exposed to acid. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G1025.
311. Hughes SF, Scott SM, Pilot MA, Williams NS. Adrenoceptors and colocolonic inhibitory reflex. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:2462.
312. Law NM, Bharucha AE, Zinsmeister AR. Rectal and colonic distension elicit viscerovisceral reflexes in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G384.
313. Bampton PA, Dinning PG, Kennedy ML, et al. The proximal colonic motor response to rectal mechanical and chemical stimulation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G443.
314. Shafik A, Shafik AA, El Sibai O, et al. Role of the rectosigmoid junction in fecal continence: concept of the primary continent mechanism. Arch Surg 2006;141:23.
315. Van der Veek PP, Schots ED, Masclee AA. Effet of neurotensin on colorectal motor and sensory function in humans. Dis Colon Rectum 2004;47:210.
316. Fukumoto S, Tatewaki M, Tamada T, et al. Short-chain fatty acids stimulate colonic transit via intraluminal 5-HT release in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2003;284:R1269.
317. Rondeau MP, Meltzer K, Michel KE, et al. Short chain fatty acids stimulate feline colonic smooth muscle contraction. J Feline Med Surg 2003;5:167.
318. O'Riordain MG, Molloy RG, Gillen P, et al. Rectoanal inhibitory reflex following low stapled anterior resection of the rectum. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:874.
319. Rattan S, Chakder S. Role of nitric oxide as a mediator of internal anal sphincter relaxation. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G107.
320. Terauchi A, Kobayashi D, Mashimo H. Distinct roles of nitric oxide synthases and interstitial cells of Cajal in rectoanal relaxation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G291.
321. De Lorijn F, De Jonge WJ, Wedel T, et al. Interstitial cells of Cajal are involved in the afferent limb of the rectoanal inhibitory reflex. Gut 2005;54:1107.
322. Konomi H, Simula ME, Meedeniya AC, et al. Induction of duodenal motility activates the sphincter of Oddi (SO)-duodenal reflex in the Australian possum in vitro. Auton Autacoid Pharmacol 2002;22:109.

323. Ohta D, Ozeki K, Ura K, et al. Effect of celiac and superior mesenteric ganglionectomy in fasted canine colonic motor activity. Surg Today 1995;25:717.
324. Wen J, Luque-de Leon E, Kost LJ, et al. Duodenal motility in fasting dogs: humoral and neural pathways mediating the colonic brake. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G192.
325. Shafik A. Effect of rectal distension on the small intestine with evidence of a recto-enteric reflex. Hepato-Gastroenterol 2000;47:1030.
326. Ropert A, Cherbut C, Roze C, et al. Colonic fermentation and proximal gastric tone in humans. Gastroenterology 1996;111:289.
327. Fu-Cheng X, Anini Y, Chariot J, et al. Peptide YY release after intraduodenal, intraileal, and intracolonic administration of nutrients in rats. Pflugers Arch 1995;431:66.
328. Mazet B, Miolan JP, Niel JP, Roman C. New insights into the organization of a gastroduodenal inhibitory reflex by the coeliac plexus. J Auton Nerv Syst 1994;46:135.
329. Quinson N, Catalin D, Niel JP, Miolan JP. Release of nitric oxide within the coeliac plexus is involved in the organization of a gastroduodenal inhibitory reflex in the rabbit. J Physiol 1999;519:223.
330. Shafik A, Shafik I, El Sibai O. Effect of vaginal distension on anorectal function: identification of the vagino-anorectal reflex. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2005;84:225.
331. Shafik A, El Sibai O, Shafik I, Shafik AA. Effect of micturition on the external anal sphincter: identification of the urethra­anal reflex. J Spinal Cord Med 2005;28:421.
332. Wilson P, Perdikis G, Hinder RA, et al. Prolonged ambulatory antroduodenal manometry in humans. Am J Gastroenterol 1994; 89:1489.
333. Gorard DA, Vesselinova-Jenkins CK, Libby GW, Farthing MJ. Migrating motor complex and sleep in health and irritable bowel syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1995;40:2383.
334. Schonfeld J, Evans DF, Wingate DL. Daytime and night time motor activity of the small bowel after solid meals of different caloric value in humans. Gut 1997;40:614.
335. Roarty TP, Suratt PM, Hellmann P, McCallum RW. Colonic motor activity in women during sleep. Sleep 1998;21:285.
336. Furakawa Y, Cook IJ, Panagopoulos V, et al. Relationship between sleep patterns and human colonic motor patterns. Gastroenterology 1994;107:1372.
337. Valori RM, Kumar D, Wingate DL. Effects of different types of stress and of "prokinetic" drugs on the control of the fasting motor complex in humans. Gastroenterology 1986;90:1890.
338. Rao SS, Hatfield RA, Suls JM, Chamberlain MJ. Psychological and physical stress induce differential effects on human colonic motility. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:985.
339. Morrow NS, Garrick T. Effects of intermittent tail shock or water avoidance on proximal colonic motor contractility in rats. Physiol Behav 1997;62:233.
340. O'Brien JD, Thompson DG, Day SJ, et al. Perturbation of upper gastrointestinal transit and antroduodenal motility by experimentally applied stress: the role of beta-adrenoceptor mediated pathways. Gut 1989;30:1530.
341. Tsukada F, Sugawara M, Sawamura K, et al. Beta3-adrenoceptor is involved in the inhibition of small intestinal motility due to restraint stress in rats. Biol Pharm Bull 2001;24:995.
342. Diop L, Pascaud X, Junien JL, Bueno L. CRF triggers the CNS release of TRH in stress-induced changes in gastric emptying. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G39.
343. Kihara N, Fujimura M, Yamamoto I, et al. Effects of central and peripheral urocortin on fed and fasted gastroduodenal motor activity in conscious rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G406.
344. Bueno L, Fargeas MJ, Gue M, et al. Effects of corticotropin-releasing factor on plasma motilin and somatostatin levels and gastrointestinal motility in dogs. Gastroenterology 1986;91:884.
345. Million M, Maillot C, Saunders P, et al. Human urocortin II, a new CRF-related peptide, displays selective CRF2-mediated action on

260

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

gastric transit in rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G34. 346. Million M, Grigoriadis DE, Sullivan S, et al. A novel water-soluble selective CRF1 receptor antagonist, NBI 35965, blunts stressinduced visceral hyperalgesia and colonic motor function in rats. Brain Res 2003;985:32. 347. Martinez V, Wang L, Rivier J, et al. Central CRF, urocortins and stress increase colonic transit via CRF1 receptors while activation of CRF2 receptors delays gastric transit in mice. J Physiol 2004; 556:221. 348. Monnikes H, Tebbe J, Bauer C, et al. Neuropeptide Y in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus stimulates colonic transit by peripheral cholinergic and central CRF pathways. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2000;12:343. 349. Tebbe JJ, Mronga S, Tebbe CG, et al. Ghrelin-induced stimulation of colonic propulsion is dependent on hypothalamic neuropeptide Y1- and corticotrophin-releasing factor 1 receptor activation. J Neuroendocrinol 2005;17:570. 350. Tebbe JJ, Tebbe CG, Mronga S, et al. Central neuropeptide Y receptors are involved in 3rd ventricular ghrelin induced alteration of colonic transit time in conscious fed rats. BMC Gastroenterol 2005;5:5. 351. Tebbe JJ, Pasat IR, Monnikes H, et al. Excitatory stimulation of neurons in the arcuate nucleus initiates CRF-dependent stimulation of colonic propulsion in rats. Brain Res 2005;1036:130. 352. Bueno L, Gue M, Delrio C. CNS vasopressin mediates emotional stress and CRH-induced colonic motor alterations in rats. Am J Physiol 1992;262:G427. 353. Miyata K, Ito H, Fukudo S. Involvement of the 5-HT3 receptor in CRH-induced defecation in rats. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G827. 354. Fargeas MJ, Fioramonti J, Bueno L. Central action of interleukin-1 on intestinal motility in rats: mediation by two mechanisms. Gastroenterology 1993;104:377. 355. Chatzaki E, Crowe PD, Wang L, et al. CRF receptor type 1 and 2 expression and anatomic distribution in the rat colon. J Neurochem 2004;90:309. 356. Saruta M, Takahashi K, Suzuki T, et al. Urocortin 3/stresscopin in human colon: possible modulators of gastrointestinal function during stressful conditions. Peptides 2005;26:1196. 357. Bisschops R, Vanden Berghe P, Sarnelli G, et al. CRF-induced calcium signalling in guinea pig small intestine myenteric neurons involves CRF-1 receptors and activation of voltage-sensitive calcium channels. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006; 290:G1252. 358. Porcher C, Juhem A, Peinnequin A, et al. Expression and effects of metabotropic CRF1 and CRF2 receptors in rat small intestine. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G1091. 359. Miampamba M, Maillot C, Million M, Tache Y. Peripheral CRF activates myenteric neurons in the proximal colon through CRF1 receptor in conscious rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G857. 360. Martinez V, Wang L, Rivier JE, et al. Differential actions of peripheral corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), urocortin II, and urocortin III on gastric emptying and colonic transit in mice: role of CRF receptor subtypes 1 and 2. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2002; 301:611. 361. Maillot C, Wang L, Million M, Tache Y. Intraperitoneal corticotrophin-releasing factor and urocortin induce Fos expression in brain and spinal autonomic nuclei and long lasting stimulation of colonic motility in rats. Brain Res 2003;974:70. 362. Tsukamoto K, Nakade Y, Mantyh C, et al. Peripherally administered CRF stimulates colonic motility via central CRF receptors and vagal pathways in conscious rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integ Comp Physiol 2006;290:R1537. 363. Ohta D, Lee CW, Sarna SK, et al. Central inhibition of nitric oxide synthase modulates upper gastrointestinal motor activity. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G417.

364. Bonaz B, Martin L, Beurriand E, et al. Locus ceruleus modulates migrating myoelectric complex in rats. Am J Physiol 1992;262: G1121.
365. Monnikes H, Tebbe J, Grote C, et al. Involvement of CCK in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus in the CNS regulation of colonic motility. Digestion 2000;62:178.
366. Bueno L, Ferre JP, Fioramonti J, Honde C. Effects of intracerebroventricular administration of neurotensin, substance P and calcitonin on gastrointestinal motility in normal and vagotomized rats. Regul Pept 1983;6:197.
367. Ferre JP, Ruckebusch Y, Soldani G. Central and peripheral motor effects of galanin on the duodenojejunum and colon in fed rats. Pharmacology 1992;44:196.
368. Greenwood B, DiMicco JA. Activation of the hypothalamic dorsomedial nucleus stimulates intestinal motility in rats. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G514.
369. Gulpinar MA, Bozkurt A, Coskun T, et al. Glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) is involved in the central modulation of fecal output in rats. Am J Physiol 2000;278:G924.
370. Bond E, Heitkemper M. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulates intestinal transit in young rats. Regul Pept 1990;27:263.
371. Fujino K, Inui A, Asakawa A, et al. Ghrelin induces fasted motor activity of the gastrointestinal tract in conscious fed rats. J Physiol 2003;550:227.
372. Abysique A, Orsoni P, Bouvier M. Evidence for supraspinal nervous control of external anal sphincter motility in the cat. Brain Res 1998;795:147.
373. Oliver MR, Tan DT, Kirk DR, et al. Colonic and jejunal motor disturbances after colonic antigen challenge of sensitized rat. Gastroenterology 1997;112:1996.
374. Yanagida H, Yanase H, Sanders KM, Ward WM. Intestinal surgical resection disrupts electrical rhythmicity, neural responses, and interstitial cell networks. Gastroenterology 2004;127:1748.
375. Overhaus M, Togel S, Pezzone MA, Bauer AJ. Mechanisms of polymicrobial sepsis-induced ileus. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G685.
376. Scott RB, Gall DG, Diamant SC. Intestinal motility during acute Yersinia enterocolitica enteritis in rabbits. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1989;67:553.
377. Husebye E, Hellstrom PM, Sundler F, et al. Influence of microbial species on small intestinal myoelectric activity and transit in germfree rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G368.
378. Yao G, Wolinski J, Zabielski R. Effect of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin on the myoelectric activity of the duodenum in weaned pigs. J Veter Med 2004;51:106.
379. Fruhwald S, Herk E, Scholl G, et al. Endotoxin pretreatment modifies peristalsis and attenuates the antipropulsive action of adrenoceptor agonists in the guinea-pig small intestine. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:213.
380. Bruins MJ, Luiking YC, Soeters PB, et al. Effect of prolonged hyperdynamic endotoxemia on jejunal motility in fasted and enterally fed pigs. Ann Surg 2003;237:44.
381. Ezberci F, Tekin E, Onuk E. Protective effect of a lipoxygenase inhibitor, nordihydroguaretic acid, on the ileal motor disturbances induced by Serratia marcescens endotoxin in rats. Surg Today 2001;31:497.
382. Dwinell KL, Bass P, Zou F, Oaks JA. Small intestinal transections decrease the occurrence of tapeworm-induced myoelectric patterns in the rat. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:349.
383. Moreels TG, De Man JG, Bogers JJ, et al. Effect of Schistosoma mansoni-induced granulomatous inflammation on murine gastrointestinal motility. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001; 280:G1030.
384. Gay J, Fioramonti J, Garcia-Villar R, Bueno L. Alterations of intestinal motor responses to various stimuli after Nippostrongylus brasiliensis infection in rats: role of mast cells. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2000;12:207.

261

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

385. Gay J, Fioramonti J, Garcia-Villar R, Bueno L. Enhanced intestinal motor response to cholecystokinin in post-Nippostrongylus brasiliensis-infected rats: modulation by CCK receptor and the vagus nerve. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2001;13:155.
386. Faussone-Pelligrini MS, Gay J, Vannucchi MG, et al. Alterations of neurokinin receptors and interstitial cells of Cajal during and after jejunal inflammation induced by Nippostrongylus brasiliensis in the rat. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:83.
387. Palmer JM, Wong-Riley M, Sharkey KA. Functional alterations in jejunal myenteric neurons during inflammation in nematodeinfected guinea pigs. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G922.
388. Bian K, Harari Y, Zhong M, et al. Down-regulation of inducible nitric-oxide synthase (NOS-2) during parasite-induced gut inflammation: a path to identify a selective NOS-2 inhibitor. Mol Pharmacol 2001;59:939.
389. Wang XY, Berezin I, Mikkelsen HB, et al. Pathology of interstitial cells of Cajal in relation to inflammation revealed by ultrastructure but not immunohistochemistry. Am J Pathol 2002;160:1529.
390. Wang XY, Vannucchi MG, Nieuwmeyer F, et al. Changes in interstitial cells of Cajal at the deep muscular plexus are associated with loss of distention-induced burst-type muscle activity in mice infected by Trichinella spiralis. Am J Pathol 2005;167:437.
391. Torrents D, Vergara P. In vivo changes in the intestinal reflexes and the response to CCK in the inflamed small intestine of the rat. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G543.
392. Venkova K, Palmer JM, Greenwood-Van Meerveld B. Nematodeinduced jejunal inflammation in the ferret causes long-term changes in excitatory neuromuscular responses. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;290:96.
393. Bercik P, Wang L, Verdu EF, et al. Visceral hyperalgesia and intestinal dysmotility in a mouse model of postinfective gut dysfunction. Gastroenterology 2004;127:179.
394. Saavedra Y, Vergara P. Hypersensitivity to ovalbumin induces chronic intestinal dysmotility and increases the number of intestinal mast cells. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:112.
395. Scott RB, Tan DT, Miampamba M, Sharkey KA. Anaphylaxisinduced alterations in intestinal motility: role of extrinsic neural pathways. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G812.
396. Oliver MR, Tan DT, Scott RB. Intestinal anaphylaxis: mediation of the response of colonic longitudinal muscle in rat. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G764.
397. Schwarz NT, Beer-Stolz D, Simmons RL, Bauer AJ. Pathogenesis of paralytic ileus: intestinal manipulation opens a transient pathway between the intestinal lumen and the leukocytic infiltrate of the jejunal muscularis. Ann Surg 2002;235:31.
398. Turler A, Moore BA, Pezzone MA, et al. Colonic postoperative inflammatory ileus in the rat. Ann Surg 2002;236:56.
399. Collins SM, Blennerhassett P, Vermillion DL, et al. Impaired acetylcholine release in the inflamed rat intestine is T-cell independent. Am J Physiol 1992;263:G198.
400. Vallance BA, Galeazzi F, Collins SM, Snider DP. CD4 T cells and major histocompatibility complex class II expression influence worm expulsion and increased intestinal muscle contraction during Trichinella spiralis infection. Infect Immunity 1999;67:6090.
401. Wehner S, Schwarz NT, Hundsdoerfer R, et al. Induction of IL-6 within the rodent intestinal muscularis after intestinal surgical stress. Surgery 2005;137:436.
402. Moore BA, Turler A, Pezzone MA, et al. Tyrphostin AG 126 inhibits development of postoperative ileus induced by surgical manipulation of murine colon. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G214.
403. Kalff JC, Turler A, Schwarz NT, et al. Intra-abdominal activation of a local inflammatory response within the human muscularis externa during laparotomy. Ann Surg 2003;237:316.
404. Turler A, Schwarz NT, Turler E, et al. MCP-1 causes leukocyte recruitment and subsequently endotoxemic ileus in rat. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G145.

405. Hierholzer C, Kalff JC, Billiar TR, et al. Induced nitric oxide promotes intestinal inflammation following hemorrhagic shock. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G225.
406. The FO, De Jonge WJ, Bennink RJ, et al. The ICAM-1 antisense oligonucleotide ISIS-3082 prevents the development of postoperative ileus in mice. Br J Pharmacol 2005;146:252.
407. Fornai M, Blandizzi C, Antonioli L, et al. Differential role of cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 isoforms in the modulation of colonic neuromuscular function in experimental inflammation. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;317:938.
408. De Winter BY, Van Nassauw L, De Man JG, et al. Role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of septic ileus in mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:251.
409. Kinoshita K, Hori M, Fujisawa M, et al. Role of TNF-alpha in muscularis inflammation and motility disorder in a TNBS-induced colitis model: clues from TNF-alpha-deficient mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2006;18:578.
410. Khan WI, Motomura Y, Blennerhassett PA, et al. Disruption of CD40­CD40 ligand pathway inhibits the development of intestinal muscle hypercontractility and protective immunity in nematode infection. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G15.
411. Akiho H, Deng Y, Blennerhassett P, et al. Mechanisms underlying the maintenance of muscle hypercontractility in a model of postinfective gut dysfunction. Gastroenterology 2005;129:131.
412. Vallance BA, Blennerhassett PA, Deng Y, et al. IL-5 contributes to worm expulsion and muscle hypercontractility in a primary T. spiralis infection. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 1999;277:G400.
413. Akiho H, Blennerhassett P, Deng Y, Collins SM. Role of IL-4, IL-13, and STAT6 in inflammation-induced hypercontractility of murine smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G226.
414. Verdu EF, Bercik P, Bergonzelli GE, et al. Lactobacillus paracasei normalizes muscle hypercontractility in a murine model of postinfective gut dysfunction. Gastroenterology 2004;127:826.
415. Fargeas MJ, Fioramonti J, Bueno L. Involvement of capsaicinsensitive afferent nerves in the intestinal motor alterations induced by intestinal anaphylaxis in rats. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1993;101:190.
416. Fargeas MJ, Theodourou V, Fioramonti J, Bueno L. Relationship between mast cell degranulation and jejunal myoelectric alterations in intestinal anaphylaxis in rats. Gastroenterology 1992;102:157.
417. Castex N, Fioramonti J, Fargeas MJ, Bueno L. c-fos expression in specific rat brain nuclei after intestinal anaphylaxis: involvement of 5-HT3 receptors and vagal afferent fibers. Brain Res 1995;688: 149.
418. Kreiss C, Birder LA, Kiss S, et al. COX-2 dependent inflammation increases spinal Fos expression during rodent postoperative ileus. Gut 2003;52:527.
419. Kreiss C, Toegel S, Bauer AJ. Alpha2-adrenergic regulation of NO production alters postoperative intestinal smooth muscle dysfunction in rodents. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G658.
420. Turler A, Kalff JC, Moore BA, et al. Leukocyte-derived inducible nitric oxide synthase mediates murine postoperative ileus. Ann Surg 2006;244:220.
421. De Winter BY, Bredenoord AJ, De Man JG, et al. Effect of inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase and guanylyl cyclase on endotoxin-induced delay in gastric emptying and intestinal transit in mice. Shock 2002;18:125.
422. Torrents D, Prats N, Vergara P. Inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitors ameliorate hypermotility observed after T. spiralis infection in the rat. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1035.
423. Mascolo Z, Izzo AA, Ligresti A, et al. The endocannabinoid system and the molecular basis of paralytic ileus in mice. FASEB J 2002;16:1973.

262

Motility of the small intestine and colon CHAPTER 11

424. Moore BA, Otterbein LE, Turler A, et al. Inhaled carbon monoxide suppresses the development of postoperative ileus in the murine small intestine. Gastroenterology 2003;124:377.
425. Moore BA, Overhaus M, Whitcomb J, et al. Brief inhalation of low-dose carbon monoxide protects rodents and swine from postoperative ileus. Crit Care Med 2005;33:1317.
426. Mathison R, Ho W, Pittman QJ, et al. Effects of cannabinoid receptor-2 activation on accelerated gastrointestinal transit in lipopolysaccharide-treated rats. Br J Pharmacol 2004;142:1247.

427. Hussain S, Miyazawa R, Tomomasa T, et al. Possible involvement of adrenomedullin in lipopolysaccharide-induced small-intestinal motility changes in conscious rats. J Gastroenterol 2005;40:1123.
428. Vermillion DL, Ernst PB, Scicchitano R, Collins SM. Antigeninduced contraction of jejunal smooth muscle in the sensitized rat. Am J Physiol 1988;255:G701.
429. Torrents D, Torres R, De Mora F, Vergara P. Antinerve growth factor treatment prevents intestinal dysmotility in Trichinella spiralisinfected rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2002;302:659.

263

12

B MOTILITY
Motility of the biliary tract
Gary M. Mawe, Peter L. Moses, Gino T.P. Saccone, Maria J. Pozo

The gallbladder, 264 The sphincter of Oddi, 271

Pathophysiology of biliary tract motility, 274 Overview, 277

Understanding biliary tract function is a clinically significant goal. In the United States alone, over 20 million people have gallstones or have had a cholecystectomy. Furthermore, the total direct costs associated with biliary tract disease, which amount to billions of dollars annually, are greater than the costs for any other gastrointestinal ailment, including colorectal cancer and peptic ulcer disease [1]. Abnormal motility is a hallmark of biliary tract disorders, including both calculous and acalculous etiologies, and it is therefore important to understand how motility of the gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi (SO) are normally regulated, and the changes in the physiology of these structures that lead to dysmotility under pathophysiological conditions.
This chapter provides an overview of biliary tract motor activity and its regulation. As motility primarily involves the activities of two cell types, neurons and smooth muscle, the chapter is organized to provide a summary of the basic physiology of the nerves and smooth muscle in the gallbladder and SO with clinical correlations provided whenever possible. These sections also describe how the nerves and smooth muscle of these organs function during the bile retention and bile flow phases of the feeding cycle. Finally, a section at the end of the chapter describes what is known about the roles of nerves and smooth muscle in the biliary tract under pathophysiological conditions.
The gallbladder
Given that biliary tract dysmotility is so prevalent in gallbladder disease, a comprehensive understanding of the neurons and smooth muscle that are responsible for gallbladder contractile activity is critical. Determination of the cellular
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

mechanisms that are responsible for normal and pathological gallbladder motility is difficult in humans; therefore, much of what is known about the structure and function of gallbladder neurons and smooth muscle is derived from animal studies.
Gallbladder neurobiology The wall of the gallbladder consists of a mucosal layer with an underlying lamina propria, a muscularis layer, and a serosal layer. Neural networks can be found in each of these layers, and these neural networks are interconnected by nerve bundles. The morphology of nerves of the gallbladder has been investigated in many species including humans, rhesus monkeys, pigs, dogs, cats, marmosets, guinea pigs, North American opossums, Australian brush-tailed possums, and mice [2­8]. The serosal plexus is the most prominent network of nerves in the gallbladder. It contains small, irregularly shaped ganglia that are connected by bundles of unmyelinated axons. The serosal plexus is connected to nerve bundles that follow the extensive vascular distribution in this layer. The neural plexus of the muscularis, which does not contain ganglia, is prominent in humans and other larger species. The mucosal plexus consists of nerve bundles that travel in the lamina propria, with branches that pass through the mucosa and often terminate near the epithelial cells. In some species, including humans, the mucosal plexus contains occasional small ganglia consisting of one to three neurons, and these neurons project to the mucosal epithelium [9].
Neuroactive compounds in gallbladder nerves Gallbladder neurons Evaluating the influence of gallbladder neurons on gallbladder function requires knowledge of the neurotransmitters made by these cells. The complexity of the enteric nervous system is reflected by the large number of neuroactive compounds that are found in the neural plexuses of the gut. Studies of the neurotransmitter content of gallbladder neurons have revealed that many putative neurotransmit-

264

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

ters also exist in this system. However, unlike the gut, where distinct populations of cholinergic and noncholinergic neurons exist, all gallbladder neurons are apparently cholinergic as all are immunoreactive for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), the essential biosynthetic enzyme for acetylcholine [5,9,10].
In the guinea pig, the most extensively studied species, the overall population of cholinergic neurons can be divided into two distinct subpopulations based on chemical coding patterns [11,12]. The larger population, representing over 80% of the neurons, is immunoreactive for substance P, neuropeptide Y (NPY), somatostatin, and orphanin FQ (OFQ, also known as nociceptin), as well as ChAT. The remaining neurons are immunoreactive for ChAT, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) and nitric oxide synthase (NOS).
Chemical coding of gallbladder neurons has also been described in other species, including humans [5,7­9,13,14]. Most human gallbladder neurons express VIP, NPY, somatostatin, and PACAP, and most of these neurons are also tachykinin immunoreactive [5,7,8,13]. NOS immunoreactivity and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) dehydrogenase staining have also been reported in a small subset of human gallbladder neurons; however, unlike the pattern seen in the guinea pig, the NOS-positive neurons are VIP negative [13].
Sympathetic nerve fibers Catecholamine histofluorescence, and antibodies directed against the biosynthetic enzymes tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine -hydroxylase, have been used to identify the sympathetic postganglionic nerves in the wall of the gallbladder [2,4,9]. Injection of axon tracers into the gallbladder wall shows that sympathetic postganglionic projections to the gallbladder arise in the celiac ganglia [4]. Sympathetic postganglionic nerves pass along serosal blood vessels and they are also abundant in the ganglionated plexus of the gallbladder, with numerous axonal varicosities surrounding gallbladder neurons [4]. In the perivascular plexus of the guinea pig and human gallbladders, the sympathetic nerve fibers are also immunoreactive for NPY, and research in the guinea pig has confirmed OFQ immunoreactivity [12].
Sensory nerve fibers It is not yet possible to distinguish sensory (afferent) fibers that arise from spinal ganglia from those that arise from nodose ganglia; however, the ganglionated plexus of the gallbladder is rich in afferent nerve fibers that are immunoreactive for both substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) [4,5,9,10,15]. These nerves are likely to be extrinsic primary afferent fibers as gallbladder neurons are not immunoreactive for CGRP [5,8]. The substance P/CGRPimmunoreactive nerve fibers are abundant in ganglia, interganglionic fiber bundles, and the perivascular plexus. Within the ganglia, the substance P/CGRP fibers appear to ramify

and give rise to processes that terminate on gallbladder neurons. Substance P/CGRP-positive nerve fibers are also immunoreactive for PACAP [12], suggesting that activated afferent nerves can release tachykinins, CGRP, and PACAP.
Electrical and synaptic properties of gallbladder neurons The electrical properties of gallbladder neurons have been studied in three species: guinea pig, opossum, and human [6,16,17]. Unlike enteric neurons, gallbladder neurons can be classified into a single group on the basis of their electrical properties. Relatively inexcitable, gallbladder neurons rarely exhibit spontaneous action potentials, and they fire stimulus-induced action potentials only at the onset of a depolarizing current pulse. These features indicate that gallbladder neurons are normally quiescent and must be driven by excitatory inputs to release their neurotransmitters onto their target tissues, such as smooth muscle. Therefore, the neural regulation of the gallbladder is more reminiscent of the dual parasympathetic­sympathetic innervation seen in organs such as the heart and the urinary bladder, as opposed to the intrinsic reflex circuitry that is characteristic of the intestines.
All gallbladder neurons receive fast excitatory synaptic input ­ the principal driving force in the neuromuscular axis of the gallbladder [6,16­18]. Fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in the gallbladder are mediated exclusively by acetylcholine. Unlike the ganglia of the intestines, where most fast synaptic inputs arise from nearby neurons, the main source of fast synaptic input to gallbladder neurons is vagal preganglionic nerve terminals [18]. Stimulation of vagus nerves in vivo elicits gallbladder contraction [19­21]. Furthermore, neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus are labeled after retrograde axonal tracers are injected into the gallbladder wall [4]. About 20% of the neurons in the gallbladder appear to receive interganglionic input from other gallbladder neurons [18].
Slow EPSPs are detected in about 25% of gallbladder neurons and are activated by an influx of Na+ through nonselective cation channels [6,16,22]. They are mediated by the release of peptides from extrinsic afferent fibers, which may be associated with the subjective experience of biliary pain. A subset of the sensory fibers in the wall of the gallbladder is activated only by noxious stimulation of the biliary system, indicating that these are pure visceral nociceptors [23]. Within the gallbladder, the pain afferents are likely to be immunoreactive for both substance P and CGRP [4,5,24]. Capsaicin, which causes peptide release from small-diameter afferent fibers, induces the release of substance P and CGRP when it is applied to the gallbladder in vitro [24]. When applied to gallbladder neurons, tachykinin, CGRP, and capsaicin all cause a membrane depolarization that is mediated by neurokinin (NK) type 3 receptors [22,25]; NK3 receptor blockade inhibits the slow EPSP and the depolarization

265

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

caused by capsaicin [22]. Therefore, sensory fibers that pass through gallbladder ganglia can act locally to modulate ganglionic output by synapsing on gallbladder neurons and increasing their excitability. This local axon reflex circuit may contribute to a cycle that induces the subjective experience of biliary pain in gallbladder disease. Increased ganglionic output caused by slow EPSPs may lead to increased gallbladder contractility. If bile outflow from the gallbladder is inhibited or obstructed, pressure may then increase to higher levels leading to a feed-forward cycle of sensory fiber activation. Activated sensory fibers elicit additional stimulation of gallbladder neurons, leading to further increases in intralumenal pressure and enhanced perception of pain.
Gallbladder smooth muscle cells Gallbladder smooth muscle cells are arranged in interposed bundles that are oriented in various directions within the muscularis of the gallbladder [26]. Within each bundle these smooth muscle cells appear to be coupled because intact cells have a very low input resistance [27] and rapid Ca2+ transients occur simultaneously in all of the smooth muscle cells of a given bundle [28].
Electrical properties of gallbladder smooth muscle The electrical properties of gallbladder smooth muscle cells have been investigated in intact preparations using intracellular microelectrodes and in isolated myocytes using patch clamp recording techniques [27,29]. Intact gallbladder smooth muscle cells generate spontaneous action potentials that consist of a rapid spike followed by a plateau phase [27]. Spontaneous action potentials typically occur at a frequency of 0.3­0.4 Hz, which is significantly faster than the frequency of slow wave potentials in gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Two of the principal channels involved in the gallbladder smooth muscle action potential are the L-type Ca2+ channel and the delayed rectifier K+ channel. The L-type Ca2+ channel blocker, nifedipine, abolishes the gallbladder smooth muscle action potential in intact tissue, as well as the voltage-activated inward current in isolated cells [27,29]. The amplitude and duration of the spike and plateau phases of the action potential are augmented by the voltage-activated K+ (KV) channel blocker, 4-aminopyridine, and most of the voltage-activated outward current is mediated by KV channels [27,30]. Despite the clear involvement of dihydropyridine-sensitive Ca2+ channels and KV channels in the action potential of gallbladder smooth muscle, the mechanisms responsible for pacing of the action potential and the generation of the plateau phase have not been resolved. ERG channels, which are expressed in the gallbladder smooth muscle, likely contribute to the repolarization of the plateau. ERG channel blockers prolong the plateau phase of the action potential, resulting in prolonged action potentials with multiple spikes and a depolarization of the membrane potential [31]. Another current that contributes to the background

activity of gallbladder smooth muscle cells is a steady state nonselective cation current. When this current is inhibited by Na2+ substitution, the cells become hyperpolarized with an associated elimination of spontaneous action potentials [32].
Other channels that have been identified in gallbladder smooth muscle include ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channels and large-conductance Ca2+-activated K (BK) channels. BK channels have been identified in single-channel recordings from gallbladder smooth muscle [27] and are responsible for spontaneous transient outward currents in these cells [33]. BK channel currents are activated by local Ca2+ release (i.e., sparks) through ryanodine receptor (RyR) channels of the endoplasmic reticulum. Although the functional relevance of sparks and transient outward currents in gallbladder smooth muscle is not completely understood, a role in the regulation of gallbladder smooth muscle excitability seems plausible as they are inhibited by cholecystokinin (CCK) [33].
KATP channels appear to play an important role in gallbladder smooth muscle hyperpolarization and relaxation [34 ­36]. Activation of the KATP channel with the activators lemakalim or pinacidil causes a prolonged hyperpolarization that is associated with an elimination of spontaneous action potentials. KATP channel activation is responsible for the inhibitory effects of CGRP and histamine H2 receptor agonists [35,37]. Activation of the KATP channel involves the activation of the cyclic AMP adenylate cyclase­protein kinase A signal transduction cascade [34,36], whereas activation of protein kinase C inhibits KATP channel function [36,38].
Calcium handling in gallbladder smooth muscle Ca2+ influx and Ca2+ release from intracellular stores is critical for gallbladder smooth muscle function as gallbladder contractility depends mainly on increases in the intracellular Ca2+ concentration [Ca2+]i. Whole-mount preparations treated with a Ca2+-sensitive dye have shown the presence of two types of rhythmic spontaneous Ca2+ transients in gallbladder smooth muscle cells: Ca2+ flashes and Ca2+ waves [28,39]. Flashes appear to be Ca2+ transients that are directly associated with the spontaneous action potentials in gallbladder smooth muscle [28]. They occur simultaneously in all of the smooth muscle cells within a given bundle, but are not synchronized among nonintersecting bundles. Waves are rhythmic Ca2+ transients that spread within a given smooth muscle cell, apparently corresponding to subthreshold depolarization of gallbladder smooth muscle cells [39]. Similar to spontaneous electrical activity, flashes and waves are sensitive to L-type Ca2+ channel and inositol triphosphate (IP3) inhibitors, and are augmented by excitatory agonists in a phospholipase C-dependent manner, which suggests that they play a role in spontaneous excitability and pacemaking in gallbladder smooth muscle. Interestingly, synchronous Ca2+ flashes occur among smooth muscle bundles in the presence of CCK or muscarinic agonists. The spatiotemporal pat-

266

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

terns of these events support a model in which asynchronous
electrical and contractile activity of gallbladder smooth mus-
cle bundles throughout the muscularis layer is responsible
for maintenance of net tone in the organ. Furthermore, syn-
chronous global electrical rhythms that likely result from
excitatory agonist stimulation may contribute to gallbladder
emptying. Functional studies indicate that Ca2+ entry through L-type
Ca2+ channels is required for gallbladder smooth muscle to
respond to excitatory neurohormonal stimulation. However, CCK-induced contraction involves Ca2+ release from intra-
cellular stores, which have both IP3 receptors and RyRs and which are dependent on sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticu-
lum calcium ATPase (SERCA) pumps for refilling and maintenance [40]. Ca2+ release from intracellular stores not only
induces contraction but also relaxation (Figs 12.1 and 12.2). As previously described, release of Ca2+ through RyR chan-
nels as sparks activates BK channels causing hyperpolarization and relaxation [33]. These divergent functions of Ca2+
stored in a single intracellular domain can only be explained by the discrete location of the IP3 and RyR Ca2+ release channels. This cellular model allows for the heterogeneity of the Ca2+ signaling, supporting the more versatile and complex role of intracellular Ca2+ mobilization. In addition, Ca2+ release and Ca2+ influx mechanisms are interrelated, as emp-
tying of stores induces the coactivation of capacitative and Ltype Ca2+ channels [40], underscoring the important role of L-type Ca2+ channels in gallbladder function. Evidence that reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton is necessary for Ca2+ depletion-induced Ca2+ entry supports a conformational
coupling model in gallbladder smooth muscle cells [41]. Alterations in Ca2+ handling (related to both Ca2+ influx and

Ca2+ release mechanisms) can be responsible for gallbladder stasis in inflammation [42].
Gallbladder interstitial cell of Cajal-like cells Spontaneous rhythmic electrical activity is a striking feature of gallbladder smooth muscle cells. Evidence of this activity is twofold: (1) action potentials detected in individual cells using intracellular microelectrodes and (2) Ca2+ flashes detected in muscle bundles of intact preparations using laser confocal Ca2+ imaging. Our laboratory has provided abundant evidence of specialized pacemakers cells capable of generating spontaneous rhythmic activity in the gallbladder muscularis. We refer to these cells as interstitial cell of Cajal (ICC)-like cells because they share a number of features with the intestinal cells described by Ramon y Cajal over a century ago and, further, they have been shown to generate pacemaker activity in the gut and to play a role in mediating neuromuscular signaling [43].
Light microscopy shows fusiform Kit-immunoreactive cells that are oriented parallel to adjacent muscle fibers in the muscularis layer. Electron microscopy shows cells in muscle bundles that have features of ICCs, including an electrondense cytoplasm and an abundance of mitochondria and calveoli. These cells are in direct contact with each other and with gallbladder smooth muscle cells. Furthermore, Ca2+ imaging also reveals cells with a higher intensity of fluo-4 fluorescence than the surrounding muscle cells. Ca2+ flashes in the ICC-like cells that are synchronized with the gallbladder smooth muscle cell flashes can be detected but, interestingly, in the presence of gap junction blockers the flashes persist in the ICC-like cells but not in the gallbladder smooth muscle cells. Finally, in isolated gallbladder smooth muscle

Sensory fiber (SP, CGRP)

Figure 12.1 Excitatory transmitters, hormones, inflammatory mediators, receptors, and ion channels that have been identified in the neuromuscular axis of the gallbladder. Nerve terminals are represented by triangles, receptors by framed boxes, and ion channels by boxes with arrows indicating the direction of ion flow. a, a-Adrenergic receptor; ACh, acetylcholine; CCE, capacitative calcium entry; CCK, cholecystokinin; CGRP, calcitonin generelated peptide; EP, prostaglandin E; H, histamine; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate; M, muscarinic; NK, neurokinin; NSCC, nonselective cation channel; SP, substance P; SR, sarcoplasmic reticulum; TK, tachykinins.

Vagal preganglionic nerve fiber (ACh)
CCK1

NK3 CGRP Gallbladder
neuron (ACh, TK)
Mast cell (histamine) ?
CCK Blood vessel

Nicotinic IP
3

a NK2

Ca2+ Ca2+

CCE L-type

Ca2+

M3 IP3 SR

H1 Smooth EP muscle Ca2+
cell Na+
CCK1

NSCC

267

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Sympathetic postganglionic nerve fiber (norepinephrine)

Smooth muscle b cell ERG K+

Vagal preganglionic nerve fiber (ACh)

a2

d,k,m

Gallbladder

NO cGMP ?

neuron (NO, VIP, PACAP)

d,k,m

VIP

?

EP CGRP cAMP-PKA H2

Mast cell (histamine) ? ?

SST Y

Ca2+ RyR SR

SOM PP FGF

FXR

Blood vessel

KV K+ KATP K+ BK K+

Figure 12.2 Inhibitory transmitters, hormones, inflammatory mediators, receptors, and ion channels that have been identified in the neuromuscular axis of the gallbladder. Nerve terminals are represented by triangles, receptors by framed boxes, and ion channels by boxes with arrows indicating the direction of ion flow. a2 and b, adrenergic receptors; d, k, and m, opioid receptors; ACh, acetylcholine; BK, large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel; CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; EP, prostaglandin E; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; FXR, farsenoid X receptor; H, histamine; KATP, ATP-sensitive K+ channel; KV, voltage-activated K+ channel; NO, nitric oxide; PACAP, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide; PKA, protein kinase A; PP, pancreatic polypeptide; RyR, ryanodine receptor; SOM, somatostatin; SR, sarcoplasmic reticulum; SST, somatostatin receptor; VIP, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide; Y, neuropeptide Y/PP receptor.

cells, spontaneous rhythmic activity was not detected even when the cells were warmed to 36°C. Collectively, these findings indicate that the spontaneous rhythmic activity that is detected in gallbladder smooth muscle, and which corresponds to smooth muscle bundle contractions, is generated by specialized ICC-like cells and is not an intrinsic property of gallbladder smooth muscle.
Gallbladder emptying Neuroendocrine control of gallbladder contraction Numerous neurotransmitters and hormones are capable of causing gallbladder contraction, as demonstrated by functional studies involving measurement of gallbladder pressure or muscle strip tension (see Fig. 12.1). The three compounds that participate physiologically in gallbladder contractile events are CCK, acetylcholine, and tachykinins.
Cholecystokinin One of the first and most significant hormones to be identified, CCK was named in 1928 by Ivy and Oldberg [44] for its ability to contract the gallbladder. The mechanisms of CCK action in the gallbladder are described in greater detail in the section on postprandial gallbladder contraction.
Acetylcholine As described previously, all gallbladder neurons are cholinergic, and stimulus-induced release of acetylcholine from these neurons results in the contraction of gallbladder smooth muscle. Although evidence of M1, M2, M3, and M4 muscarinic receptors has been reported in the gallbladder [45­48], the main muscarinic receptor subtype in the smooth muscle cells is M3, whose activation induces smooth muscle contraction [45,46]. Activation of M3 receptors leads

to phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis by phospholipase C as well as inhibition of cAMP formation [49,50].
Tachykinins Tachykinins are prevalent in the nerves of the gallbladder, including extrinsic afferent nerves as well as gallbladder neurons and their axons. Tachykinins produce a direct, concentration-dependent contraction of the isolated gallbladder, with a rank order potency of NKA > NKB > substance P [21,24,51], which is characteristic of NK2 receptors. In the gallbladder, the binding of tachykinins to NK receptors is linked to protein kinase C activation [51]. The coexpression of tachykinins with acetylcholine in gallbladder neurons indicates that these compounds may act together to promote gallbladder emptying on vagal stimulation.
Postprandial gallbladder contractions Postprandial gallbladder contraction is triggered by gastric emptying leading to the release of CCK from enterochromaffin cells in the epithelial lining of the duodenum. Although the concept that CCK acts as a hormone to cause gallbladder emptying is well established, it is also likely that CCK acts at several sites to promote functional gallbladder motility (see Fig. 12.1). The most direct means of gallbladder contraction is for hormonal CCK to act on receptors located on gallbladder smooth muscle, which expresses the CCK1 but not the CCK2 receptor [52]. It is likely that low-affinity CCK1 receptors are present on gallbladder smooth muscle, as the EC50 for CCK-induced gallbladder contraction is in the 10­50 nM range [53­55]. However, it is unclear whether the CCK receptors on gallbladder smooth muscle are a normal physiological site of action for CCK because postprandial serum concentrations of CCK are in the 10­20 pM range

268

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

[56,57], which is far below the threshold necessary for a direct action of CCK on gallbladder muscle strips. Therefore, a neural mechanism must be involved in the prokinetic effects of postprandial CCK release.
Meal-induced gallbladder contractions and contractions induced by physiological concentrations of CCK in vivo are significantly attenuated by neural blockade in several species, including humans [57­66]. Furthermore, hexamethonium, which blocks the vagal preganglionic input to gallbladder neurons, inhibits CCK- and meal-induced gallbladder contractions [57,63,64]. These data indicate that CCK can act on nerves to promote gallbladder motility.
Results of electrophysiological studies suggest that CCK does not have a direct effect on gallbladder neurons, but rather a potent presynaptic excitatory effect on nerve terminals in gallbladder ganglia, thereby increasing the release of acetylcholine onto gallbladder neurons [6,18,67]. CCK enhances vagally mediated fast EPSPs in gallbladder ganglia by way of a presynaptic facilitory action on vagal postganglionic nerve terminals [6,67]. Note that the action of CCK in gallbladder ganglia occurs within the physiological concentration range for CCK (EC50 of 33 pM).
Vagal afferent nerve fibers in the duodenum are another likely site of action for CCK released from enterochromaffin cells. Subdiaphragmatic vagal afferent fibers are sensitive to CCK, and postprandial physiological responses, such as increased gastric motility and pancreatic secretion, have been attributed to CCK-mediated increases in vagal afferent activity [68,69]. After a meal, CCK stimulates vagal afferent nerve fibers, which act in the vagal motor complex to increase the rate of firing of vagal preganglionic neurons. Furthermore, CCK acts in gallbladder ganglia, as previously discussed, to increase the amount of acetylcholine released from the vagal motor terminals each time they are activated.
The questions remain of how CCK-induced gallbladder emptying still occurs (albeit diminished) after vagotomy, or after liver transplantation with the donor gallbladder intact, if CCK normally acts through the neural mechanisms described. The answers to these questions probably lie in the fact that gallbladder emptying involves increased gallbladder tone in concert with a decrease in resistance at the SO. As described in the section on interprandial sphincter of Oddi activity, it is likely that the circuitry responsible for the CCKinduced decrease in SO resistance remains intact after vagotomy or liver transplantation. Therefore, changes in SO tone, in combination with the myogenic tone of the gallbladder, may lead to the flow of bile. Another potential mechanism for CCK-induced gallbladder emptying after vagotomy is that gallbladder denervation could lead to a sensitization of gallbladder smooth muscle, resulting in a leftward shift of the concentration­effect curve for CCK. This phenomenon is observed in patients who have had a truncal vagotomy, as the gallbladder contraction in response to CCK is significantly enhanced [70]. Gallbladder emptying after vagotomy could

also be mediated through an enterobiliary neural reflex. Studies in the guinea pig and the Australian possum have demonstrated that the gallbladder receives projections from neurons located in the myenteric plexus of the duodenum [4,71]. It is plausible that lumenal stimuli or mucosal CCK release may result in the activation of these neurons, which directly signal to the gallbladder. Although this scheme could not contribute to gallbladder emptying after liver transplantation, the enterobiliary circuitry may contribute to gallbladder emptying after truncal vagotomy.
Interprandial gallbladder contractions During duodenal phase II of the migrating myoelectric complex (MMC) there is an increase in gallbladder pressure accompanied by a transient flow of bile from the gallbladder to the duodenal lumen. This interprandial gallbladder motor response, which occurs in association with elevated antral and duodenal motor activity, has been demonstrated in several species, including humans, and is thought to help maintain the enterohepatic circulation of bile salts [72,73].
The mechanisms responsible for the phase II gallbladder contraction have not been clearly resolved, but they appear to involve a neural component because spontaneous and motilin-induced gallbladder contractions are reduced or abolished with atropine or hexamethonium [74]. However, it is not clear whether the neural component involves the activation of a vagal reflex or whether it is limited to actions on intrinsic reflex circuits of the bowel. In a canine study, inhibition of vagal reflex activity by transient vagal chilling or by acute vagotomy led to a decrease in MMC-related gallbladder emptying [75]. In contrast, MMC-related contractile activity changes little after chronic vagotomy [76­78]. If the biliary motor response that accompanies the MMC does not involve an extrinsic neural circuit, it may involve direct neural interactions between the gut and the biliary tree, or humoral factors may contribute.
The gastrointestinal hormone motilin is thought to initiate the MMC as plasma motilin levels increase during or just before the onset of MMC activity, and exogenous motilin administration initiates an early burst phase of the MMC in the upper gastrointestinal tract [79,80], including the gallbladder [58]. Exogenous administration of motilin, or motilin analogues such as erythromycin, increases gallbladder motor activity [81], and motilin induces the contraction of isolated gallbladder myocytes [82]. However, it is not yet clear how endogenous motilin would directly activate MMC-related gallbladder activity, which is primarily limited to phase II, as peak levels of motilin in the serum correspond to duodenal phase III of the MMC, when the gallbladder is quiescent.
Gallbladder filling Between meals, gallbladder filling is related to the rate of hepatic secretion from the liver, as well as SO resistance. During this process, hepatic secretory pressure is relatively

269

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

high ( 25­30 mmHg), as is SO pressure (~ 11­30 mmHg), whereas pressure within the biliary tree is maintained at a relatively low level (~ 5­15 mmHg) because the gallbladder is able to accommodate newly synthesized bile [72]. The accommodation of the gallbladder during fasting relies on the ability of the epithelium to concentrate bile and on the receptive expansion of the gallbladder. The gallbladder thereby contributes to the modulation of pressure within the biliary system through both passive and active mechanisms.
Passive filling The fibroelastic properties of the gallbladder wall likely facilitate filling, allowing the organ to expand as bile is routed from the biliary tree to the gallbladder. The sheer size of this organ relative to other structures in the biliary tree could favor the passage of bile into the gallbladder. According to the law of Laplace, tension in the wall of a hollow elastic structure is proportional to the product of pressure multiplied by diameter. Because the diameter of the gallbladder is significantly greater than that of the bile ducts, the path of least resistance would be gallbladder filling and expansion while the SO is resisting bile flow. As the gallbladder fills and its diameter increases further, the propensity for bile to flow into the gallbladder increases. Although this principle has never been applied to the gallbladder, many visceral structures that undergo expansion, including the urinary bladder, alveoli, the heart, and the eyeball, have been shown to behave according to the law of Laplace.
Several stretch-activated channels have been identified. It is possible that gallbladder smooth muscle cells express stretch-activated channels that are opened as gallbladder tone increases slightly as a result of filling. These could be channels that induce a depolarization of the smooth muscle resulting in increased gallbladder basal tension, or channels that elicit hyperpolarization and decreased tension.
Active filling Several candidates exist as potential mediators of active gallbladder relaxation and resultant gallbladder filling (see Fig. 12.2). Neurotransmitters that have an inhibitory effect on gallbladder smooth muscle include CGRP, norepinephrine (noradrenaline), VIP, PACAP, and nitric oxide (NO). Humoral factors that relax the gallbladder include pancreatic polypeptide, somatostatin, and fibroblast growth factor. However, it is difficult to determine which of these compounds actually contribute to normal physiological gallbladder expansion, as many of their effects on the gallbladder have been observed at supraphysiological concentrations. Several potential schemes that could contribute to this process will be described.
Release of inhibitory neuroactive compounds from gallbladder neurons In the bowel, distinct subpopulations of enteric neurons (i.e., inhibitory motor neurons) act to decrease muscle tone.

Compounds that have been proposed to contribute to the relaxation of intestinal smooth muscle include NO, VIP, PACAP, and ATP. As mentioned, subsets of gallbladder neurons are VIP- or PACAP-immunoreactive [8,11­13], and immunoreactive for NOS [8­10,12,13,83]. The neuroactive peptides VIP and PACAP cause relaxation of resting or precontracted gallbladder muscle strips from several species including humans [84­87], probably through the activation of adenylate cyclase. VIP is released by nerves in the gallbladder in response to electrical stimulation of the vagus nerves, further evidence of its neurotransmitter capability [88,89]. Relaxant responses to exogenous VIP-vagal stimulation can be antagonized by VIP antisera [86].
Evidence indicating that NO relaxes gallbladder smooth muscle includes the finding that inhibition of NOS results in increased gallbladder tone and an enhancement of agonistinduced contractions [90,91]. NOS inhibition also reduces stimulation-induced neurogenic relaxations, and NO donors have an inhibitory effect on gallbladder tone [90­93].
CGRP, which is present in extrinsic sensory fibers, can decrease tension in gallbladder muscle strips and cause a hyperpolarization of gallbladder smooth muscle cells. It is unlikely, however, that CGRP released from gallbladder afferent fibers contributes to relaxation because tachykinins are costored with CGRP in these nerve fibers [4,5,10], and tachykinins have an excitatory effect on gallbladder smooth muscle [15,21,24,51,94].
Carbon monoxide may also play a role in gallbladder function. The enzyme that synthesizes carbon monoxide, heme oxygenase 2, is present in canine gallbladder nerves, and copper protoporphyrin IX, an inhibitor of heme oxygenase, inhibits nonadrenergic noncholinergic stimulus-induced relaxations [95].
In the bowel, ATP is a mediator of nerve-induced relaxations. However, it is unlikely that ATP contributes to gallbladder relaxation as application of exogenous ATP leads to gallbladder contraction [96].
Despite the results described, it is difficult to conceive how gallbladder neurons could provide an unambiguous inhibitory signal to gallbladder smooth muscle as all gallbladder neurons express ChAT and are therefore likely to be cholinergic and excitatory [5]. Activation of these neurons would lead to the release of acetylcholine plus other compounds such as NO and/or VIP, thus providing the gallbladder smooth muscle with a mixed signal.
Increased sympathetic neural activity in the gallbladder Another possibility is that gallbladder relaxation involves the release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerves. Stimulation of the splanchnic nerves leads to a decrease in gallbladder tone [97­99], indicating that sympathetic activity contributes to interprandial gallbladder filling. It is likely that activation of sympathetic neural inputs can lead to decreased gallbladder tone through direct effects on gallbladder smooth

270

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

muscle [87] and by inhibiting vagal input to gallbladder neurons [18,100]. However, it is still unclear whether such a system is active primarily at times of physiological stress or whether it contributes to the normal accommodation of the gallbladder wall during interprandial filling. Indeed, in models of hemorrhagic shock, gallbladder contractility is significantly decreased [101].
Humoral factors that relax gallbladder smooth muscle Because pancreatic polypeptide relaxes gallbladder muscle strips [102], this peptide has been implicated as a potential contributor to gallbladder filling. Furthermore, elevated pancreatic polypeptide levels have been implicated in the etiology of clinically significant biliary stasis, as is seen in patients with diabetes mellitus [103]. Increases in pancreatic polypeptide levels have been measured in response to liquid test meals, intraduodenal feeding, and CCK infusion [104,105]. However, there is no correlation between pancreatic polypeptide levels and gallbladder motor activity when observed in healthy individuals [106], indicating that pancreatic polypeptide probably does not contribute to interprandial gallbladder filling. Pancreatic polypeptide may play an indirect role in the control of gallbladder motility by modifying pancreatic secretion or intestinal motility, but this has not been resolved.
Somatostatin is another compound that may contribute to gallbladder filling as several lines of evidence indicate that somatostatin decreases gallbladder contractility. Long-term therapy with the somatostatin analogue octreotide for diseases such as acromegaly [107,108], or the existence of somatostatin-secreting tumors [109], both interfere with gallbladder contractility. Gallbladder hypomotility in celiac disease has been associated with elevated somatostatin levels, increased gallbladder fasting volume, and decreased CCK release [110]. In addition to its well-known inhibitory effect on the release of mucosal CCK, somatostatin can act locally to decrease gallbladder motility. Somatostatin decreases CCK- and carbachol-induced gallbladder contractions, gallbladder pressure, and the release of acetylcholine from gallbladder muscle strips [111,112]. Somatostatin also inhibits CCK-induced gallbladder contractions in isolated cells [113]. In healthy subjects, somatostatin enhances gallbladder relaxation and reduces CCK secretion in the late postprandial phase [114]. Although these results infer an association between somatostatin and gallbladder volume under pharmacological or pathological conditions, a physiological role for somatostatin in gallbladder filling has not been proven.
A study in mice has provided convincing evidence that fibroblast growth factor (FGF) plays a role in gallbladder relaxation and filling [115]. The investigators reported that gallbladders of FGF15 ­/­ mice were almost devoid of bile, and administration of FGF15 or its human orthologue FGF19 caused gallbladder filling. Furthermore, they showed that FGF induced relaxation of precontracted gallbladder muscle

strips, probably through a cAMP-dependent mechanism. Although the neuromuscular mechanisms are not yet understood, these findings support the concept that FGF15/19 released from the ileum in response to bile salts causes gallbladder relaxation and filling.
The sphincter of Oddi
The sphincter of Oddi (SO) oversees the flow of about 3 L of bile and pancreatic secretions per day, and it is the busiest nonvascular intersection in the body. A vast interspecies variation in morphology and function of the SO has led to more discussion and controversy than any other structure in the gastrointestinal tract. The tasks of the SO are to regulate the flow of bile and pancreatic secretions into the duodenum, to facilitate gallbladder filling, and to prevent the reflux of lumenal contents from the duodenum into the pancreatic ducts and biliary tree. Although the precise mechanisms of SO function are not yet fully understood, research has demonstrated that changes in SO motility involve neurohormonal regulation of nontraditional neural circuits that orchestrate coordinated signals from SO ganglia to the surrounding circular smooth muscle.
Sphincter of Oddi neurobiology Most studies of SO ganglia have involved the guinea pig and the Australian possum. Therefore, most of the following information relates to ganglia in the SO region of these two species, notable considering the aforementioned interspecies variation [116].
Morphology of the sphincter of Oddi ganglia Ganglia in the guinea pig SO are similar in shape and density to the ganglia of the myenteric plexus of the duodenum [117,118]. In fact, interganglionic nerve bundles can be traced between the myenteric plexus of the duodenum and that of the SO [117]. The processes of SO neurons typically leave the ganglionated plexus to innervate the smooth muscle of the SO, and therefore most SO neurons are thought to be motor neurons.
Neurotransmitters of the sphincter of Oddi Immunohistochemical studies have revealed the presence of numerous neuroactive compounds in SO nerves [113­130]. For example, among the species investigated there is evidence of acetylcholine, NO, VIP, tachykinins, CGRP, NPY, OFQ, somatostatin, enkephalin (ENK), galanin (GAL), serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), peptide histidine isoleucine (PHI), gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), and bombesin.
The most thorough investigation of neurochemical content and distribution in the SO has been conducted in the guinea pig. Guinea pig SO ganglia consist of two major subpopulations of neurons: those that are immunoreactive for

271

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

ChAT and those that are immunoreactive for NOS [10,118]. The cholinergic (ChAT-positive) neurons, which are thought to be excitatory motor neurons, represent about two-thirds of the population and are also immunoreactive for tachykinins and/or ENK. The nitrergic neurons, which are thought to be inhibitory motor neurons, are also immunoreactive for either VIP or NPY, but not both. SO neurons have also been found to be immunoreactive for bombesin [119], OFQ [120], and 5-HT [121]; whether these compounds are expressed by cholinergic and/or nitrergic neurons is not yet known. Nerve fibers, thought to be extrinsic afferent axons, are immunoreactive for tachykinins and CGRP and are abundant in the ganglionated plexus of the guinea pig SO [118]. Sympathetic postganglionic nerves immunoreactive for tyrosine hydroxylase are also abundant in guinea pig SO ganglia and nerve bundles [122].
Less is known about the colocalization of various compounds in other species. Considerable neurotransmitter diversity exists, and a nitrergic innervation of the SO has been reported in all species in which this has been investigated. In the human SO, neural immunostaining has demonstrated NOS, VIP, PHI, NPY, CGRP, GAL, somatostatin, tachykinin, and ENK, and histochemical staining was positive for NADPH dehydrogenase [7,123­126]. Nerve fibers of the rhesus monkey SO are immunoreactive for ENK, NPY, and tyrosine hydroxylase, and NADPH dehydrogenase staining has also been reported [7,127]. In the pig, immunoreactivities for NOS, VIP, NPY, GAL, PHI, CGRP, tachykinin, and bombesin have been reported [14,124,128]. Feline SO nerves have been shown to be VIP and tachykinin immunoreactive [21,86,129,130]. In studies of the Australian possum SO, ChAT, tachykinin, GAL, GRP, and somatostatin immunoreactivities have been demonstrated [131­134], and NADPH dehydrogenase staining suggests a nitrergic innervation [135].
Sphincter of Oddi smooth muscle Human and animal studies of the SO have established that the sphincter is not a simple and passive smooth muscle portion of the biliary system. Rather, it exhibits basal tonicity, spontaneous phasic contractions, and peristaltic activity that modulates bile flow into the duodenum [136­140]. The human SO is normally characterized by prominent phasic contractions that are superimposed on a modest basal pressure [141]. In a landmark study, pressures were recorded from the human SO to determine the effect of neurohumoral mediators on SO function [142]. The basal SO pressure was 4 mmHg higher than the common bile duct or pancreatic duct pressure. Pronounced phasic contractions superimposed on the basal SO pressure occurred at a frequency of 4.1/min. The phasic SO contractions were about 100 mmHg in amplitude and 4.3 s in duration. These contractions were unique to the SO and did not exist in the duodenum, the common bile duct, or the pancreatic duct. The phasic contractions

were altered by intravenous infusions of CCK, glucagon, and secretin, suggesting a neurohumoral component to the modulation of SO motility in humans.
Animal studies have revealed that the proximal and distal segments of the SO can respond differently to a variety of bioactive compounds, further evidence of the complexity of the regulation and function of this neuromuscular structure. Exogenous CCK, secretin, adenosine, and ATP have been used to explore the concept that the SO is not a single-function entity but that, under defined conditions, it can function as one, two, three, and four separate sphincters [143­145]. This complexity may reflect the various inputs that the SO receives from the autonomic nervous system, including those inputs from local reflex circuits, as described in the following text.
In general, the interpretation of the actions of various compounds in the SO has been difficult because most compounds mediate their effects through both direct actions on the smooth muscle and indirect neural responses. For example, exogenously administered CCK has a direct contractile effect on SO smooth muscle as well as contractile and relaxant effects that are mediated by neurotransmitter release. The neurally mediated effects of CCK are species specific; both contraction and relaxation are detected in species whose sphincter acts as a pump [146], whereas simple relaxation is detected in species such as humans and cats in which the sphincter acts primarily as a resistor [147­149].
Electrical field stimulation of the SO evokes a twitch-like contraction followed by relaxation [135,150­152]. Muscarinic blockade in the presence of guanethidine alters this pattern to a simple relaxation [150,151,153], consistent with the existence of inhibitory nonadrenergic noncholinergic innervation. NO is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the SO [135,151,154,155]. Neurally released NO increases cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP levels in SO smooth muscle [154,156] and induces the activation of KATP channels [157]. This pathway may be important in the physiological regulation of bile duct pressure, as NOS blockers increase SO resistance to flow [153] and NO donors inhibit SO contraction frequency and decrease basal pressure [123].
Whereas the understanding of purinergic regulation of gastrointestinal motility is well advanced, the action of purines in the regulation of SO motility is rudimentary. Exogenous ATP is known to reduce rabbit SO contractility and inhibit spontaneous activity in cat SO [158,159]. In contrast, exogenous ATP produces an excitatory response in the guinea pig SO and the Australian brush-tailed possum SO. [145] Purines have no effect on human SO contractility [160]. Exogenous adenosine exerts an inhibitory effect on the guinea pig SO [161] in contrast to the excitatory response elicited in the human SO and the Australian brush-tailed possum SO [145,162].
In some species, such as guinea pig, rabbit, and North American opossum, CCK release leads to a pumping

272

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

response that involves rhythmic fluctuations in SO tension [53,163­165]. In the opossum, bile flow appears to involve peristalsis through the particularly long SO region characteristic of this species. Regardless of the species or the type of response, it appears that the physiological effect of CCK is to decrease resistance and therefore promote bile flow.
The effect of CCK on SO tone involves a neural mechanism, as the CCK-induced increase in bile flow through the SO is inhibited by muscarinic blockade with atropine or by complete neural blockade with tetrodotoxin, [62,63,163­ 165]. Furthermore, inhibition of VIPergic signals with VIP antiserum, or NO release by NOS inhibitors, suppresses CCK actions [155,166]. These observations led to the theory that CCK alters SO tone through a hormonal effect on SO neurons. Indeed, the application of CCK to guinea pig SO neurons causes a prolonged depolarization and bursts of action potentials [167]. However, as for gallbladder smooth muscle, the concentration-dependent nature of this response is outside of the physiological range [56,57]. These data indicate that the neural mechanism by which CCK decreases SO resistance probably does not involve a direct action of hormonal CCK on SO neurons. One possibility is that CCK, released locally at high concentrations from enterochromaffin cells, has a paracrine effect on SO neurons; another possibility is that CCK acts on duodenal neurons that provide regulatory input to SO ganglia (Fig. 12.4).
Evidence is mounting in support of the concept that CCK released from duodenal enterochromaffin cells activates duodenal enteric neurons, and that these neurons signal SO ganglia, initiating postprandial changes in SO function (see Fig. 12.4) [168]. In the guinea pig [169] and the Australian possum [71], retrograde axonal tracing studies have confirmed the existence of a direct neural projection from the myenteric plexus of the duodenum to the SO. In the guinea pig, the neurons of this duodenum­SO projection are cholinergic [169], and neurons in SO ganglia receive nicotinic excitatory synaptic input from the duodenal myenteric plexus [170]. Experiments involving electrical recordings from duodenal neurons that have been retrogradely labeled from the SO have shown that all of these neurons express CCK receptors and many of these neurons are intrinsic primary afferent neurons [169]. Intrinsic primary afferent neurons in the intestines are known to send projections to the lamina propria, where they may be activated by local release of CCK from enterochromaffin cells [171­173]. These data support the view that CCK released from duodenal enterochromaffin cells could initiate changes in SO resistance by way of a local neural circuit (Fig. 12.4). However, the involvement of this neural circuit in postprandial changes in SO tone is not certain. Other potential functions for this circuit include the mediation of changes in SO tone that accompany interprandial bile flow during phase II of the MMC (see next section). Alternatively, it may provide a means of increasing SO tone when lumenal pressure in the duodenum

2

Smooth muscle cell
3?

Vagus nerve X

CCK
Blood vessel

1
E CCK
Blood vessel

Figure 12.3 Sequence of events leading to postprandial gallbladder contraction. 1. Cholecystokinin (CCK) released from the duodenal mucosa activates vagal afferent fibers and enters the bloodstream. 2. Increased vagal afferent activity leads to increased vagal preganglionic output. 3. Within the gallbladder, hormonal CCK acts at physiological concentrations on receptors located on vagal preganglionic nerve terminals in gallbladder ganglia. Activation of these presynaptic receptors leads to an increase in acetylcholine release and enhanced activation of gallbladder motor neurons. CCK may also act directly on gallbladder smooth muscle, although the receptors at this location appear to be low-affinity CCK1 receptors, which normally would not be activated by physiological concentrations of CCK.

is elevated, thus inhibiting the flow of duodenal contents into the biliary tract.
Interprandial sphincter of Oddi activity During the fasting state, bile flowing toward the small bowel is diverted into the gallbladder by the resistance encountered at the SO ­ resistance maintained by phasic contractions of the smooth muscle superimposed upon a basal level of tonic pressure. Thus, intraductal pressures are increased and bile flow is diverted to the region of lowest resistance, the cystic duct and gallbladder. High pressures in the biliary system also trigger relaxation and compliance of the gallbladder. Resistance at the SO and increased compliance of the gallbladder allow for the diversion of most of the bile away from the gut and into the gallbladder. There are, however,

273

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Pathophysiology of biliary tract motility

Lumen
CCK

E

Blood + vessel

Blood vessel

Mechanisms of biliary stasis in cholesterol disease Patients with cholesterol gallstones often have abnormal gallbladder motility. These individuals have an increased residual gallbladder volume interprandially, as well as decreased gallbladder emptying after a meal [179,180] or in response to exogenous CCK administration [179,181]. Furthermore, gallbladder muscle strips from patients with cholesterol gallstones demonstrate impaired contractile responses to a variety of stimuli [182,183].

Figure 12.4 Postprandial relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi (SO). Cholecystokinin (CCK) released from the duodenal mucosa activates inhibitory motor neurons in SO ganglia, which in turn decrease the basal tone of SO. CCK probably causes a relaxation of the sphincter by activating duodenal neurons that provide synaptic input to SO ganglia. Hormonal CCK may activate SO neurons, although these neurons are not sensitive to the concentrations of CCK that are found in the serum. Another possibility is that locally released CCK acts directly on SO neurons through a paracrine mechanism.
interprandial changes in SO activity that correspond to phase II of the MMC.
The interprandial SO activity associated with the MMC involves a decrease in SO resistance that accompanies increased gallbladder motor activity and bile flow. However, the MMC-related flow of bile does not depend on increased gallbladder motility, as dogs that have undergone cholecystectomy also exhibit cyclic bile flow that corresponds to the MMC [174]. Changes in SO activity that accompany the MMC have been documented in many species, including humans [74,174­176].
As for the gallbladder, the mechanisms underlying the MMC-related changes in SO activity are not entirely clear; however, it appears likely that the duodenum­SO neural circuitry is involved. After truncal vagotomy, MMC-related SO activity is normal in the opossum. Furthermore, relocation of the duodenal papilla in the opossum, which leaves the blood supply and extrinsic nerves intact but eliminates myoneural continuity between the duodenum and the SO, leads to a marked reduction in electrical activity of the SO during phases II and III of the MMC [177]. Also, surgical relocation of the duodenal papilla reduces the SO responsiveness to motilin [178]. Together, these data support the concept that an intrinsic neural circuit mediates the interprandial SO motor response, although evidence of cyclic activity after translocation of the SO suggests the involvement of vagal reflexes or humoral factors.

Cholesterol and biliary stasis Decreased gallbladder smooth muscle contractility is a critical link in the chain of events that leads to cholesterol gallstone formation and resultant cholecystitis. Ground squirrels and prairie dogs, as well as CCK1 receptor knockout mice, that are fed a high-cholesterol diet exhibit a progressive increase in cholesterol saturation in the bile, a decrease in gallbladder contractility, and, ultimately, cholesterol stone formation and cholecystitis [184­187]. If the decrease in gallbladder motility is offset by the administration of the prokinetic agents cisapride or erythromycin, the formation of cholesterol crystals is prevented [188,189]. Conversely, if gallbladder stasis is pharmacologically induced by the administration of a CCK1 antagonist or by knockout of the CCK1 receptor, gallstones form in animals fed a high-cholesterol diet [186,187,190].
These clinical and basic scientific data indicate that gallstone formation results from an elevation in cholesterol concentrations within the bile and an associated decrease in gallbladder contractility. The decrease in contractility is directly linked to cholesterol enrichment. Gallbladder smooth muscle that is exposed to cholesterol-rich liposomes exhibits diminished contractility similar to that observed in human gallbladders with cholesterol stones and in animals fed a high-cholesterol diet [191]. These results support the hypothesis that cholesterol itself can have a direct effect on gallbladder smooth muscle.
Gallbladder stasis probably involves changes in the cytosolic membranes of gallbladder smooth muscle cells. An elevated level of cholesterol in the cystolic membranes disrupts spontaneous action potentials and suppresses voltage-activated Ca2+ currents [192]. The effect of cholesterol appears to be somewhat selective because KV and KATP currents are not affected by cholesterol enrichment. In addition to altering Ca2+ channel activity, cholesterol enrichment affects cytosolic membrane receptors. For example, the hyperpolarization elicited by CGRP is suppressed after cholesterol enrichment, even though the KATP channel that mediates this response is not altered by cholesterol. Furthermore, gallbladders from patients with cholesterol stones have diminished CCK receptor binding and function [193,194]. These data indicate that

274

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

cholesterol enrichment results in selective deficits rather than a nondiscriminatory disruption of membrane protein function, and that the biliary stasis associated with cholesterol stone formation is likely to involve altered Ca2+ channel and membrane receptor function, possibly caused by changes in membrane fluidity [195]. In vitro studies have shown that cholesterol-induced gallbladder dysmotility can be reversed to normal levels after the defective muscle cells (either from cholesterol-enrichment protocols or patients with cholesterol stones) are incubated with cholesterol-free liposomes [191,194,195].
Bile salts and biliary stasis Modifications in bile acid metabolism, associated with prolonged intestinal transit, may also contribute to the formation of cholesterol stones [196]. Reduced gallbladder refilling in gallbladder stasis leads to altered enterohepatic circulation [179]. In patients with gallbladder dysmotility, slow bowel transit contributes to the alterations in the metabolism of bile salts, resulting in an enrichment of the bile acid pool with hydrophobic secondary acids such as deoxycholic acid [197]. This enrichment induces hypersecretion of cholesterol into the bile, an increase in the cholesterol saturation index, and acceleration of cholesterol crystallization [198], thus elevating the risk of gallstone formation. In addition, an elevated concentration of hydrophobic acids in bile decreases gallbladder motility and emptying [199­201]. The dysmotility caused by hydrophobic bile acids involves H2O2 production through the activation of NADPH and xanthine oxidases [201]. H2O2 causes lipid peroxidation and activates cytosolic phospholipase A2 to increase prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production [201]. In contrast, the hydrophilic bile salt ursodeoxycholic acid does not impair gallbladder contractility and can attenuate the deleterious effects of hydrophobic salts [200,201]. Furthermore, ursodeoxycholic acid treatment can prevent gallbladder smooth muscle dysfunction in acute cholecystitis [202]. These findings may explain why ursodeoxycholic acid therapy for patients with symptomatic gallstones reduces the risk for colicky biliary pain and acute cholecystitis, and improves bile turnover [203,204].
Inflammation and gallbladder dysmotility Acalculous cholecystitis Conditions other than elevated biliary cholesterol also lead to decreased gallbladder contractility and cholecystitis, with or without stones. For example, biliary colic in the absence of gallstones is an increasingly prevalent complication among patients in the intensive care unit and in patients without predisposing illness [205­207]. This condition, commonly referred to as acute acalculous cholecystitis, is often associated with trauma or extensive surgery. In a retrospective chart review over 53 months in a tertiary care center, 27 cases of acalculous cholecystitis were observed. Of these cases, 52% occurred in the intensive care unit, 63% occurred

in patients recovering from unrelated surgery, and acalculous cholecystitis accounted for 14% of all cases of acute cholecystitis [208]. The mortality rate for all patients with acalculous cholecystitis was 41%, illustrating the potential lethality of this clinical entity.
The development of acalculous biliary colic, like cholesterol-related gallbladder disease, involves decreased gallbladder motility leading to an increase in the resting volume of the gallbladder and cholecystitis [209­211]. The clinical complexity of a critically ill patient makes it difficult to distinguish between interrelated factors and to determine the etiology of a complication such as acute acalculous cholecystitis. Factors implicated in the pathophysiology of acalculous cholecystitis include parenteral feeding, altered bile composition, ischemia, infection, and functional obstruction of gallbladder outflow [209­211]. Decreased gallbladder motility may also be a consequence of the use of therapeutic agents administered to alleviate traumatic or postoperative pain. A summary of the major findings in these areas follows.
Parenteral feeding During total parenteral nutrition (TPN), biliary stasis and hypomotility have been well documented, contributing to the development of biliary dilation, sludge accumulation, and acute cholecystitis. In most patients, TPN induces gallbladder stasis but does not increase the biliary lithogenic index [212]. Interruption of the enterohepatic circulation and gallbladder stasis are part of the pathogenesis as a consequence of the lack of a physiological stimulus for CCK release. However, during prolonged enteral nutrition, plasma CCK levels are significantly increased and gallbladder contractility is preserved, thus minimizing the risk of acute acalculous cholecystitis [105]. Furthermore, intravascular infusion of CCK in human or animal models ameliorates the hepatobiliary dysfunction caused by TPN [212,213]. Increased circulating levels of CCK can also be induced by intermittent, rapid intravenous infusion of amino acids [214,215]. However, continuous administration of amino acids for longer than 2 h (as occurs in TPN) is accompanied by a decline in CCK release [216]. Taken together, these findings indicate that intravenous administration of amino acids or CCK may circumvent the biliary dysmotility associated with TPN, but therapy of this kind would probably be most beneficial if administered periodically rather than continuously.
Opiate analgesic administration Another factor that likely contributes to the development of gallbladder stasis in the critically ill patient is opiate analgesic administration. In addition to acting as potent analgesics, opiate compounds are well known for their ability to alter gastrointestinal motility [217]. Opioid agonists do not act directly on gallbladder neurons or gallbladder smooth muscle cells; rather, they cause a decrease in the synaptic activity

275

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

between neurons, and between neurons and smooth muscle. Thus, opioid agonists have a potent inhibitory effect on gallbladder motility by decreasing the release of acetylcholine and other excitatory neurotransmitters from vagal terminals in gallbladder ganglia and the neuromuscular terminals of gallbladder neurons. A study showing that the -opiate receptor agonist loperamide decreases bethanechol-induced gallbladder contraction even though plasma CCK levels are increased supports this inhibitory mechanism [218]. Because opioid agonists also increase SO resistance, bile flow is likely to be severely inhibited by opioid compounds, and continued administration of these substances may contribute to the onset of acalculous cholecystitis.
Inflammatory mediators The cause-and-effect relationship between biliary stasis and cholecystitis is not well understood. However, the actions of several proinflammatory agents that are likely to be involved in acute cholecystitis have been investigated. These include prostaglandins, reactive oxygen species, histamine, and endothelins.
Prostaglandins Prostaglandins, particularly PGE2, have been shown to be intimately associated with cholecystitis [219]. Early studies of diseased human gallbladders have shown that both the mucosa and the muscularis of the organ produce high levels of PGE2 [220]. Furthermore, a correlation between severity of inflammation and PGE2 concentrations has been described [221]. Prostaglandin release may be prolonged or augmented by bradykinin, as gallbladder distention and progressive inflammation stimulate local bradykinin formation, thereby stimulating PGI2 and PGE2 release [222] through the activation of cyclooxygenase and prostacyclin synthase [223]. Other stimulants of prostaglandin synthesis that participate in experimental and human gallbladder disease are interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor [224]. These cytokines activate prostaglandin synthesis through phospholipase A2 stimulation [225]. In addition, protease-activated receptors induce gallbladder contraction, an effect that is mediated by prostaglandin synthesis [226] and correlated with the presence of high levels of trypsin in the bile of patients with gallbladder disease [227].
The concept that prostaglandins play a role in cholecystitis is supported by human and animal model studies showing that symptoms of acute cholecystitis are significantly reduced by the cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin (indometacin) [228]. For example, in an experimental cholecystitis model, inflammation and defects in contraction were partially reversed during the first 24 h by indomethacin [229], contrary to the protective role for PGE2 suggested by other studies. PGE2 causes a concentration-dependent contraction of the gallbladder [230], as well as a significant reversal in net fluid movement from absorption to secretion, including an

increase in mucin secretion [231,232]. Furthermore, PGE2 stimulates the synthesis of free radical scavengers that attenuate the noxious effects of reactive oxygen species [233]. These actions are consistent with a cytoprotective role for PGE2 in the gallbladder, at least in acute inflammation, which acts by expelling gallbladder contents and preserving mucosal integrity.
Conversely, PGE2 also has been shown to decrease gallbladder ganglionic output by hyperpolarizing gallbladder neurons [234], thereby inhibiting neurogenic contractions of the gallbladder. Thus, the direct contractile effects of prostaglandin may contribute to the pain reported by patients suffering acute cholecystitis, as these contractions would not be accompanied by SO relaxation. Furthermore, the neural effects of prostaglandin in the gallbladder would lead to a decrease in postprandial contractions because, as previously described, excitatory neural activity is involved in normal postprandial gallbladder emptying. Therefore, in acute cholecystitis, prostaglandins may contribute to gallbladder dysmotility by causing the gallbladder to contract when it normally would not, and by preventing the gallbladder from contracting when it normally would.
Reactive oxygen species The generation of reactive oxygen species is a common feature of inflammatory states, including ischemia and reperfusion injury. Under normal conditions, reactive oxygen species produced during oxidative metabolism are cleared by antioxidant mechanisms that include the antioxidant enzymes superoxide dismutase and catalase, and the glutathione antioxidant systems. Superoxide dismutase and catalase are present in the ganglionated plexus of the gallbladder [235]. During inflammation, oxygen-derived free radical production may exceed the scavenger capability, resulting in the accumulation of reactive oxygen species and deleterious effects. Consistent with this, experimental gallbladder inflammation results in an increase in the H2O2 content associated with an increase in superoxide dismutase and catalase activities [233]. Exogenous H2O2 causes smooth muscle contraction and impairs the gallbladder response to agonists that are membrane dependent [236] and related to membrane desensitization [237]. Similarly, other reactive oxygen species, such as monochloramine or superoxide anions, induce gallbladder contraction [235,238] and smooth muscle impairment [238], indicating that this is a common feature of reactive oxygen species. Reactive oxygen species-induced gallbladder contractions are blocked by indomethacin [236,238] and are associated with an increase in PGE2 production, which, in turn, induces an increase in superoxide dismutase and catalase activities and a reduction in lipid peroxidation and contraction [233], possibly as part of the protective mechanism against the reactive oxygen speciesinduced gallbladder stasis. In inflammation, excessive production of NO, often through inducible NOS [239], with

276

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

concurrent reactive oxygen species production [233] increases peroxynitrite formation. Although NO causes gallbladder relaxation, peroxynitrite induces contraction [240], consistent with the contractile effects reported for other oxidants, suggesting that peroxynitrite also mediates the dysmotility induced by cholecystitis.
Histamine Histamine is a well-recognized inflammatory mediator that can be released from mast cells to cause vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, gastric secretion, and contraction of bronchiolar and gastrointestinal smooth muscle. The gallbladder wall is rich in histamine-containing mast cells, which are distributed in the mucosa and muscularis/ serosa layers [241]. In gallbladder smooth muscle, both H1 and H2 receptors are present, with activation of H1 receptors causing contraction and H2 receptors mediating relaxation [241]. Consistent with this, activation of H1 receptors depolarizes gallbladder smooth muscle, whereas activation of H2 receptors causes a hyperpolarization that is mediated by KATP channels [37]. However, the net effect of histamine in gallbladder muscle strips is contraction [241,242]. Although there is no direct evidence for a role of histamine in gallbladder inflammation, it is possible that acute cholecystitis is associated with increased mast cell infiltration and degranulation. Thus, endogenously released histamine may exert an excitatory effect on gallbladder smooth muscle, resulting in a prokinetic protective effect.
Endothelins Endothelins are another class of inflammatory mediators. Studies in the Australian brush-tailed possum have shown that endothelins increase gallbladder activity [243­245]. In a model of acalculous cholecystitis in this same species, induction of the disease was associated with a significant production of endothelins by gallbladder epithelial cells and an increase in gallbladder tone. Pretreatment with a nonselective endothelin antagonist prevented the onset of inflammation. This study showed that gallbladder endothelin production is an early event in the process of acute cholecystitis, increasing gallbladder tone and playing a crucial role in the inflammatory process [246].
The sphincter of Oddi and postcholecystectomy syndrome During the fasting state, bile flow into the small bowel is diverted into the gallbladder by the resistance at the SO because of the basal and phasic contractions previously described. After cholecystectomy, the pressure reservoir represented by the gallbladder is lost and the ability of the biliary tree to accommodate hepatic bile production is compromised. In most individuals, bile manages to flow through the SO interprandially, without dramatic increases in pressure within the biliary tree. In some individuals, however, bile

does not flow as readily through the SO, leading to increased intrabiliary pressure and postoperative pain [247,248]. In some patients with postoperative biliary pain, biliary manometry has demonstrated abnormal pressure profiles in the SO with changes in amplitude, frequency, and direction of contractions [248­250]. In an attempt to alleviate the pain experienced by these individuals, endoscopic sphincterotomy, stent placement, and surgical sphincteroplasty have all been used with variable results [251].
Overview
Although the neuromuscular reflexes of the gallbladder and SO appear to be less complicated than those of the bowel, bile retention and bile flow require coordinated neuromuscular reflex interactions. Normal gallbladder filling requires relatively high basal pressure in the SO, in concert with an expansion of the gallbladder. This increase in gallbladder diameter requires the passive fibroelastic features of the gallbladder wall as well as myogenic and neurohormonal relaxation of gallbladder smooth muscle. Postprandial bile flow occurs in response to the release of CCK from the duodenal mucosa. To contract the gallbladder CCK acts locally to activate vagal afferent nerves; it also acts within gallbladder ganglia to increase acetylcholine release from vagal preganglionic nerve terminals. CCK release also leads to a decrease in the resistance of the SO by activating inhibitory motor neurons in SO ganglia by way of a duodenum­SO neural circuit.
A common feature of biliary tract disease is abnormal motor activity. In cholesterol gallstone disease, decreased motility involves a disruption of Ca2+ channels in gallbladder smooth muscle and a decrease in the ability of agonists to bind to membrane receptors. Acalculous cholecystitis is also associated with biliary stasis, but the contributing factors have not been clearly resolved; likely etiologies include decreased CCK release caused by parenteral feeding, opioid inhibition of excitatory neurotransmission in the gallbladder when opiate analgesics are administered, and the effects of inflammatory mediators. As detailed in this chapter, much has been learned about how gallbladder nerves and smooth muscle operate. However, a clearer understanding of the precise subcellular mechanisms of gallbladder smooth muscle excitability and contractility will aid in the development of clinical strategies for preventing biliary stasis and subsequent biliary disease.
References
1. Brown DM, Everhart JE. Cost of digestive diseases in the United States. In: Everhart JE (ed.). Digestive Diseases in the US: Epidemiology and Impact. NIH publication no. 94­1447. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1994:55.

277

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

2. Cai W, Gabella G. Innervation of the gallbladder and biliary pathways in the guinea pig. J Anat 1983;136:97.
3. Keast JR, Furness JB, Costa M. Distribution of certain peptide containing nerve fibres and endocrine cells in the gastrointestinal mucosa of five mammalian species. J Comp Neurol 1985;236:403.
4. Mawe GM, Gershon MD. Structure, afferent innervation, and transmitter content of ganglia of the guinea pig gallbladder: relationship to the enteric nervous system. J Comp Neurol 1989;283: 374.
5. Talmage EK, Pouliot WA, Schemann M, et al. Structure and chemical coding of human, canine and opossum gallbladder ganglia. Cell Tissue Res 1996;284:289.
6. Bauer AJ, Hanani M, Muir TC, et al. Intracellular recordings from gallbladder ganglia of opossums. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G299.
7. De Giorgio RD, Parodi JE, Brecha NC, et al. Nitric oxide producing neurons in the monkey and human digestive system. J Comp Neurol 1994;342:619.
8. De Giorgio RD, Zittel TT, Parodi JE, et al. Peptide immunoreactivities in the ganglionated plexuses and nerve fibers innervating the human gallbladder. J Auton Nerv Syst 1995;51:37.
9. Meedeniya AC, Schloithe AC, Toouli J, et al. Characterization of the intrinsic and extrinsic innervation of the gall bladder epithelium in the Australian brush-tailed possum (Trichosurus vulpecula). Neurogastroenterol Motil 2003;15:383.
10. Mawe GM, Talmage EK, Cornbrooks EB, et al. Innervation of the gallbladder: structure, neurochemical coding, and physiological properties of guinea pig gallbladder ganglia. Microsc Res Tech 1997;39:1.
11. Talmage EK, Pouliot WA, Cornbrooks EB, et al. Transmitter diversity in ganglion cells of the guinea pig gallbladder: an immunohistochemical study. J Comp Neurol 1992;317:45.
12. Mawe GM, Ellis LM. Chemical coding of intrinsic and extrinsic nerves in the guinea pig gallbladder: distributions of PACAP and orphanin FQ. Anat Rec 2001;262:101.
13. Uemura S, Pompolo S, Furness JB, et al. Nitric oxide synthase in neurons of the human gall-bladder and its colocalization with neuropeptides. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1997;12:257.
14. Harling H, Messell T, Jensen SL, et al. Distribution and effect of galanin on gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi motility in the pig. HPB Surg 1991;3:279.
15. Cox MR, Padbury RT, Harvey JR, et al. Substance P stimulates sphincter of Oddi motility and inhibits trans-sphincteric flow in the Australian brush-tailed possum. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1998;10:165.
16. Mawe GM. Intracellular recording from neurones of the guinea-pig gall-bladder. J Physiol (Lond) 1990;429:323.
17. Hillsley K, Jennings LJ, Mawe GM. Neural control of the gallbladder: an intracellular study of human gallbladder neurons. Digestion 1998;59:125.
18. Mawe GM, Gokin AP, Wells DG. Actions of cholecystokinin and norepinephrine on vagal inputs to ganglionic cells in guinea pig gallbladder. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G1146.
19. Ryan JP. Motility of the gallbladder and biliary tree. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:695.
20. Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ, Geenen JE. Motility of the biliary system. In: Schultz SG (ed.). Handbook of Physiology. The Gastrointestinal System, Motility and Circulation. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society, 1989:1055.
21. Dahlstrand C. The vagal nerves and peptides in the control of extrahepatic biliary motility. Acta Physiol Scand 1990;139:1.
22. Mawe GM. Tachykinins as mediators of slow EPSPs in guinea-pig gall-bladder ganglia. Involvement of neurokinin-3 receptors. J Physiol (Lond) 1995;485:513.
23. Cervero F. Afferent activity evoked by natural stimulation of the biliary system in the ferret. Pain 1982;13:137.
24. Maggi CA, Sannticioli P, Renzi D, et al. Release of substance P- and calcitonin gene-related peptide-like immunoreactivity and motor

response of the isolated guinea pig gallbladder to capsaicin. Gastroenterology 1989;96:1093. 25. Gokin AP, Jennings LJ, Mawe GM. Actions of calcitonin generelated peptide (CGRP) in guinea pig gallbladder ganglia. Am J Physiol 1996;271:G876. 26. Cai W, Gabella G. The musculature of the gall bladder and biliary pathways in the guinea-pig. J Anat 1983;136:237. 27. Zhang L, Bonev AD, Nelson MT, et al. Ionic basis of the action potential of guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1993;265:C1552. 28. Balemba OB, Salter MJ, Heppner TJ, et al. Spontaneous electrical rhythmicity and the role of the sarcoplasmic reticulum in the excitability of guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G655. 29. Shimada T. Voltage-dependent calcium channel current in isolated gallbladder smooth muscle cells of guinea pig. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G1066. 30. Jaggar JH, Mawe GM, Nelson MT. Voltage-dependent K(+) currents in smooth muscle cells from mouse gallbladder. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G687. 31. Parr E, Pozo MJ, Horowitz B, et al. ERG K(+) channels modulate the electrical and contractile activities of gallbladder smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003;284:G392. 32. Petkov GV, Balemba OB, Nelson MT, et al. Identification of a spontaneously active, Na(+)-permeable channel in guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G501. 33. Pozo MJ, Perez GJ, Nelson MT, et al. Ca(2+) sparks and BK currents in gallbladder myocytes: role in CCK-induced response. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G165. 34. Zhang L, Bonev AD, Mawe GM, et al. Protein kinase A mediates activation of ATP-sensitive K(+) currents by CGRP in gallbladder smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G494. 35. Zhang L, Bonev AD, Nelson MT, et al. Activation of ATP-sensitive potasium currents in guinea-pig gall-bladder smooth muscle by the neuropeptide CGRP. J Physiol (Lond) 1994;478:483. 36. Firth TA, Mawe GM, Nelson MT. Pharmacology and modulation of K(ATP) channels by protein kinase C and phosphatases in gallbladder smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2000;278: C1031. 37. Hemming JM, Guarraci FA, Firth TA, et al. Actions of histamine on muscle and ganglia of the guinea pig gallbladder. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G622. 38. Morales S, Camello PJ, Alcón S, et al. Coactivation of capacitative calcium entry and L-type calcium channels in guinea pig gallbladder. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G1090. 39. Balemba OB, Heppner TJ, Bonev AD, et al. Calcium waves in intact guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;291:G717. 40. Morales S, Camello PJ, Mawe GM, et al. Characterization of intracellular Ca(2+) stores in gallbladder smooth muscle. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G507. 41. Morales S, Camello PJ, Rosado JA, et al. Disruption of the filamentous actin cytoskeleton is necessary for the activation of capacitative calcium entry in naive smooth muscle cells. Cell Signal 2005;17: 635. 42. Gomez-Pinilla PJ, Morales S, Camello-Almaraz C, et al. Changes in guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle Ca(2+) homeostasis by acute acalculous cholecystitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G14. 43. Lavoie B, Balemba OB, Nelson MT, et al. Morphological and physiological evidence for interstitial cell of Cajal-like cells in the guinea pig gallbladder. J Physiol 2007;579:487. 44. Ivy AC, Oldberg E. A hormone mechanism for gallbladder contraction and evacuation. Am J Physiol 1928;86:599. 45. von Schrenck T, Sievers J, Mirau S, et al. Characterization of muscarinic receptors on guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1341.

278

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

46. Eltze M, Konig H, Ullrich B, et al. Contraction of guinea-pig gallbladder: muscarinic M3 or M4 receptors? Eur J Pharmacol 1997;332:77.
47. Akici A, Karaalp A, Iskender E, et al. Further evidence for the heterogeneity of functional muscarinic receptors in guinea pig gallbladder. Eur J Pharmacol 2000;388:115.
48. Parkman HP, Pagano AP, Ryan JP. Subtypes of muscarinic receptors regulating gallbladder cholinergic contractions. Am J Physiol 1999;276:G1243.
49. Takahashi T, Kurosawa S, Owyang C. Regulation of PI hydrolysis and cAMP formation by muscarinic M3 receptor in guinea pig gallbladder. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G523.
50. Chen Q, Yu P, de Petris G, et al. Distinct muscarinic receptors and signal transduction pathways in gallbladder muscle. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995;273:650.
51. Yau WM. Mode of stimulation of gallbladder contraction by substance K. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G838.
52. Funakoshi A, Fukamizu Y, Miyasaka K. Mechanism of cholecystokinin-A-receptor antagonist on human pancreatic exocrine secretion. Localization of CCK-A receptor in the human duodenum. Digestion 1999;60:75.
53. Harrington K, Bomzon A, Sharkey KA, et al. Differential sensitivities of the sphincter of Oddi and gallbladder to cholecystokinin in the guinea pig: their role in transsphincteric bile flow. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1992;70:1336.
54. Pozo MJ, Salido MD, Madrid JA, et al. In-vitro effect of pirenzepine on motility of canine gall-bladder. J Pharm Pharmacol 1990;42:89.
55. Alcón S, Morales S, Camello P, et al. Tyrosine kinases regulate basal tone and responses to agonists in the guinea pig gallbladder through modulation of Ca(2+) mobilization. Analyt Pharm 2001;2: 48.
56. Shirohara H, Tabaru A, Otsuki M. Effects of intravenous infusion of amino acids on cholecystokinin release and gallbladder contraction in humans. J Gastroenterol 1996;31:572.
57. Takahashi T, May D, Owyang C. Cholinergic dependence of gallbladder response to cholecystokinin in the guinea pig in vitro. Am J Physiol 1991;261:G565.
58. Takahashi I, Suzuki T, Aizawa I, et al. Comparison of gallbladder contraction induced by motilin and cholecystokinin in dogs. Gastroenterology 1982;82:419.
59. Fisher RS, Rock E, Malmud LS. Cholinergic effects on gallbladder emptying in humans. Gastroenterology 1985;89:716.
60. Marzio L, DiGiammarco AM, Neri M, et al. Atropine antagonizes cholecystokinin and cerulein induced gallbladder evacuation in man: a real time ultrasonographic study. Am J Gastroenterol 1985; 80:1.
61. Strah KM, Pappras TN, Melendez RL, et al. Contrasting cholinergic dependance of pancreatic and gallbladder responses to cholecystokinin. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G665.
62. Behar J, Biancani P. Pharmacologic characterization of excitatory and inhibitory cholecystokinin receptors of the cat gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi. Gastroenterology 1987;92:764.
63. Pozo MJ, Salida GM, Madrid JA. Cholyecystokinin-induced gallbladder contraction is influenced by nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. Arch Int Physiol Biochim 1989;97:403.
64. Hanyu N, Dodds WJ, Layman RD, et al. Mechanism of cholecystokinin-induced contraction of the opossum gallbladder. Gastroenterology 1990;98:1299.
65. Brotschi EA, Pattavino J, Williams LF, Jr. Intrinsic nerves affect gallbladder contraction in the guinea pig. Gastroenterology 1990; 99:826.
66. Takahashi I, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ, et al. Effect of vagotomy on biliary-tract motor activity in the opossum. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33:481.
67. Mawe GM. The role of cholecystokinin in ganglionic transmission in the guinea-pig gall-bladder. J Physiol (Lond) 1991;439:89.
68. Raybould HE, Lloyd KC. Integration of postprandial function in the proximal gastrointestinal tract. Role of CCK and sensory pathways. Ann NY Acad Sci 1994;713:143.

69. Li Y, Hao Y, Owyang C. High-affinity CCK-A receptors on the vagus nerve mediate CCK-stimulated pancreatic secretion in rats. Am J Physiol 1997;273:G679.
70. Masclee AA, Jansen JB, Riessen WM, et al. Effect of truncal vagotomy on cholecystokinin release, gallbladder contraction, and gallbladder senstivity to cholecystokinin in humans. Gastroenterology 1990;98:1338.
71. Padbury RT, Furness JB, Baker RA, et al. Projections of nerve cells from the duodenum to the sphincter of Oddi and gallbladder of the Australian possum. Gastroenterology 1993;104:130.
72. Shaffer EA. Control of gall-bladder motor function. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2000;14(Suppl2):2.
73. Saccone GT, Harvey JR, Liu YF, et al. Coordination of biliary and upper gastrointestinal motility in the fasted conscious pig. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1996;8:51.
74. Takahashi I, Kern MK, Dodds WJ, et al. Contraction pattern of opossum gallbladder during fasting and after feeding. Am J Physiol 1986;250:G227-.
75. Scott RB, Tan DT. Neural modulation of canine duodenal bile acid delivery in the interdigestive and postprandial periods. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G357.
76. Takahashi I, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ, et al. Effect of vagotomy on biliary-tract motor activity in the opossum. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33: 481.
77. Weisbrodt NW, Copeland EM, Moore EP, et al. Effect of vagotomy on electrical activity of the small intestine of the dog. Am J Physiol 1975;228:650.
78. Qvist N, Oster-Jorgensen E, Pedersen SA, et al. Gastric antrectomy with selective gastric vagotomy does not influence gallbladder motility during interdigestive and postprandial periods. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41:835.
79. Svenberg T, Christofides ND, Fitzpatrick ML, et al. Interdigestive biliary output in man: relationship to fluctuations in plasma motilin and effect of atropine. Gut 1982;23:1024.
80. Itoh Z, Takahashi I, Nakaya M, et al. Interdigestive gallbladder bile concentration in relation to periodic contraction of gallbladder in the dog. Gastroenterology 1982;83:645.
81. Itoh Z, Takahashi I. Periodic contractions of the canine gallbladder during the interdigestive state. Am J Physiol 1981;240:G183.
82. Yamasaki T, Chijiiwa K, Chijiiwa Y. Direct contractile effect of motilin on isolated smooth muscle cells from human gallbladder. J Surg Res 1994;56:89.
83. Meedeniya AC, Al-Jiffry BO, Konomi H, et al. Inhibitory motor innervation of the gall bladder musculature by intrinsic neurones containing nitric oxide in the Australian brush-tailed possum (Trichosurus vulpecula). Gut 2001;49:692.
84. Ryan J, Cohen S. Effect of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide on basal and cholecystokinin induced gallbladder pressure. Gastroenterology 1977;73:870.
85. Ryan JP, Ryave S. Effect of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide on gallbladder smooth muscle in vitro. Am J Physiol 1978;234:E44.
86. Dahlstrand C, Theordorson E, Dahlström A, et al. VIP-antisera inhibit the relaxatory motor responses of the feline sphincter of Oddi and gallbladder induced by VIP or vagal nerve stimulation. Acta Physiol Scand 1989;137:375.
87. Chen Q, Lee K, Xiao Z, et al. Mechanism of gallbladder relaxation in the cat: role of norepinephrine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998;285: 475.
88. Schaffalitzky de Muckadell OB, Fahrenkrug J, Holst JJ. Release of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) by electric stimulation of the vagal nerves. Gastroenterology 1977;72:373.
89. Bjorck S, Fahrenkrug J, Jivegard L, et al. Release of immunoreactive vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) from the gallbladder in response to vagal stimulation. Acta Physiol (Scand) 1986;128: 639.
90. Mourelle M, Guarner F, Molero X, et al. Regulation of gall bladder motility by the arginine-nitric oxide pathway in guinea pigs. Gut 1993;34:911.

279

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

91. McKirdy ML, McKirdy HC, Johnson CD. Non-adrenergic noncholinergic inhibitory innervation shown by electrical field stimulation of isolated strips of human gall bladder muscle. Gut 1994;35: 412.
92. Chen Q, Amaral J, Oh S, et al. Gallbladder relaxation in patients with pigment and cholesterol stones. Gastroenterology 1997;113:930.
93. Alcón S, Morales S, Salido G, et al. Redox-based mechanism for the contractile and relaxing effects of NO in the guinea-pig gallbladder. J Physiol 2001;532:793.
94. Maggi CA, Patacchini R, Renzi D, et al. Effect of thiorphan on response of the guinea-pig gallbladder to tachykinins. Eur J Pharm 1989;165:51.
95. Alcón S, Morales S, Camello PJ, et al. Relaxation of canine gallbladder to nerve stimulation involves adrenergic and non-adrenergic noncholinergic mechanisms. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2001;13:555.
96. Naughton P, Baer HP, Clanachan AS, et al. Adenosine and ATP effects on isolated guinea pig gallbladder. Phlug Arch 1983;399:42.
97. Persson CG. Adrenoceptor functions in the cat choledochoduodenal junction in vitro. Br J Pharmacol 1971;42:447.
98. Persson CG. Dual effects of the sphincter of Oddi and gallbladder induced by stimulation of the right splanchnic nerves. Acta Physiol Scand 1973;87:334.
99. Yamasato T, Nakayama S. Participation of the parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves in regulation of gallbladder motility in the dog. Acta Med Okayama 1990;44:79.
100. Mawe GM. Noradrenaline acts as a presynaptic inhibitory neurotransmitter in ganglia of the guinea-pig gall-bladder. J Physiol (Lond) 1993;461:378.
101. Calabuig R, Seggerman RE, Weems WA, et al. Gallbladder and gastrointestinal motility after hemorrhagic shock. Surgery 1990;107:568.
102. Adrian TE, Mitcherene P, Sagor G, et al. Effect of pancreatic polypeptide on gallbladder pressure and hepatic bile secretion. Am J Physiol 1982;243:204.
103. Meguro T, Shimosegawa T, Satoh A, et al. Gallbladder emptying and cholecystokinin and pancreatic polypeptide responses to a liquid meal in patients with diabetes mellitus. J Gastroenterol 1997;32:628.
104. Ledeboer M, Masclee AA, Biemond I, et al. Effect of intragastric or intraduodenal administration of a polymeric diet on gallbladder motility, small-bowel transit time, and hormone release. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:2089.
105. Ledeboer M, Masclee AA, Biemond I, et al. Gallbladder motility and cholecystokinin secretion during continuous enteral nutrition. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:2274.
106. Glasbrenner B, Dominguez-Munoz JE, Nelson DK, et al. Postprandial release of cholecystokinin and pancreatic polypeptide in health and in gallstone disease: relationships with gallbladder contraction. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:404.
107. Eastman RC, Arakaki RF, Shawker T, et al. A prospective examination of octreotide-induced gallbladder changes in acromegaly. Clin Endocrinol 1992;36:265.
108. Moschetta A, Stolk MF, Rehfeld JF, et al. Severe impairment of postprandial cholecystokinin release and gall-bladder emptying and high risk of gallstone formation in acromegalic patients during sandostatin LAR. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2001;15:181.
109. Krejs GJ, Orci L, Conlon JM, et al. Somatostatinoma syndrome: biochemical, morphologic and clinical features. N Engl J Med 1979;301:285.
110. Fraquelli M, Bardella MT, Peracchi M, et al. Gallbladder emptying and somatostatin and cholecystokinin plasma levels in celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:1866.
111. Behar J, Biancani P. Pharmacology of the biliary tract. In: Schulz S, Wood J, Rauner B (eds). Handbook of Physiology, Section 6, The Gastrointestinal System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989: 1103.
112. Maselli MA, Piepoli AL, Pezzolla F, et al. Effect of somatostatin on human gallbladder motility: an in vitro study. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1999;11:47.

113. Yamasaki T, Chijiiwa K, Chijiiwa Y. Somatostatin inhibits cholecystokinin-induced contraction of isolated gallbladder smooth muscle cells. J Surg Res 1995;59:743.
114. Vu MK, Van Oostayen JA, Biemond I, et al. Effect of somatostatin on postprandial gallbladder relaxation. Clin Physiol 2001;21:25.
115. Choi M, Moschetta A, Bookout AL, et al. Identification of a hormonal basis for gallbladder filling. Nat Med 2006;12:1253.
116. Mawe GM. Oddi: the structure of Oddi's sphincter. In: Daniel EE, Tsuchida S, Tomita T, et al. (eds). Sphincters: Normal Functionchanges in Diseases. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1992:175.
117. Wells DG, Mawe GM. Physiological and morphological properties of neurons in the sphincter of Oddi region of the guinea pig. Am J Physiol 1993;265:G258.
118. Wells DG, Talmage EK, Mawe GM. Immunohistochemical identification of neurons in ganglia of the guinea pig sphincter of Oddi. J Comp Neurol 1995;352:106.
119. Cai W, Gu J, Huang W, et al. Peptide immunoreactive nerves and cells of the guinea pig gallbladder and biliary pathways. Gut 1983;24:1186.
120. O'Donnell AM, Ellis LM, Riedl MS, et al. Distribution and chemical coding of orphanin FQ/nociceptin-immunoreactive neurons in the myenteric plexus of guinea pig intestines and sphincter of Oddi. J Comp Neurol 2001;430:1.
121. Hillsley K, Mawe GM. 5-HT is present in nerves of guinea pig sphincter of Oddi and depolarizes sphincter of Oddi neurons. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G1018.
122. Wells DG, Mawe GM. Sympathetic input to ganglia of the guinea pig sphincter of Oddi. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G1162.
123. Slivka A, Chuttani R, Carr-Locke DL, et al. Inhibition of sphincter of Oddi function by the nitric oxide carrier S-nitroso-N-acetylcysteine in rabbits and humans. J Clin Invest 1994;94:1792.
124. Sand J, Arvola P, Jantti V, et al. The inhibitory role of nitric oxide in the control of porcine and human sphincter of Oddi activity. Gut 1997;41:375.
125. Sand J, Tainio H, Nordback I. Peptidergic innervation of human sphincter of Oddi. Dig Dis Sci 1994;39:293.
126. Zhang M, Shimojo H, Ehara T, et al. Decreased distribution of nitric oxide synthase- and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-positive nerve cells in the sphincter of Oddi in humans with pancreatobiliary diseases. Arch Histol Cytol 2005;68:121.
127. Melander T, Millbourn E, Goldstein M. Distribution of opioidergic, sympathetic and neuropeptide Y-positive nerves in the sphincter of Oddi and biliary tree of the monkey, Macaca fascicularis. Cell Tissue Res 1991;266:597.
128. Sand J, Tainio H, Nordback I. Neuropeptides in pig sphincter of Oddi, bile duct, gallbladder, and duodenum. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:694.
129. Dahlstrand C, Dahlström A, Ahlman H. Adrenergic and VIP-ergic relaxatory mechanisms of the feline extrahepatic biliary tree. J Auton Nerv Syst 1989;26:97.
130. Dahlstrand C, Dahlström A, Theodorsson E, et al. Is the CCK-8 induced relaxation of the feline sphincter of Oddi mediated by VIP neurons? J Auton Nerv Syst 1990;31:75.
131. Simula ME, Harvey JR, Costi D, et al. In vitro characterisation of intramural neural pathways between the duodenum and the sphincter of Oddi of the brush-tailed possum. J Auton Nerv Syst 1997;63:77.
132. Baker RA, Wilson TG, Padbury RTA, et al. Galanin modulates sphincter of Oddi function in the Australian brush-tailed possum. Peptides 1996;17:933.
133. Cox MR, Padbury RT, Snelling TL, et al. Gastrin-releasing peptide stimulates gallbladder motility but not sphincter of Oddi motility in Australian brush-tailed possum. Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:1275.
134. Huang J, Padbury RT, Schloithe AC, et al. Somatostatin stimulates the brush-tailed possum sphincter of Oddi in vitro and in vivo. Gastroenterology 1998;115:672.
135. Baker RA, Saccone GT, Brookes SJ, et al. Nitric oxide mediates nonadrenergic, noncholinergic neural relaxation in the Australian possum. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1746.

280

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

136. Funch-Jensen P, Kraglund K, Djurhuus JC. Multimodal contractile activity of the canine sphincter of Oddi. Eur Surg Res 1984;16:312.
137. Toouli J, Dodds WJ, Honda R, et al. Motor function of the opossum sphincter of Oddi. J Clin Invest 1983;71:208.
138. Elbrond H, Huniche B, Ostergaard L. Rabbit sphincter of Oddi and duodenum are regulated by slow waves with a common basicmode activity. Scand J Gastroenterol 1990;25:534.
139. Grivell MB, Woods CM, Grivell AR, et al. The possum sphincter of Oddi pumps or resists flow depending on common bile duct pressure: a multilumen manometry study. J Physiol 2004;558:611.
140. Woods CM, Mawe GM, Toouli J, et al. The sphincter of Oddi: understanding its control and function. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17(Suppl1):31.
141. Toouli J, Baker RA. Innervation of the sphincter of Oddi: physiology and considerations of pharmacological intervention in biliary dyskinesia. Pharmacol Ther 1991;49:269.
142. Geenen JE, Hogan WJ, Dodds WJ, et al. Intraluminal pressure recording from the human sphincter of Oddi. Gastroenterology 1980;78:317.
143. Woods CM, Schloithe AC, Simula ME, et al. Proximal and distal segments of the possum sphincter of Oddi respond differently to neural and cholecystokinin octapeptide stimulation in vitro. Dig Surg 2000;17:241.
144. Al-Jiffry BO, Jobling JM, Schloithe AC, et al. Secretin induces variable inhibition of motility in different parts of the Australian possum sphincter of Oddi. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2001;13: 449.
145. Woods CM, Toouli J, Saccone GT. Exogenous adenosine triphosphate and adenosine stimulate proximal sphincter of Oddi motility via neural mechanisms in the anesthetized Australian possum. Dig Dis Sci 2006;51:1347.
146. Harada T, Katsuragi T, Furukawa T. Release of acetylcholine mediated by cholecystokinin receptor from the guinea pig sphincter of Oddi. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1986;239:554.
147. Behar J, Biancani P. Pharmacologic characterization of excitatory and inhibitory cholecystokinin receptors of the cat gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi. Gastroenterology 1987;92:764.
148. Toouli J, Hogan WJ, Geenen JE, et al. Action of cholecystokininoctapeptide on sphincter of Oddi basal pressure and phasic wave activity in humans. Surgery 1982;92:497.
149. Tokunaga Y, Cox KL, Itasaka H, et al. Characterization of cholecystokinin receptors on the human sphincter of Oddi. Surgery 1993;114:942.
150. Elbrond H, Tottrup A, Virchenko S, et al. Effects of transmural field stimulation in isolated muscle strips from rabbit sphincter of Oddi and duodenum. Acta Physiol Scand 1994;151:91.
151. Allescher HD, Lu S, Daniel EE. Nitric oxide as putative nonadrenergic noncholinergic inhibitory transmitter in the opossum sphincter of Oddi. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1993;71:525.
152. Kaufman HS, Shermak MA, May CA, et al. Nitric oxide inhibits resting sphincter of Oddi activity. Am J Surg 1993;165:74.
153. Thune A, Delbro DS, Nilsson B, et al. Role of nitric oxide in motility and secretion of the feline hepatobiliary tract. Scand J Gastroenterol 1995;30:715.
154. Sari R, Szilvassy Z, Jakab I, et al. Cross tolerance between nitroglycerin and neural relaxation of the rabbit sphincter of Oddi. Pharmacol Res 1998;37:505.
155. Pauletzki JG, Sharkey KA, Davison JS, et al. Involvement of L-arginine-nitric oxide pathways in neural relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi. Eur J Pharmacol 1993;232:263.
156. Szilvassy Z, Sari R, Nemeth J, et al. Improvement of nitrergic relaxation by farnesol of the sphincter of Oddi from hypercholesterolaemic rabbits. Eur J Pharmacol 1998;353:75.
157. Szilvassy Z, Lonovics J, Jakab I, et al. Glibenclamide sensitivity of neural relaxation of the rabbit sphincter of Oddi. Pharmacol Res 1997;36:129.
158. Persson C. Inhibitory innervation of cat sphincter of Oddi. Br J Pharmacol 1976;58:479.

159. Azuma H, Fujiwara M. Analysis of contractions induced by transmural stimulation in the isolated sphincter of Oddi. Jpn J Pharmacol 1973;23:723.
160. McKirdy HC. Novel autonomic neurotransmitters and upper gastrointestinal function. Pharmacol Ther 1988;38:429.
161. Katsuragi T, Inoue T, Furukawa T. Antagonism by clonidine of the adenosine-induced inhibition of the twitch contraction of the guinea-pig Oddi sphincter. Eur J Pharmacol 1985;108:151.
162. Pap A, Forro G. [The effect of theophylline preparations on morphineinduced spasm of Oddi's sphincter in man.] Orv Hetil 1998;139:1411.
163. Cox KL, Von Schrenck T, Moran TH, et al. Characterization of cholecystokinin receptors on the sphincter of Oddi. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G873.
164. Hanyu N, Dodds WJ, Layman RD, et al. Cholecystokinin-induced contraction of opossum sphincter of Oddi. Dig Dis Sci 1990;35:567.
165. Vogalis F, Bywater RAR, Taylor GS. Propulsive activity of the isolated choledochoduodenal junction of the guinea pig. J Gastrointest Motil 1989;1:115.
166. Wiley JW, O'Dorisio TM, Owyang C. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide mediates cholecystokinin-induced relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi. J Clin Invest 1988;81:1920.
167. Gokin AP, Hillsley K, Mawe GM. Cholecystokinin (CCK) depolarizes guinea pig sphincter of Oddi neurons by activating CCK-A receptors. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G1365.
168. Kennedy AL, Saccone GT, Mawe GM. Direct neuronal interactions between the duodenum and the sphincter of Oddi. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2000;2:104.
169. Kennedy AL, Mawe GM. Duodenal sensory neurons project to sphincter of Oddi ganglia in guinea pig. J Neurosci 1998;18:8065.
170. Mawe GM, Kennedy AL. Duodenal neurons provide nicotinic fast synaptic input to sphincter of Oddi neurons in guinea pig. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G226.
171. Clerc N, Furness JB, Li ZS, et al. Morphological and immunohistochemical identification of neurons and their targets in the guineapig duodenum. Neuroscience 1998;86:679.
172. Song Z-M, Brookes SH, Costa M. All calbindin-immunoreactive myenteric neurons project to the mucosa of guinea-pig small intestine. Neurosci Lett 1994;180:219.
173. Furness JB, Trussell DC, Pompola S, et al. Calbindin neurons of the guinea-pig small intestine: quantitative analysis of their numbers and projections. Cell Tissue Res 1990;260:261.
174. Scott RB, Strasberg SM, El-Sharkawy TY, et al. Regulation of the fasting enterohepatic circulation of bile acids by the migrating myoelectric complex in dogs. J Clin Invest 1983;71:644.
175. Marzio L, Neri M, Capone F, et al. Gallbladder contraction and its relationship to interdigestive duodenal motor activity in normal human subjects. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33:540.
176. Worthley CS, Baker RA, Iannos J, et al. Human fasting and postprandial sphincter of Oddi motility. Br J Surg 1989;76:709.
177. Tanaka M, Senninger N, Runkel N, et al. Sphincter of Oddi cyclic motility. Effect of translocation of the papilla in opossums. Gastroenterology 1990;98:347.
178. Tanaka M, Senninger N, Runkel N, et al. Hormonal control of opossum sphincter of Oddi motility: role of myoneural continuity to duodenum. J Surg Res 1992;53:91.
179. Jazrawi RP, Pazzi P, Petroni ML, et al. Postporandial gallbladder motor function: refilling and turnover of bile in health and in cholelithiasis. Gastroenterology 1995;109:582.
180. Shoda JH, He BF, Tanaka N, et al. Increase of deoxycholate in supersaturated bile of patients with cholesterol gallstone disease and its correlation with de novo synthesis of cholesterol and bile acids in liver, gallbladder emptying and small intestinal transit. Hepatology 1995;21:1291.
181. LaMorte W. Biliary motility and abnormalities associated with cholesterol cholelithiasis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 1993;9:810.
182. Behar JL, KY. Thompson, WR. Biancani, P. Gallbladder contraction in patients with pigment and cholesterol stones. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1479.

281

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

183. Chen Q, Amaral J, Biancani P, et al. Excess membrane cholesterol alters human gallbladder muscle contractility and membrane fluidity. Gastroenterology 1999;116:678.
184. Li YF, Moody FG, Weisbrodt NW, et al. Gallbladder contractility and mucus secretion after cholesterol feeding in the prairie dog. Surgery 1986;100:900.
185. Fridhandler TM, Davison JS, Shaffer EA. Defective gallbladder contractility in the ground squirrel and prairie dog during the early stages of cholesterol gallstone formation. Gastroenterology 1983;85:830.
186. Sato N, Miyasaka K, Suzuki S, et al. Lack of cholecystokinin-A receptor enhanced gallstone formation: a study in CCK-A receptor gene knockout mice. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1944.
187. Wang DQ, Schmitz F, Kopin AS, et al. Targeted disruption of the murine cholecystokinin-1 receptor promotes intestinal cholesterol absorption and susceptibility to cholesterol cholelithiasis. J Clin Invest 2004;114:521.
188. Xu QW, Shaffer EA. Cisapride improves gallbladder contractility and bile lipid composition in an animal model of gallstone disease. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1184.
189. Xu QW, Scott RB, Tan DT, et al. Effect of the prokinetic agent, erythromycin, in the Richardson ground squirrel model of cholesterol gallstone disease. Hepatology 1998;28:613.
190. Xu QW, Mantle M, Pauletzki JG, et al. Sustained gallbladder stasis promotes cholesterol gallstone formation in the ground squirrel. Hepatology 1997;26:831.
191. Yu PR, Chen QA, Biancani P, et al. Membrane cholesterol alters gallbladder muscle contractility in prairie dogs. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 1996;34:G56.
192. Jennings LJ, Xu QW, Firth TA, et al. Cholesterol inhibits spontaneous action potentials and calcium currents in guinea pig gallbladder smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G1017.
193. Xiao ZL, Chen Q, Amaral J, et al. CCK receptor dysfunction in muscle membranes from human gallbladders with cholesterol stones. Am J Physiol 1999;276:G1401.
194. Xiao ZL, Chen Q, Amaral J, et al. Defect of receptor-G protein coupling in human gallbladder with cholesterol stones. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;278:G251.
195. Chen Q, Amaral J, Biancani P, et al. Excess membrane cholesterol alters human gallbladder muscle contractility and membrane fluidity. Gastroenterology 1999;116:678.
196. Van Erpecum KJ, Van Berge-Henegouwen GP. Gallstones: an intestinal disease? Gut 1999;44:435.
197. Thomas LA, Veysey MJ, Bathgate T, et al. Mechanism for the transit-induced increase in colonic deoxycholic acid formation in cholesterol cholelithiasis. Gastroenterology 2000;119:806.
198. Hussaini SH, Pereira SP, Murphy GM, et al. Deoxycholic acid influences cholesterol solubilization and microcrystal nucleation time in gallbladder bile. Hepatology 1995;22:1735.
199. Thimister PW, Hopman WP, Tangerman A, et al. Effect of intraduodenal bile salt on pancreaticobiliary responses to bombesin and to cholecystokinin in humans. Hepatology 1998;28:1454.
200. Xu QW, Freedman SM, Shaffer EA. Inhibitory effect of bile salts on gallbladder smooth muscle contractility in the guinea pig in vitro. Gastroenterology 1997;112:1699.
201. Xiao ZL, Rho AK, Biancani P, et al. Effects of bile acids on the muscle functions of guinea pig gallbladder. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;283:G87.
202. Xiao ZL, Biancani P, Carey MC, et al. Hydrophilic but not hydrophobic bile acids prevent gallbladder muscle dysfunction in acute cholecystitis. Hepatology 2003;37:1442.
203. Tomida S, Abei M, Yamaguchi T, et al. Long-term ursodeoxycholic acid therapy is associated with reduced risk of biliary pain and acute cholecystitis in patients with gallbladder stones: a cohort analysis. Hepatology 1999;30:6.
204. Guarino MP, Carotti S, Sarzano M, et al. Short-term ursodeoxycholic acid treatment improves gallbladder bile turnover in gall-

stone patients: a randomized trial. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005; 17:680. 205. Barie PS, Fischer E. Acute acalculous cholecystitis. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:232. 206. Savoca PE, Longo WE, Zucker KA, et al. The increasing prevalence of acalculous cholecystitis in outpatients. Results of a 7-year study. Ann Surg 1990;211:433. 207. Parithivel VS, Gerst PH, Banerjee S, et al. Acute acalculous cholecystitis in young patients without predisposing factors. Am Surg 1999;65:366. 208. Kalliafas S, Ziegler DW, Flancbaum L, et al. Acute acalculous cholecystitis: Incidence, risk factors, diagnosis, and outcome. Am Surg 1998;64:471. 209. Cullen JJ, Maes EB, Aggrawal S, et al. Effect of endotoxin on opossum gallbladder motility: a model of acalculous cholecystitis. Ann Surg 2000;232:202. 210. Parkman HP, Bogar LJ, Bartula LL, et al. Effect of experimental acalculous cholecystitis on gallbladder smooth muscle contractility. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:2235. 211. Sustic A, Krznaric Z, Uravic M, et al. Influence on gallbladder volume of early postoperative gastric supply of nutrients. Clin Nutr 2000;19:413. 212. Doty JE, Pitt HA, Porter-Fink V, et al. Cholecystokinin prophylaxis of parenteral nutrition-induced gallbladder disease. Ann Surg 1985;201:76. 213. Curran TJ, Uzoaru I, Das JB, et al. The effect of cholecystokininoctapeptide on the hepatobiliary dysfunction caused by total parenteral nutrition. J Pediatr Surg 1995;30:242. 214. Nealon WH, Upp JR, Alexander RW, et al. Intravenous amino acids stimulate human gallbladder emptying and hormone release. Am J Physiol 1990;259:G173. 215. Zoli G, Ballinger A, Healy J, et al. Promotion of gallbladder emptying by intravenous aminoacids. Lancet 1993;341:1240. 216. Kalfarentzos F, Vagenas C, Michail A, et al. Gallbladder contraction after administration of intravenous amino acids and long-chain triacylglycerols in humans. Nutrition 1991;7:347. 217. Guarraci F, Pozo M, Firth T, et al. Opioid agonists inhibit excitatory neurotransmission in ganglia and at the neuromuscular junction in guinea pig gallbladder. Gastroenterology 2002;122:340. 218. Otto B, Mawe GM, Riepl RL. Mu-opiate receptor agonist loperamide blocks bethanechol-induced gallbladder contraction, despite higher cholecystokinin plasma levels in man. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:761. 219. Myers SI, Bartula L. Human cholecystitis is associated with increased gallbladder prostaglandin I2 and prostaglandin E2 synthesis. Hepatology 1992;16:1176. 220. Wood JR, Stamford IF. Prostaglandins in chronic cholecystitis. Prostaglandins 1977;13:97. 221. Kaminski DL, Deshpande Y, Thomas L, et al. Evaluation of the role of prostaglandins E and F in human cholecystitis. Prostaglandins Leukot Med 1984;16:109. 222. Myers SI, Bartula L, Kalley-Taylor B. Bradykinin and not cholecystokinin stimulates exaggerated prostanoid release from the inflamed rabbit gallbladder. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1992;47:35. 223. Bogar LJ, Bartula LL, Parkman HP, et al. Enhanced bradykininstimulated prostaglandin release in the acutely inflamed guinea pig gallbladder is due to new synthesis of cyclooxygenase 1 and prostacyclin synthase. J Surg Res 1999;84:71. 224. Prystowsky JB, Rege RV. Interleukin-1 mediates guinea pig gallbladder inflammation in vivo. J Surg Res 1997;71:123. 225. Grossmann EM, Longo WE, Mazuski JE, et al. Role of cytosolic phospholipase A2 in cytokine-stimulated prostaglandin release by human gallbladder cells. J Gastrointest Surg 2000;4:193. 226. Tognetto M, Trevisani M, Maggiore B, et al. Evidence that PAR-1 and PAR-2 mediate prostanoid-dependent contraction in isolated guinea-pig gallbladder. Br J Pharmacol 2000;131:689.

282

Motility of the biliary tract CHAPTER 12

227. Vracko J, Wiechel KL. Trypsin level in gallbladder bile and ductitis and width of the cystic duct. Hepatogastroenterology 2000;47:115.
228. Thornell E. Mechanisms in the development of acute cholecystitis and biliary pain. A study on the role of prostaglandins and effects of indomethacin. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1982;76:1.
229. Parkman HP, James AN, Thomas RM, et al. Effect of indomethacin on gallbladder inflammation and contractility during acute cholecystitis. J Surg Res 2001;96:135.
230. Wood JR, Saverymuttu SH, Ashbrooke AB, et al. Effects of various prostanoids on gallbladder muscle. Adv Prostaglandin Thromboxane Res 1980;8:1569.
231. Thornell E, Svanvik J, Wood JR. Effects of intra-arterial prostoglandin E2 on gallbladder fluid transport, motility, and hepatic bile flow in the cat. Gastroenterology 1981;16:1083.
232. Lee SP, LaMont JT, Carey MC. Role of gallbladder mucus hypersecretion in the evolution of cholesterol gallstones: studies in the prairie dog. J Clin Invest 1981;67:1712.
233. Xiao ZL, Chen Q, Biancani P, et al. Abnormalities of gallbladder muscle associated with acute inflammation in guinea pigs. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;281:G490.
234. Jennings LJ, Mawe GM. PGE2 hyperpolarizes gallbladder neurons and inhibits synaptic potentials in gallbladder ganglia. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G493.
235. Cullen JJ, Conklin JL, Ephgrave KS, et al. The role of antioxidant enzymes in the control of opossum gallbladder motility. J Surg Res 1999;86:155.
236. Xiao ZL, Andrada MJ, Biancani P, et al. Reactive oxygen species (H2O2): effects on the gallbladder muscle of guinea pigs. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2002;282:G300.
237. Xiao ZL, Biancani P, Behar J. Role of PGE2 on gallbladder muscle cytoprotection of guinea pigs. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;286:G82.
238. Moummi C, Gullikson GW, Gaginella TS. Monochloramine induces contraction of guinea pig gallbladder via two different pathways. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G881.
239. Parkman HP, James AN, Bogar LJ, et al. Effect of acalculous cholecystitis on gallbladder neuromuscular transmission and contractility. J Surg Res 2000;88:186.

240. Alcón S, Morales S, Camello PJ, et al. A redox-based mechanism for the contractile and relaxing effects of NO in the guinea-pig gall bladder. J Physiol 2001;532:793.
241. Jennings LJ, Salido GM, Pozo MJ, et al. The source and action of histamine in the isolated guinea-pig gallbladder. Inflamm Res 1995;44:447.
242. Wise WE, Jr, LaMorte WW, Gaca JM, et al. Reciprocal H1- and H2histamine receptors in guinea pig gallbladder. J Surg Res 1982;33: 146.
243. Al-Jiffry BO, Chen JW, Toouli J, et al. Endothelins induce gallbladder contraction independent of elevated blood pressure in vivo in the Australian possum. J Gastrointest Surg 2002;6:699.
244. Al-Jiffry BO, Meedeniya AC, Chen JW, et al. Endothelin-1 induces contraction of human and Australian possum gallbladder in vitro. Regul Pept 2001;102:31.
245. Al-Jiffry BO, Toouli J, Saccone GT. Endothelin-3 induces both human and opossum gallbladder contraction mediated mainly by endothelin-B receptor subtype in vitro. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2002;17:324.
246. Al-Jiffry BO, Shaffer EA, Woods CM, et al. Endogenous endothelin increases gallbladder tone and leads to acute cholecystitis in the Australian possum. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:125.
247. Tanaka M, Ikeda S, Nakayama F. Change in bile duct pressure responses after cholecystectomy: loss of gallbladder as a pressure reservoir. Gastroenterology 1984;87:1154.
248. Torsoli A, Corazziari E, Habib FI, et al. Pressure relationships within the human bile tract. Normal and abnormal physiology. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1990;175:52.
249. Toouli J. Evaluation of sphincter of Oddi function. Aust NZ J Surg 1989;59:445.
250. Torsoli A. Physiology of the human sphincter of Oddi. Endoscopy 1988;20(Suppl1):166.
251. Lehman GA, Sherman S. Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. Int J Pancreatol 1996;20:11.

283

13

C SECRETION AND ABSORPTION
Gastric secretion
John Del Valle, Andrea Todisco

Anatomy of gastric mucosa, 284 Regulation of acid secretion, 287 Cellular basis of acid secretion, 293

Other gastric secretory products, 310 Mouse models for the study of gastric secretion, 316

The stomach is a complex organ capable of secreting a great variety of products into the gastric lumen, vasculature, and interstitium. Although hydrochloric acid (HCl) is the primary gastric secretion, the stomach also secretes pepsinogen, mucus, bicarbonate (HCO3-), intrinsic factor, prostaglandins, regulatory peptides, and other chemical messengers. This chapter discusses each of these, with particular emphasis on gastric acid secretion. Classic human and whole-animal studies are integrated with information gained at the cellular and molecular level, and this integrated model of acid secretion is placed within the fabric of modern clinical practice.
Anatomy of gastric mucosa

Cells The parietal or oxyntic cell is the most distinctive cell of the gastric mucosa. It is usually found in the neck or isthmus of oxyntic glands bulging into the glandular lumen. The

Gastric pit (foveolus)

Surface mucous cells

A detailed understanding of gastric mucosal structure provides insight into the functional events occurring during gastric secretion. The epithelial lining of the stomach lumen consists of thick vascular folds, called rugae, invaginated with microscopic gastric pits. Each pit opens into four to five gastric glands. The epithelial cells lining the gastric glands are highly specialized and different from the surface epithelial cells. Glands from the cardiac region of the stomach provide the transition from esophageal squamous epithelium to gastric columnar epithelium. They contain mucous and endocrine cells and comprise less than 5% of the gastric gland area. Most gastric glands (75%) occur in the oxyntic mucosa and are responsible for acid secretion (Fig. 13.1). They include parietal, chief, mucous neck, endocrine, and enterochromaffin cells [1]. The pyloric glands cover the gastric antrum and pylorus and contain gastrin cells (G cells), mucous cells, and other endocrine cells. Each of these cell types has evolved into a highly specialized secretory cell that contributes to gastric secretion.

Oxyntic gland

Isthmus Neck
Base (fundus)

Mucous neck cells
Parietal cells Endocrine cell

Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

Chief cells Figure 13.1 Oxyntic gastric gland. Adapted from Ito & Winchester [508].

284

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

unstimulated parietal cell has prominent cytoplasmic tubulovesicles and an apical intracellular canaliculus lined with stubby microvilli. On stimulation, a dense meshwork of intracellular canaliculi rapidly forms while tubulovesicles disappear [2,3]. The canaliculi contain a large number of elongated microvilli formed by extensive microfilaments that have a central cytoskeletal core of actin filaments stabilized by other proteins. It is across this apical canalicular surface that HCl is secreted. Acid secretion is an active transport process and requires significant amounts of energy. To provide this energy, parietal cells have numerous mitochondria, which account for 30%­ 40% of total cellular volume [4].
One prominent feature of parietal cells is their lack of the microvillous glycocalyx that is present on other cells in the gastric glands. Parietal cells are characterized by basolateral membrane folds that increase the surface area for HCO3- exchange.
In addition to their well-established role in the production of gastric acid, parietal cells exert important biological actions in the regulation of gastric mucosal homeostasis. Parietal cells are the major site for the production of growth factors and morphogens in the gastric epithelium ­ growth factors such as transforming growth factor (TGF)- and morphogens such as sonic hedgehog (Shh), a peptide that contributes to the regulation of complex programs of cellular growth and differentiation in the stomach [5­7]. Interestingly, the loss of mature parietal cells, achieved by genetic, pharmacological, and immunological methods, appears to be associated with an increase in the number of pit cells and a block in the differentiation program of the zymogenic and endocrine lineages, leading to the accumulation of preneck cells and the depletion of their mature zymogenic and endocrine cell descendents [8­12]. Accordingly, these observations suggest that parietal cells, possibly through their ability to produce and secrete TGF- and Shh, are necessary for the normal differentiation and development of multiple cell lineages in the stomach.
Chief cells are pepsinogen-secreting exocrine cells found in the base or fundus of oxyntic glands. Zymogen granules containing proenzymes are located in the apical cytoplasm and release their contents by exocytosis. The apical membrane has a few short microvilli covered by a thin coating of glycoprotein or glycocalyx. An abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum extends upward from the basal cytoplasm toward the apical granules. Functional characterization of chief cells has been aided by the ability to obtain relatively pure populations of these cells.
Mucous neck cells are located in the isthmus or neck region of oxyntic glands (see Fig. 13.1). A transition zone from mucous neck cells to surface mucous cells appears near the junction of gastric glands and gastric pits. The mucous neck cells are the stem cell precursors for all of the gastric epithelial cells, including the surface mucous, parietal, chief, and endocrine cells [13,14].

Mucous neck cells differ in appearance from surface mucous cells. All mucous cells synthesize large amounts of mucin in prominent Golgi stacks, and these glycoproteins are transported by vesicles to large apical mucous granules. Mucous neck cells contain acidic glycoproteins, indicating sulfated forms, whereas surface mucous cells contain a neutral mucosubstance [15,16]. Mucous granules are larger and often paranuclear in mucous neck cells compared with surface mucous cells. Mucous neck cells have abundant ribosomes and moderate amounts of rough endoplasmic reticulum. Their function as secretory cells and mucosal stem cells is different from the presumed function of surface mucous cells in mucosal defense. Surface mucous cells line the gastric pits and cover the entire lumenal surface of the stomach. They migrate up from the gastric pits and are replaced every 1­3 days [17]. They are thought to protect the stomach from injury by acid, pepsin, ingested materials, and pathogens by secreting mucus and HCO3- to form a protective gel. The apical portion of the surface mucous cell is packed with secretory granules. Short microvilli extend from the apical membrane and are covered by a glycocalyx. Secretion of granular mucus appears to occur by exocytosis, apical expulsion, and cell exfoliation [18].
There are many different types of endocrine cells scattered throughout the gastric mucosa. Their secretory products have important endocrine and paracrine effects on acid secretion. Immunohistochemical techniques have enabled characterization of these cells based on their secretory granule contents [19]. Gastric endocrine cells secrete gastrin, somatostatin, and enteroglucagon. Other morphologically distinct gastric endocrine cells may contain additional candidate hormones, but they await further characterization.
Gastric endocrine cells can be classified as open cells, which have apical membranes in contact with the glandular lumen, or closed cells, which are located near the epithelial basement membrane and do not border on the lumen of the gland. The prototypical open endocrine cell is the G cell. The basilar portion of the cell is packed with secretory granules [20] from which gastrin is released by basilar exocytosis [21], consistent with the rapid postprandial appearance of the hormone in the bloodstream. The apical portion of the cell narrows until only a small microvillous border opens on the glandular lumen. The apical membrane may contain lumenal receptors that can detect amino acids or their amine derivatives, which are thought to stimulate G cells during feeding [22,23]. The model of a closed gastric endocrine cell is the fundic somatostatin cell (D cell). Immunohistochemical staining of these cells reveals long, slender processes that terminate on or near parietal and chief cells [24]. These processes presumably mediate the paracrine effect of somatostatin.
The primary cell containing mucosal histamine in the dog stomach is the mast cell [25]. Histamine-containing mast

285

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

cells also occur in the human stomach. Mast cells from canine fundic mucosa have been enriched by elutriation and shown to contain characteristic dense granules that stain metachromatically [26]. In some species, including rat and human, histamine is also present in endocrinelike cells that contain large granules and have the characteristic appearance of enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells [27]. The relative proportion of these two histamine cell types in humans is unknown. Although in situ morphological studies have not been definitive, it appears that these cells exist in the lamina propria in proximity to the glandular cells.
The origin of gastric epithelial cells and the molecular events important in their differentiation are becoming increasingly clear. Electron microscopic examination and the measurement of DNA synthesis in gastric cells indicate that the isthmus of the gastric gland (see Fig. 13.1) constitutes the proliferative zone for the stomach [28­30]. Within this region are three populations of cells that do not contain granules and which are characterized on the basis of their Golgi apparatus. Parietal cells originate from precursor cells (preparietal cells), which mature as they migrate toward the neck and base of the gland.
Karam and colleagues [31] demonstrated that there is functional heterogeneity of parietal cells along the pit­gland axis. Using quantitative morphometry, these investigators observed that parietal cells in the isthmus and neck of the rabbit gastric gland responded appropriately to secretagogues, whereas those in the base showed minimal morphological change in response to stimulation. The factors responsible for decreased function of senescent parietal cells are unclear.
Innervation As is the case for the entire gastrointestinal tract, the stomach is innervated by the central and enteric nervous systems. This innervation mediates secretion and motor activity through efferent fibers and detects chemical or mechanical stimuli by means of afferent fibers. A full description of the structure and function of the enteric nervous system is provided in Chapter 2.
Central efferents are carried by the parasympathetic vagal branches and the sympathetic greater splanchnic nerve [32]. Afferent sensory neurons are characterized by mucosal chemoreceptors and myenteric mechanoreceptors. These receptors communicate with the central and the enteric nervous systems. Afferent nerve processes account for about 80% of vagal fibers and 20% of fibers of the greater splanchnic nerve [33,34]. The incoming information carried by these nerves is processed in central sensory nuclei and initiates neurally mediated gastric reflexes. Sensory neurons in enteric ganglia also initiate local reflexes such as gastric peristalsis. Cross-talk between central and enteric fibers occurs continu-

ally in the enteric plexus as it modulates the effects of motor neurons.
Vasculature Gastric mucosal blood flow maintains epithelial integrity and is an essential component of mucosal defense. The stomach receives its blood supply from the celiac axis through six major arteries. The right and left gastric arteries supply the lesser curvature and extend over the anterior and posterior surfaces of the stomach. In a similar fashion, the left and right gastroepiploic arteries supply the greater curvature. Short gastric arteries from the splenic artery perfuse the upper stomach, and the gastroduodenal artery serves the pyloroantral region. These arteries provide large arterioles that pierce the gastric muscle wall.
The microvasculature of the stomach is illustrated in Figure 13.2. The entering arterioles provide smaller arterioles that extend to the submucosal plexus and to the muscle layers [35]. A capillary layer in the muscle drains into the venous collecting system. The afferent arterioles supplying the submucosal plexus are innervated by sympathetic fibers coursing with the entering blood vessels. The submucosal arteriolar plexus does not communicate with the venous plexus directly but rather provides mucosal arterioles to the base of the gastric glands. The mucosal arterioles branch into capillaries that ascend perpendicularly between the glands to the epithelial surface. These ascending capillaries interconnect horizontally, forming a lattice around the gastric glands. Ascending capillaries receive HCO3- secreted from the basolateral surface of stimulated parietal cells and carry it to the surface epithelium. This phenomenon is called the alkaline tide. At the surface epithelium, the HCO3- can assist in buffering any H+ ion backdiffusion. At the mucosal surface the fenestrated capillaries empty into venules that drain into the submucosal venous plexus and efferent veins that follow the course of the primary arterial branches [36]. This anatomic arrangement allows muscle layer blood flow to be in parallel with mucosal flow while submucosal flow is in series with the mucosa. This type of microvascular system allows selective decreases in mucosal blood flow while muscular blood flow is maintained.
Mucosal blood flow accounts for 70%­80% of total gastric blood flow in basal and stimulated states [37,38]. Previous studies using aminopyrine clearance techniques suggest that stimulation of acid secretion increases mucosal blood flow, but interpretation of these results must be tempered by the knowledge that acid secretion affects aminopyrine clearance and may account for the apparent increase in mucosal blood flow [39]. Indicator dilution methods suggest that acid secretagogues have no effect on mucosal blood flow. When gastric perfusion pressures are adequate, gastric acid secretion varies independently of blood flow [40]. These conclusions have

286

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

Pepsin Degraded

pH2

mucus

H+

LUMEN

HCl

Mucus

HCO3-

Mucus

pH7

MUCUS-BICARBONATE LAYER

SURFACE MUCOUS CELLS

H+ H+

HCO3-

Parietal cell HCO3

Mucosal arterioles

Capillary lattice

MUCOSA
Collecting venule

Arteriolar plexus

Venular plexus

SUBMUCOSA

Artery

Vein

Figure 13.2 Gastric microvasculature. Adapted from Guth & Leung [35] and Koelz et al. [509].

MUSCLE

challenged the long-held hypothesis that secretagogue stimulation induces a parallel increase in acid secretion and mucosal blood flow [41].
The innervation of the gastric microvasculature partially reveals the mechanisms regulating mucosal blood flow. The submucosal arterioles appear to be innervated by sympathetic nerve fibers [42]. When stimulated, these fibers constrict the arterioles and temporarily decrease mucosal blood flow [43,44]. After 3­ 4 min of prolonged sympathetic stimulation, flow increases [45]. This response has been described as

autoregulatory escape from adrenergic vasoconstrictor influence [46]. Anatomical details support these physiological findings and suggest a regulatory function at the level of the submucosal arterioles [42].
Regulation of acid secretion
The regulation of acid secretion can be subdivided into the supracellular influences that have been the focus of classic

287

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

physiology since Beaumont and the cellular mechanisms that have been elucidated more recently. This section concentrates on supracellular influences and reviews the in vivo studies of acid secretion.
Integrated control The integrated mechanisms that control acid secretion can be viewed as an arrangement of regulatory strata. These include two forms of neural control: long reflex or cephalovagal arcs and local intragastric reflex arcs. A second tier of control is exerted by humoral substances acting in an endocrine fashion, such as gastrin, or in a paracrine manner, such as histamine. Somatostatin may function as an endocrine and paracrine factor. The role of many such peptides remains uncertain. The direct influence of chemical factors is an additional tier of regulation, typified by the stimulatory action of amino acids and amines on gastrin release and the inhibitory effect of gastric acid on gastrin release.
These strata are not distinct but rather are closely intertwined; when discussing the phases of postprandial acid secretion, Grossman [47] asserted that the individual contributions made by the various phases could not be differentiated. Nevertheless, classic physiology has attempted to isolate and study factors that influence acid secretion. The results indicate that there are three principal stimuli of parietal cell acid secretion: histamine, acetylcholine, and gastrin. The principal inhibitory secretagogue appears to be somatostatin, although other chemical modulators, including peptides, growth factors, and prostaglandins, may also have roles.
When reviewing these in vivo studies, several confounding facts should not be forgotten. First, acute responses should be differentiated from chronic adaptive changes. For example, the effect on gastrin and somatostatin cell number seen during acute achlorhydria differs from the changes seen in chronic achlorhydria [48]. By analogy, data from studies using vagotomy may signify the chronic adaptive response to achlorhydria rather than the effect of withdrawal of vagal innervation alone. Second, acid secretagogues potentiate the response to one another. This central point, which is crucial to the understanding of studies of supracellular and cellular regulation, was first appreciated by Grossman [47]. He defined a potentiated response as one in which the effect of two agents in combination is greater than the sum of their separate effects when administered alone. Gillespie and Grossman [49] demonstrated in dogs with Heidenhain pouches that the acid secretory response to a combination of Urecholine (bethanechol chloride) and gastrin or to Urecholine and histamine greatly exceeded the maximal response to gastrin, histamine, or Urecholine alone (Fig. 13.3). These investigators subsequently demonstrated the corollary effect using antagonists of acid secretion. Metiamide, an H2-receptor antagonist, inhibited acid secretion stimulated by histamine, pentagastrin, 2-deoxyglucose (which activates central vagal

Acid output (mEq/h)

14 Mean and standard errors
12
10

Urecholine and
histamine
Urecholine and
gastrin

8
Histamine 6
Urecholine 4
Gastrin
2

Figure 13.3 Maximal acid responses to gastrin, histamine, and Urecholine, alone and in combination, in dogs with Heidenhain pouches. From Gillespie & Grossman [49], with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.

stimulation), and food. Atropine sulfate also inhibited the response to all of these stimulants except histamine [50]. With great perception, Grossman deduced that there were receptors for histamine, gastrin, and acetylcholine on the parietal cell that interacted with one another. Because of these interactions, it is impossible to predict the relative importance of each secretagogue on the basis of individual in vivo stimulation or inhibition studies. The phenomenon of potentiation provides the basis for the efficacy of many of the acid-reducing therapies for peptic ulceration, especially the use of H2 antagonists. A third fact to consider when reviewing in vivo studies of acid secretion is that stimulatory and inhibitory influences are active simultaneously. This is true in the basal interprandial and the postprandial state.
Methods for measuring acid secretion Animal studies have used dogs, rats, rabbits, and mice. There are great species differences in basal secretion and responsiveness to secretagogues [51]. Classic studies of dogs have used vascularly perfused isolated pouches of gastric mucosa. The fundic pouches with intact vagal innervation are called Pavlov pouches, and vagotomized fundic pouches are called Heidenhain pouches. It is assumed that secretion from a vagally innervated fundic pouch is an accurate index of secretion from the main stomach [47]. These gastric pouches have been used to define many aspects of regulation of gastric acid secretion, including cephalic influences, the role of gastrin, long cephalovagal and local reflex neural arcs, and the inhibitory feedback control of acid secretion by intralumenal acid.
Aspiration of gastric juice is the simplest and most widely used method of estimating acid secretion in humans. To perform this test, a fine-bore nasogastric tube is inserted under fluoroscopic control into the most dependent part of the

288

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

stomach of a fasted volunteer, and several measurements are made: basal acid output (BAO), which estimates resting secretion, and maximal acid output (MAO) or peak acid output (PAO), which estimates the acid secretory response to an exogenous secretagogue. The BAO is measured by aspirating the gastric contents for four consecutive 15-min periods. The H+ ion concentration of the aspirate is estimated by titration with a basic solution of known concentration. The BAO is expressed as mEq H+/h and is the sum of the measured acid output in four unstimulated test periods. The expected range for BAO in healthy adults is 0 ­11 mEq H+/h (Fig. 13.4) [52]. The measurement of BAO is usually combined with the measurement of MAO or PAO. In this test, acid output is stimulated by a supraphysiological dose of an exogenous secretagogue; this is usually pentagastrin, which may be administered by a subcutaneous or intramuscular injection (6 g/kg) or by continuous intravenous infusion (6 g/ kg/h). Other secretagogues that have been used are histamine or a histamine analogue, betazole [1]. The MAO is the sum of acid output of four consecutive 15-min collection periods. The PAO is calculated by multiplying by two the sum of the two highest outputs recorded in the four test periods. The expected range for PAO in healthy adults is 10­63 mEq H+/h (see Fig. 13.4) [52].
The MAO and PAO are a reflection of the total number of parietal cells, also called the parietal cell mass [53], which is influenced by gender, body weight, lean body mass, and age [54]. The MAO and PAO are lower in women than men because of a smaller parietal cell mass and a lower sensitivity of that parietal cell mass to exogenous secretagogues [55]. Stimulated acid output in children is comparable to that in adults when expressed as a function of body weight, but acid secretion declines in the elderly [56,57].

The BAO, MAO, and PAO under-represent actual basal and stimulated acid secretion because these methods do not account for acid lost through the pylorus, acid neutralization by gastric HCO3- and refluxed duodenal juice, and acid losses resulting from back-diffusion of H+ through the gastric mucosa. Nonetheless, these measurements have proved useful in defining the pathophysiology of peptic ulcer disease [52] and in diagnosing Zollinger­Ellison syndrome.
Another method of estimating acid secretory ability was introduced by Fordtran and Walsh [58] using continuous in vivo intragastric titration. By this means, the acid secretory response to the physiological stimulation of ingested food is estimated. Continuous intragastric titration requires placement of a double-lumen tube into the most dependent part of the stomach, usually under fluoroscopic visualization. One lumen allows frequent sampling of small volumes (2­ 3 mL) of gastric contents. The pH of the sample is immediately measured and the gastric juice is returned to the stomach. The port of the second tube is positioned 10 cm proximal to the sampling port; throughout the study, the gastric pH is maintained at an arbitrary value, usually pH 5.5, by infusing NaHCO3 through this second tube. A homogenized meal buffered to pH 5.5 is eaten. The amount of NaHCO3 necessary to maintain the pH of the gastric juice at pH 5.5 is a measure of the postprandial acid secretory response. Because this is a cumbersome procedure, it has not gained widespread use outside specific research investigations. However, continuous intragastric titration has proven to be a useful method of measuring postprandial acid secretory responses [59,60].
A different approach to studying continuous acid responses is to measure intragastric pH by using an indwelling probe or radiotelemetric capsule [61,62]. This does not

Basal acid output 30 (mmol/h)

Peak acid output 90 (mmol/h)
75

BAO/PAO × 100 45

20 60 30 45

10 30 15

15

00 0

Normal (n = 91)

Duodenal ulcer (n = 58)

Figure 13.4 Basal acid output (BAO), peak acid output (PAO), and BAO­PAO ratio in 91 healthy adults and in 58 patients with duodenal ulcers. From Blair et al. [52], with permission from the American Society for Clinical Investigation.

289

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

estimate total H+ concentration because it does not account for the volume of gastric juice and buffering capacity. Further studies with these techniques are required before their specific utility in humans can be determined.
Basal or interprandial acid secretion Basal unstimulated acid secretion exhibits a circadian variation, with the highest secretion at night and the lowest in the early morning [63]. This variation is not matched by changes in circulating serum gastrin levels. In humans, vagotomy greatly reduces or abolishes interprandial acid secretion in patients with duodenal ulcer [53,60,64]. The caveats expressed about the influence of potentiation and chronic adaptive changes on studies of the effect of vagotomy on gastric endocrine and exocrine responses are pertinent when interpreting these data, although vagotomy does not affect parietal cell number [65]. Twice-daily administration of an H2 receptor antagonist to patients with a duodenal ulcer reduces interprandial acid secretion, although it does not abolish it [60]. This suggests that H2 receptor activation is also capable of influencing BAO. Basal interprandial acid secretion is likely the result of combined cholinergic and histaminergic stimulation.
The cholinergic regulation of basal gastric acid secretion is complex. In dogs with gastric pouches, denervation of the antral pouch markedly reduces resting output of acid from the main innervated stomach and from the denervated fundic pouch without changing plasma gastrin levels [66]. This suggests that there is a local interneuronal reflex arc

innervated by the vagus and independent of plasma gastrin which carries acid stimulatory signals from the antrum to the fundus. These data are mirrored in humans; the small amount of basal acid secretion found in some patients who have undergone vagotomy can be abolished by antrectomy plus vagotomy [64].
Stimulation of acid secretion The physiological stimulus for acid secretion is food. Traditionally, the food-stimulated acid response has been described in three phases: cephalic, gastric, and intestinal. These phases refer to the sites of origin of the stimuli and do not imply mechanisms by which acid secretion is stimulated or inhibited. These phases occur concurrently, not consecutively. The acid secretory response at any instant represents the sum of all of the stimulatory and inhibitory influences.
Cephalic phase The influence of the nervous system on gastric acid secretion was first recognized by William Beaumont and Pavlov. In 1928, Farrell [67] showed that the vagus was the sole gastrocephalic neural link involved in gastric secretion, and this observation remains valid. The cephalic phase contributes in some degree to total postprandial acid but was estimated by Richardson and colleagues [68] to be as much as 50%. Feldman and Richardson [69] studied the relative contributions of thought, sight, smell, and taste of food to the cephalic phase of gastric acid secretion in humans (Fig. 13.5). Merely discussing appetizing food for 30 min without sight, smell,

Acid output (mmol/h)

(a) 25 20 15 10 5 0 25 20 15 10 5 0
(c)

(b)

(n = 11)

SF
Food discussion

SF

(n = 9)

Smell

­30 0

30 60 90

(d)

Time (min)

(n = 9)

SF Sight

SF

Figure 13.5 Mean gastric output in the same

persons in response to sham feeding (SF)

Sight compared with (a) discussion of favorite foods,

(n = 9)

and (b) sight of appetizing food, (c) smell of

smell appetizing food, and (d) a combination of sight

­30 0 30 60 90

and smell. From Feldman & Richardson [69],

with permission from Elsevier.

290

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

or taste produced an average of 66% of the total cephalic response estimated by the time-honored method of modified sham feeding. Serum gastrin levels also significantly increased. The sight of food or smell of food alone, although still producing significant acid secretion and gastrin release, was a considerably less potent stimulus than conversation. These data show by subtraction that taste is also an important component of the cephalic phase.
There are many interrelated mechanisms by which cephalovagal input mediates the cephalic phase of stimulated acid secretion. Vagal innervation acts directly on parietal cells. This was deduced from studies of dogs with antral and fundic gastric pouches. Denervation of the antral pouch reduced or abolished the serum gastrin response to sham feeding but did not abolish acid secretion by the vagally innervated fundic pouch [66]. Corroborative evidence for this mechanism is afforded by the demonstration of acetylcholine receptors on isolated canine parietal cells.
A second pathway in the cephalic phase of gastric acid secretion is the release of circulating gastrin from the gastric antrum. The thought, sight, or smell of food and modified sham feeding increase serum gastrin levels [64]. Isolated canine gastrin cells possess acetylcholine receptors. The plasma gastrin response to sham feeding in humans is regulated by intragastric pH and is not observable when gastric pH is maintained at pH 2.5 [70]. This effect is also atropine sensitive. However, vagal control of postprandial gastrin release is complex. Low doses of atropine, a muscarinic antagonist, enhance rather than reduce the gastrin response to sham feeding, insulin-induced hypoglycemia, or feeding [71­75]. Similarly, parietal cell vagotomy, although markedly reducing acid secretion, enhances gastrin release in response to sham feeding [71,76], insulin-induced hypoglycemia, or intragastric nutrient infusion [77]. These effects are independent of changes in intragastric pH [73]. This result suggests that the vagus carries cholinergic fibers that, in the absence of atropine, mediate directly or indirectly an inhibitory control of gastrin release. Studies of dogs with Heidenhain pouches and gastric fistulae demonstrate that truncal vagal denervation reduces gastrin release but elevates acid secretion [78]. These data can be interpreted to suggest that there is cholinergic release of a substance which can inhibit acid secretion independently of its effects on gastrin release. Although the nature of this substance has yet to be elucidated, somatostatin is one candidate [75]. However, Feldman and colleagues [72] were unable to demonstrate a rise in the level of plasma somatostatin in humans during sham feeding, and the role of somatostatin in regulating the cephalovagal control of gastric acid secretion, whether by acting directly on the parietal cell or by inhibition of gastrin release, remains uncertain. To define more precisely the role of gastrin in sham feeding-mediated gastric acid secretion in dogs, Kovacs and colleagues [79] developed a monoclonal antigastrin antibody capable of immunoneutralizing circulating gastrin in

vivo. By means of this antibody, these investigators demonstrated that immunoneutralization of gastrin leads to a significant inhibition of sham feeding-stimulated gastric acid output, suggesting that gastrin released by central vagal stimulation is an important mediator of sham feeding-stimulated gastric acid secretion in dogs.
The components of the central nervous system involved in modulating gastric secretion include the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMNV), the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), and the hypothalamus. The DMNV supplies stimulatory efferent fibers to the stomach through the vagus nerve [80,81]. Stimulation of the DMNV results in activation of gastric secretion [82,83], whereas ablation of this nucleus abolishes the secretory process [84]. It appears that the role of the DMNV is not to initiate secretion [85] but instead to integrate central input from the hypothalamus and visceral input from the NTS. Regions of the hypothalamus that are important for regulating gastric secretion include the ventromedial hypothalamus, which appears to provide tonic inhibition [86,87], the lateral hypothalamus, and the adjacent medial forebrain bundle, which together mediate secretion in response to hypoglycemia [88­90]. Visceral afferents and taste fibers deliver input into the NTS demonstrating its potential involvement in stimulating gastric secretion in response to taste. The NTS is also thought to mediate stimulation of acid secretion in response to hypoglycemia [91]. Sympathetic and vagal afferents relay sensory information (mechanical, chemical, and thermal) from the stomach to the central nervous system [92].
Peptidergic factors also play an important role in modulating central nervous system-regulated gastric secretion. Direct injection of peptides into the brain has led to the discovery of factors that either stimulate or inhibit gastric secretion [93]. The peptides observed to either activate or inhibit gastric acid secretion by central injection are summarized in Table 13.1. This represents a partial summary of these peptides, the result of the numerous elegant studies examining this important subject [93­104].
Gastric phase When food enters the stomach it initiates the gastric phase of acid secretion. This is usually divided into two components: a physical component caused by distention of the stomach and a chemical component in which chemical effectors interact with gastric cells.
The acid secretory response to distention results from presumed stretch receptors in the gastric tissue. This response is the stereotypical long vasovagal reflex arc. Distention of the gastric fundus and corpus in humans stimulates acid secretion. The effect is almost abolished by proximal gastric vagotomy and at least in part is independent of changes in serum gastrin levels [105­107].
Distention-induced acid secretion is a complex phenomenon in which antral and fundic responses can be

291

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Table 13.1 Peptides that affect gastric acid secretion after injection into the central nervous system

Inhibitors

Stimulants

CRF -Endorphin Bombesin Neurotensin Calcitonin CGRP Interleukin-1

TRH Somatostatin Neuropeptide Y Galanin Peptide YY Ghrelinyama Orexin A

CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; CRF, corticotropin-releasing factor; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone.

viewed separately. Antral distention produces gastrin release in dogs [108] and humans [109] ­ Debas and associates [108] called this the pylorooxyntic reflex. In dogs with antral and fundic pouches, this response was inhibited by antral acidification [108]; however, in humans, albeit those with intact stomachs, it appeared to be independent of lumenal pH [109]. In dogs, the pH sensitivity of the antral distention response required an intact cerebrovagal link to the antrum. In humans, low-dose atropine, which inhibited the acid secretory response to antral distention, nonetheless enhanced the elevation of serum gastrin levels. This suggests that there is an atropine-sensitive inhibitory pathway restraining the gastrin response to antral distention. Fundic distention in dogs with vagally innervated fundic and antral pouches produces gastrin release and acid secretion [110]. Both responses are lost when the antral pouch is maintained at pH 2.5. This vasovagal reflex has been called the oxyntopyloric reflex. A similar vagally dependent acid stimulatory response to fundic distention occurs in humans, but it appears not to be mediated through elevated serum gastrin [105].
The roles of histamine and acetylcholine in mediating distention-induced acid secretion are unclear. As may be predicted from our knowledge of the potentiation interrelations of the three principal secretagogues ­ gastrin, acetylcholine, and histamine ­ the acid response to gastric distention in humans is abolished by vagotomy or cimetidine [111,112]. However, this may indicate the facilitory effect of background secretion of these secretagogues only. Gastric release of acetylcholine or histamine in response to distention has not been shown.
Food interacts with the gastric mucosa to cause acid secretion in a manner that is independent of stretch by the food bolus. At least four constituents of food produce this stimulat-

ory effect: peptic digests of proteins, ethanol, coffee, and Ca2+. Whole proteins are poor stimuli of gastric acid secretion, but peptic digests of the same proteins are effective [113]. Amino acids, the breakdown products of proteins and amines produce acid secretion principally through the release of gastrin [23,113,114]. The aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tryptophan are the most potent stimuli of gastrin release and gastric acid secretion in vivo [115]. Their amine derivatives may contribute significantly to this response [23,116]. Circulating gastrin is the principal mediator of postprandial gastric acid secretion. This has been demonstrated in human studies in which the increment in plasma gastrin that occurred after an intragastric infusion of amino acids or ingestion of a protein-rich meal was reproduced with an intravenous infusion of gastrin and a similar acid secretory response to endogenous and exogenous gastrin was observed [58,114]. These studies suggest that, despite the cephalovagal component of gastrin release, it is the chemical response to protein breakdown products that is the principal stimulus for postprandial gastrin release [114].
Although amines and amino acids can cause gastrin release by direct action on the G cell [23,115], this phenomenon must be viewed within the larger orchestrated physiological response to ingested nutrients. Nutrients stimulate the release of many peptides into the circulation, including somatostatin, cholecystokinin (CCK), secretin, gastric inhibitory peptides, enteroglucagon, and peptide YY, which may influence acid secretion directly or by affecting gastrin release.
Integrating these data with data derived from whole animal physiology has proven difficult. Atropine enhances gastrin release in many circumstances, although, according to the in vitro model previously described, inhibition of gastrin release or no change would be expected. Agents that block the gastrin response to bombesin do not affect the gastrin response to food. Studies in humans also suggest that adrenergic innervation may play a role in gastric acid secretion. Administration of terbutaline, a 2-adrenergic receptor agonist, enhances serum gastrin levels but inhibits acid secretion in response to intragastric infusion of a homogenized meal [117]. Although it is likely that numerous neurohumoral mediators, such as somatostatin and gastrin-releasing peptide, and cholinergic and adrenergic innervation are significant factors in postprandial gastrin release, their relative roles in the integrated physiology of gastrin release remain as yet undefined.
Studies in humans have demonstrated a modest acid stimulatory response or no response to direct intragastric infusions of pure alcohol [118­120]. Red wine and beer, however, are potent stimuli of acid secretion and serum gastrin [118­120]. These effects are probably caused by amines or amino acids in the beverage stimulating gastrin release rather than by a direct effect of the alcohol content.

292

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

Caffeine stimulates acid release in humans [121]. McArthur and colleagues [122] showed that many beverages are potent stimulants of gastric acid secretion, including Tab, coffee, beer, and milk; each of these caused a pentagastrinstimulated MAO of greater than 70%. Decaffeinated coffee was also a potent stimulant, showing that it is not just the caffeine in coffee that is an acid stimulant. These studies did not attempt to control for the cephalic phase of acid secretion, nor was gastrin measured; it is therefore impossible to draw conclusions about the mechanisms that underlie these observations.
Oral ingestion of calcium carbonate stimulates gastrin release and acid secretion in humans [123]. This action is independent of acid buffering capacity and is presumed to be an effect of dissociated Ca2+.
Intestinal phase The entry of chyme into the small intestine initiates the intestinal phase of the acid secretory process. The primary stimulatory factors are distention, proteins, and the products of protein digestion [124,125]. Quantitating the significance of the intestinal phase to the stimulatory limb of acid secretion has proven controversial, perhaps because there are definite potentiation phenomena between the acid secretory response to intestinal nutrients and gastrin or histamine [126]. Serum gastrin levels do not appear to mediate the intestinal phase of acid secretion in dogs or humans [125,127]. The acid stimulatory response to intestinal nutrients is preserved in vagotomized animals, indicating that circulating stimuli are involved to some degree [128]. This role may be filled in part by circulating amino acids, which have been shown to stimulate acid secretion without elevating serum gastrin [129]. There have been numerous attempts to isolate a distinct acid stimulatory peptide hormone (i.e., enterooxyntin) from small bowel mucosa, albeit without convincing success [130­133].
Inhibition of acid secretion Cephalic influence Evidence suggesting that there may be a cephalic inhibitory influence acting on gastric acid secretion comes from intracerebral microinjection studies [134]. Several of the peptides that can lead to this inhibitory event after intracerebroventricular injection are outlined in Table 13.1. It appears that vagal fibers carry inhibitory and stimulatory messages to the parietal cells. As with the cerebral microinjection studies in which gastric acid secretion is stimulated, however, there are no data to indicate which, if any, of these observations are relevant to the cephalic phase of gastric acid secretion. In addition, the complex response of stimulated serum gastrin levels to low-dose atropine previously described suggests that there are vagal inhibitory influences on gastrin release.

Gastric mediation Just as vagal inhibitory fibers have been implicated in the cephalic acid secretory response, there appear to be vagally mediated inhibitory neural arcs involved in the distentioninduced acid secretory response. Studies of dogs and humans led Debas and colleagues [108,135,136] to conclude that antral distention, in addition to stimulating serum gastrin release, results in the release of an inhibitor of acid secretion. Whether this effect is humoral or neurocrine is not clear, but it does depend on an intact vagus.
Gastrin release in response to nutrients, sham feeding, and antral distention is inhibited by the presence of acid in the gastric antrum [70,108,137]. An intralumenal pH of 3 appears to be the threshold for initiating this response [138]. The mechanisms of this negative-feedback loop probably include somatostatin release as a paracrine or endocrine gastrin inhibitor [138]. Evidence from in vitro human studies suggests that gastric acid regulates local release of somatostatin in the stomach and postprandial release into the circulation [139,140]. An alternative mechanism for the inhibition of gastrin release at low intralumenal pH is that an acidic milieu causes amines to be protonated and, as charged particles, they are not taken up by G cells [141]. This cannot be the complete answer, however, because at pH 2.5 cephalovagal stimulation of gastrin release is inhibited [70]. It is probable that somatostatin acts directly on the parietal cell to inhibit acid secretion by means of paracrine or endocrine pathways [1,142].
Intestinal inhibition The observation that nutrient infusion into the small intestine inhibits acid secretion dates to the 1920s. Feng and colleagues [143] proposed that fat infusion into the small bowel inhibited acid secretion by the release from the small bowel mucosa of a circulating inhibitory hormone they called enterogastrone. There have been at least seven candidate peptides for this role: somatostatin, neurotensin, gastric inhibitory peptides, peptide YY, secretin, CCK, and galanin [143­151]. It is probable that enterogastrone is not a single entity but rather a physiological response to more than one circulating acid inhibitor.
Cellular basis of acid secretion
Analysis of the regulatory effects of gastric secretagogues in vivo has provided important insights into the mechanisms of acid secretion in animals and humans. Interactions among neurocrine, paracrine, and endocrine signals and their effects on the parietal cell ultimately must be studied in the intact organism. However, the complexity of the regulatory effects converging on the parietal cell makes integrated in vitro analysis a necessity. In vitro models of acid secretion include

293

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

preparations of gastric mucosa, gastric glands, and isolated enriched parietal cells. Gastric endocrine cells effecting acid secretion have also been enriched and analyzed. These models have provided an understanding of the cellular events leading to acid secretion.
In vitro models Isolated preparations of intact gastric mucosa allow the study of secretory events while maintaining all of the mucosal cell types in their usual cellular environment. Cell polarity, tight junctions, gap junctions, desmosomes, and certain paracrine effects are maintained in such models. Physiological neurocrine and endocrine effects are absent but can be mimicked by bathing one or both surfaces with the desired neurotransmitter or hormone. One such model, the isolated bullfrog mucosa, has been used to study histamine release and acid secretion [152]. Mucosal strips are bluntly dissected and are mounted as a sheet between two sides of a Lucite chamber. A flow-through system can be used to ensure rapid changes of the serosal solution. Acid secretion into the mucosal solution is measured with a pH stat by maintaining the pH at 7.0 with isotonic 15 mM NaOH. Other types of mucosal studies use explants maintained in organ culture or fragments of mucosa suspended in tissue culture solutions [153­155]. However, studies using these types of models have been supplanted by gastric gland and isolated cell studies.
The initial steps in the preparation of glands and cells are similar [156,157]. The gastric mucosa is bluntly dissected away from the submucosa, finely minced, and then dispersed with pronase or crude collagenase. The viability rate of parietal cells obtained with this technique generally exceeds 95% as judged by trypan blue exclusion.
After digestion of the gastric mucosa, the glands can be separated from the cells and debris by several sedimentation washes at unit gravity. The large size of the glands allows them to sediment rapidly, essentially free of nonglandular material. Separation of isolated cells can be achieved by velocity and density separation techniques. Counterflow elutriation is a velocity separation technique that separates cells predominantly on the basis of size [157]. Enriched fractions routinely contain 50%­70% parietal cells, which maintain their viability and biological activity. Antral G cells and fundic D cells have also been enriched by elutriation [158]. A second purification step using a density gradient can be added to enrich parietal or endocrine cells further.
There is a potential limitation in using isolated parietal cells for physiological studies. Once the cells are separated from the microenvironment found within the gastric mucosa, their ability to respond to secretogogues in a tissue-specific fashion diminishes within 8­10 h after isolation (Del Valle and Yamada, unpublished observations). To circumvent this problem, Chew and Ljunstrom [159] developed a system for culturing isolated parietal cells so that they retain their differentiated structure and function for as long as 72 h

after isolation. These cultured cells express receptors for the appropriate secretagogues and maintain expression of parietal cell-specific genes such as ATP4B, which codes for H+,K+-ATPase. This model provides an important tool for characterizing the multiple factors involved in regulating parietal cell physiology.
Gastric secretion in different species has been analyzed with each of these models. Interspecies variation may account for certain discrepant results occasionally observed with different models. Many analyses of the cellular events controlling acid secretion have used canine gastric mucosal cells enriched by counterflow elutriation. The data obtained using canine cells can be correlated with the large body of data obtained from in vivo acid secretory studies in dogs. Moreover, canine parietal cells have several features in common with human parietal cells.
Indirect measures of parietal cell function have been developed to quantitate the biological effects of various secretagogues and inhibitors. The development of these assays has made it possible to correlate the binding of ligands with their functional effects. Oxygen consumption has been shown to correlate with HCl secretion in both in vivo and ex vivo studies [160,161]. Oxygen consumption in isolated enriched parietal cells increases in response to gastrin, carbachol, and histamine, probably reflecting the activity of the proton pump [157]. Glucose oxidation can also be used as a measure of parietal cell metabolic activity [162]. Morphological transformation of parietal cells in response to secretagogues produces dramatic changes in cell appearance. Resting cells are filled with tubulovesicles whereas stimulated cells rapidly develop a dense intracellular canalicular network communicating with the apical surface of the cell. Nomarski optics can visualize this transformation in living cells, and fluorescent microscopy with acridine orange can show the accumulation of fluorescent dye in the newly generated acidic spaces [163].
The accumulation of weak bases in membrane-bound acidic spaces can be measured using the carbon 14-labeled aminopyrine uptake assay [164]. Uncharged aminopyrine is lipid soluble and easily crosses cellular membranes. On entering an acidic compartment, aminopyrine is protonated and loses its lipid solubility. This sequestration of [14C]aminopyrine correlates with intracellular acid formation and is the most commonly used assay for parietal cell stimulation. Other methods involving measurement of proton pump association with canalicular membranes and correlation of morphological changes in parietal cells with functional measurement of acid production using fluorescence microscopy techniques permit the dynamic study of parietal cell physiology [165,166].
Receptors Separation of gastric cells into highly enriched cell populations has made it possible to identify and characterize specific

294

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

receptors on each cell type [167]. Cells maintain intact receptors throughout the separation procedure and purified cells bind radiolabeled ligands specifically. The binding of a ligand should correlate with a functional assay over the same dosage range to confirm that a specific cell type has biologically active receptors. An example is the correlation of carbachol binding to parietal cells and the induction of aminopyrine uptake by carbachol.
After functional receptors have been demonstrated, they can be characterized using binding studies with available receptor agonists and antagonists. Further characterization of receptors has been achieved by solubilizing them from cell membranes and cross-linking them to specific radiolabeled ligands. The solubilized form of the receptor can be examined for size, subunit structure, or ligand-induced autophosphorylation.
Receptors can be purified, their amino acid sequences analyzed, and their genes eventually cloned. The application of molecular biological techniques to the study of cell surface receptors has greatly enhanced our understanding of their structure and function. Several receptors that are critical for gastric secretory function have been cloned. These include the histamine H2, somatostatin, muscarinic M3, and gastrin or CCK2 receptors [168 ­171]. Analysis of the amino acid sequences of these cloned receptors indicates that they belong to the family of heptahelical or G protein-linked receptors. Structurally, these receptors consist of a single amino acid chain containing seven hydrophobic domains, which presumably traverse the cell surface membrane (i.e., transmembrane regions). Recombinant molecular technology (e.g., site-directed mutagenesis, chimeric receptor studies) enabled the characterization of the structural components of G protein-linked receptors that are important for ligand binding and biological action. For example, the specificity of ligand binding can be determined by the hydrophobic transmembrane regions of the receptor and the extracellular domains. Furthermore, coupling to the G proteins that are responsible for secretagogue-mediated signal transduction involves interaction principally with the third intracellular loop of the receptor. Receptor regulation (e.g., uncoupling, sequestration, down-regulation) appears to involve kinasemediated phosphorylation events targeted to serine and threonine residues found within the C-terminal portion of these receptors. Detailed structure­function analyses of the receptors that are important in gastric secretion are in progress.
The question of whether acid secretagogues act directly or indirectly on parietal cells could be answered after isolated parietal cell preparations were developed. Initial studies showed that histamine, carbachol, and gastrin increased canine parietal cell oxygen uptake [157,172]. Later studies revealed that [14C]aminopyrine accumulation was also increased by each of these secretagogues. By using isolated rabbit gastric glands, however, somewhat different results

were obtained; aminopyrine accumulation could be demonstrated in response to histamine and carbachol but not to gastrin [173]. These differences may reflect species variability. For example, rabbits, which are known to feed continuously, may not have developed the ability to marshal an acid secretory response to intermittent bolus feeding as mediated by gastrin. Alternatively, these differences may reflect differences in the study methods used. The experiments of Del Valle and colleagues [174] have demonstrated marked increases in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) in response to the administration of gastrin 17 in single isolated rabbit parietal cells, suggesting that gastrin receptors are present on rabbit cells as well.
The concept that secretagogues such as acetylcholine and gastrin directly activate parietal cells was placed in doubt by a study that demonstrated the expression of histamine H2, gastrin, and muscarinic receptors on immunocytes found in gastric lamina propria instead of on parietal cells [175]. Diaz and colleagues [176] revisited this controversial issue. Using in situ hybridization histochemistry and autoradiography with a highly selective H2 receptor radioligand (iodine 125labeled aminopotentidine), a specific signal for H2-specific gene transcripts was detected only within parietal cells of the gastric epithelium. The discrepant results obtained by these two investigative teams may be attributed to the less sensitive oligonucleotide probes used by the former group compared with the highly specific H2 receptor antisense riboprobe used by the latter. The classic secretagogues previously described clearly act directly on gastric parietal cells as initially postulated by multiple investigators, and the possibility that receptors for these ligands are also located on immunocytes in the lamina propria should not be excluded.
Although the critical role of the H2 receptor in regulating gastric acid secretion had been well established, the structural components of this receptor that determine H2 selectivity were unknown. The success of Gantz and associates [168] in cloning the gene encoding the histamine H2 receptor provided the essential tools required for the further study of this question. Key areas of homology in the structures of the histamine H2 and 2-adrenergic receptors suggested specific transmembrane amino acids that could be important for histamine binding. On the basis of studies involving the expression of histamine H2 receptors with site-directed mutations, a model for histamine binding and action on the H2 receptor was proposed [177]. An aspartic acid residue (Asp98) in the third transmembrane domain is essential for histamine binding and action, and an aspartic acid (Asp186) in the fifth transmembrane domain defines H2 selectivity. A threonine (Thr190) in the fifth transmembrane domain is important in establishing the kinetics of histamine binding but is not essential for H2 selectivity.
The presence of a specific muscarinic receptor on canine parietal cells is supported by specific blockade of the biological

295

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

effects of carbachol with atropine. The dissociation constant for atropine inhibition of carbachol-induced aminopyrine uptake, 1.3 nM, is consistent with dissociation constants observed with muscarinic receptors in other tissues [173]. In addition to inducing oxygen uptake and aminopyrine accumulation in a dose-dependent manner, carbachol produces a parallel increase in the turnover of membrane inositol phospholipids [178]. Pharmacological studies indicate that the parietal cell muscarinic receptor is of the M3 subtype, which has been confirmed by the molecular cloning of this receptor [179,180]. Rat parietal cells have also been shown to have M3 muscarinic receptors that stimulate aminopyrine uptake, increase inositol phospholipid turnover, and bind [N-methyl-3H]scopolamine [181].
Gastrin receptors have been localized to isolated rat [182] and canine [183] parietal cells. Binding studies with purified parietal cells reveal specific binding that is rapid and saturable. Proglumide, a CCK or gastrin receptor blocker, inhibits gastrin binding and stimulation of parietal cell function. CCK-8 is equipotent with gastrin 17 in displacing radioligand and in stimulating aminopyrine uptake [183]. This suggests that the parietal cell gastrin receptor binds and responds to either ligand in a similar fashion. The gastrin receptor has been characterized further by cross-linking studies in two species. Using canine parietal cell membranes, cross-linking studies with 125I-gastrin 2­7 revealed a single gastrin receptor with a molecular weight of 74 kDa [184]. Half-maximal inhibition of radiolabeled gastrin binding in these canine parietal cell preparations was achieved at 3 × 10-10 M, in agreement with the potency of gastrin in stimulating aminopyrine uptake [183]. Similar studies with detergent extracts of porcine gastric mucosal membranes using 125I-[Nleu15]gastrin 2­17 as a ligand resulted in the crosslinking of a 78-kDa binding protein [185]. In contrast to the studies using canine parietal cells, however, 50% inhibition of binding required 2 × 10-6 M [Nleu15]gastrin. The apparent reduction in affinity may be an artifact of the extraction technique used. In both species the receptor appears to be a single protein with no disulfide-linked subunits. These studies confirm the presence of a specific gastrin receptor on parietal cells. The gastrin receptor appears to be coupled to membrane inositol phospholipid turnover and protein kinase C (PKC) activation [178].
Kopin and colleagues [171] isolated a cDNA clone encoding the gastrin receptor found on canine parietal cells. They determined that it is a member of the G protein-linked receptor family and, when expressed, it has a molecular weight similar to those reported in the receptor cross-linking studies. Expression of the cloned receptor confirmed that it is coupled to membrane inositol phospholipid turnover and mobilization of [Ca2+]i. Song and colleagues [186] cloned the gene encoding the human gastrin or CCK2 receptor and localized it to a region of chromosome 11 (11p15.4). It appears that the gene produces two different receptor pro-

teins as a result of alternative RNA splicing. The functional difference between the two receptor isoforms remains to be established.
As with many peptides, gastrin is synthesized as a precursor molecule that undergoes posttranslational processing to become a C-terminally amidated product, which is presumed to be the sole biologically active form of this hormone [187]. Indeed, posttranslational processing intermediates of gastrin, specifically the C-terminally glycine-extended form (GGly), serve as substrates for amidation, are stored in gastric tissues, and are secreted into the circulation with amidated peptide reaching plasma concentrations roughly equivalent to those of processed gastrin.
The question of whether posttranslational processing intermediates of gastrin exert a biological effect was addressed by Seva and colleagues [188]. These investigators showed that G-Gly exerts growth-promoting effects by activation of non-CCK2 receptors [188]. This finding demonstrated that glycine-extended intermediates of prohormone processing have independent and hitherto unrecognized important biological actions. Subsequently, Kaise and associates [189] showed specific binding of 125I-[Leu15]G2­17-Gly to gastric canine parietal cells, which was dose-dependently displaced by G2­17-Gly but not by gastrin or by the specific gastrin/CCK2 receptor antagonist L365 260. Thus, gastric parietal cells appear to express specific and distinct receptors for both gastrin and G-Gly.
The role of G-Gly in gastric acid secretion has been the focus of ongoing investigative efforts. An early study conducted in isolated canine gastric parietal cells demonstrated that G-Gly was at least four orders of magnitude less potent than gastrin in stimulating gastric acid secretion [190]. Interestingly, inhibition of gastrin amidation by copper chelation with diethyldithiocarbamate led to an unexpected increase in both basal and gastrin-stimulated gastric acid outputs, suggesting that chronically elevated levels of G-Gly could have a stimulatory effect on the gastric secretory process [191]. Higashide and colleagues [192] showed that infusion of G-Gly alone did not stimulate gastric acid secretion in rats. However, administration of G-Gly in combination with gastrin significantly potentiated the response observed in the presence of gastrin alone, further supporting a physiological stimulatory role for G-Gly in gastric acid secretion [192]. Chen and associates [193] observed similar potentiating effects on gastric acid secretion after administering G-Gly in combination with gastrin to gastrin-deficient mice. Interestingly, in these animals G-Gly infusion did not affect the number of ECL or parietal cells, the proliferation rate of the fundic epithelium, or the level of expression of the H+,K+ATPase. Administration of G-Gly, however, appeared to prevent the formation of vacuolar canaliculi and lipofuscin bodies, suggesting that G-Gly could synergize with gastrin to stimulate gastric acid secretion by preventing parietal cell degradation [193].

296

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

Another possible mechanism for these observations was presented in a study performed in cultured canine gastric parietal cells [189]. Preincubation of parietal cells with G-Gly enhanced the acid secretory response of the cells to histamine, whereas acutely administered G-Gly had no effect [189]. G-Gly dose-dependently increased both the transcription and expression of the gene encoding the -subunit of H+,K+-ATPase, suggesting that G-Gly may have a functional role in potentiating gastric acid secretion by enhancing the expression of the gene encoding the protein responsible for H+ generation [189]. Although these observations are in apparent discordance with those reported in the study of the gastrin-deficient mice [193], it is possible that these genetically engineered animals exhibit developmental abnormalities in the mechanisms regulating the expression of the H+,K+-ATPase. Alternatively, these findings may reflect species-specific differences in the ability of G-Gly to induce H+,K+-ATPase gene expression.
The effects of somatostatin on isolated enriched canine parietal cells have been evaluated. Somatostatin dose-dependently inhibits histamine-induced aminopyrine uptake and cAMP production and pentagastrin-stimulated aminopyrine accumulation [194]. Somatostatin binding sites have been identified using 125I-[Leu8-D-Trp22-Tyr25]somatostatin 28 as a radioligand. Somatostatin 14 and somatostatin 28 are equally potent at displacing bound ligand and at inhibiting aminopyrine accumulation. Scatchard analysis of the binding data revealed two binding sites with dissociation constants of 3.2 × 10-9 M and 2.1 × 10-7 M respectively. Crude membranes prepared from 95%­100% pure parietal cells were incubated with 125I-[Leu8-D-Trp22-Tyr25]somatostatin 28 and cross-linked with disuccinimidyl suberate [195]. After solubilization, a single sharp band with no disulfide linkages was identified corresponding to a membrane receptor with a molecular weight of 99 kDa. These parietal cell somatostatin receptors may be activated by means of a direct paracrine effect mediated by long cytoplasmic processes that extend from fundic mucosal D cells and appear to terminate on parietal cells [24]. Inhibition of acid secretion by postprandial serum somatostatin may also be mediated through these receptors.
Five members of the somatostatin receptor family (SSTR1­SSTR5) have been cloned and characterized; they have distinct pharmacological properties and tissue distribution [196]. All five SSTR subtypes are expressed throughout the rat gastrointestinal tract and, specifically, in all layers of the gastric mucosa [196]. The development of highly specific and selective agonists [197] has led to more precise functional characterization of these different somatostatin receptors. In particular, SSTR2 appears to mediate the inhibition of gastric acid secretion in rats, dogs, and humans [197,198], a finding confirmed by selective ablation of the SSTR2 gene [199]. Moreover, Prinz and colleagues [200] showed that SSTR2 is the predominant somatostatin receptor subtype

expressed on rat ECL cells, where it mediates the inhibition
of histamine release. Therefore, although all five SSTRs are
expressed in the stomach, SSTR2 appears to be the receptor subtype most involved in regulating the gastric secretory
process.
The presence of other receptors on parietal cells has been
suggested but awaits confirmation. Prostaglandins E2 (PGE2) and I2 (PGI2) inhibit histamine-stimulated aminopyrine accumulation and cAMP generation in enriched canine pari-
etal cells [201]. These agents have no effect on aminopyrine
uptake induced by gastrin, carbachol, or dibutyryl cAMP.
Specific binding sites for PGE2 exist in subcellular membrane fractions of porcine fundic mucosa, suggesting localization to
the plasma membrane [202­204]. Prostaglandins can displace bound [3H]PGE2 and inhibit histamine-stimulated aminopyrine uptake in isolated rabbit parietal cells [205].
Together, these findings strongly suggest the presence of
prostaglandin receptors on parietal cells. Ding and colleagues
[206] confirmed this observation by documenting gene
expression of the prostaglandin receptor subtypes EP3 and EP4 on rat gastric parietal cells.
A calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) has been identified on
rat and human parietal cells. Activation of this receptor by Ca2+ and L-amino acids appears to lead to an increase in [Ca2+]i and to stimulate H+,K+-ATPase activity [207,208].
Although it is fairly clear that H3 receptors are expressed on ECL cells, serving a role in autocrine regulation of his-
tamine release, their presence on parietal cells remains con-
troversial. The H3 receptor agonist methylhistamine is a potent stimulant of aminopyrine uptake in isolated cultured
rabbit parietal cells [209]. This observed stimulatory effect
can be blocked by the H2 receptor antagonist ranitidine, placing in question the selectivity of the H3 receptor agonist and the significance of the H3 receptor in parietal cell physiology.
The sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system
may be expected to counterbalance the stimulatory effect of
muscarinic receptors on acid secretion. Although it is possible that -adrenergic agonists may inhibit acid secretion through stimulation of somatostatin release [210] and inhibition of
histamine release by fundic mucosal mast cells [167,211],
direct studies with parietal cells support the presence of stimulatory -adrenergic receptors [212].
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and TGF- have been implicated in the inhibitory modulation of gastric acid secretion [213­215]. TGF- shares structural homology with EGF and is expressed within parietal cells. Parietal cells express
the receptor for EGF, which is recognized by both EGF and TGF- [216,217]. Both these growth factors inhibit parietal cell function in a similar fashion [218­221]. TGF- is secreted by parietal cells and it may function as an auto-
crine regulatory factor. The presence of secretin, glucagon, or
opioid receptors on parietal cells remains unconfirmed.
Beales and Calam [222] have suggested that parietal cells
may express receptors for cytokines. In a series of studies

297

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

conducted in isolated rabbit gastric parietal cells, tumor necrosis factor- and interleukin-1 were shown to inhibit gastric acid secretion, as assessed by the accumulation of the weak base aminopyrine, both in the basal state and after stimulation with histamine, gastrin, and carbachol [222]. In contrast to these observations, Yakabi and colleagues [223] reported that interleukin-8 enhanced in vivo gastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion in rats. Thus, cytokines appear to have complex regulatory effects on gastric acid secretion, which may be mediated, at least in part, by a direct action of these agents on gastric parietal cells.
An overview of the interactions of ligands and receptors involved in acid secretion is provided in Figure 13.6. The parietal cell has stimulatory receptors for gastrin, acetylcholine, and histamine. Several lines of evidence suggest that parietal cells in humans may be exposed continuously to basal levels of acetylcholine and histamine. Gastrin can

account for most of the postprandial increase in gastric acid secretion [114]. Although a portion of the postprandial response is the result of a direct effect of gastrin on parietal cells, a significant component may be caused by the ability of gastrin to stimulate histamine release from ECL cells (see the section on histamine). The parietal cell also has inhibitory somatostatin receptors that counteract the secretagogue effects. Vagal nerve fibers may enhance their acid stimulatory effect through stimulatory muscarinic receptors on G cells and inhibitory muscarinic receptors on D cells [209]. Adrenergic fibers appear to stimulate D-cell secretion and inhibit release by histamine-containing cells, counterbalancing the vagal effects [209]. Gastrin and CCK stimulate parietal cells and D cells [224]. Gastrin-releasing peptide acts as a neurotransmitter that stimulates G cells, and somatostatin may function as a paracrine G-cell inhibitor [225­227]. Further structural and functional analyses of each of these

Acetylcholine

- D cell

+

Gastrin

Vagus nerve

Food, amino acids

ANTRUM LUMEN
H+ +

- +

Somatostatin

G cell

D cell

-

Gastrin +

Intrinsic nerve

Gastrinreleasing peptide

H+ LUMEN

- + Acetylcholine

Parietal cell

+ Gastrin

+

Histamine cell BODY

+

Circulation
Figure 13.6 Regulation of gastric acid secretion. Major gastric mucosal ligand­receptor interactions regulate parietal cell HCl secretion. D cell, somatostatin cell; G cell, gastrin cell. Adapted from Feldman [510].

298

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

receptors will greatly enhance the understanding of gastric secretion.
Intracellular signal transduction As previously described, the gastric parietal cell is a complex biological structure that is controlled by a broad variety of growth factors, hormones, and neurotransmitters. These agents interact with specific receptors on the cell surface, initiating a flow of information that moves to the cell nucleus along highly organized and complex signal transduction pathways. Once in the nucleus, these signals are known to activate specific programs of transcriptional events that lead to the expression of specialized cellular functions. Numerous signal transduction pathways have been studied and characterized in gastric parietal cells.
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate Receptors linked to adenylate cyclase influence intracellular levels of cAMP. Such receptors are coupled to inhibitory (Gi) or stimulatory (Gs) GTP-binding proteins (Fig. 13.7) [228]. Gi attenuates adenylate cyclase activity, decreasing cAMP levels. The ability of pertussis toxin to block the actions of Gi can be used experimentally to dissect second messenger pathways. Gs, which increases adenylate cyclase activity and cAMP levels, can be stimulated selectively by cholera toxin. Increases in cytoplasmic cAMP levels result in activation of

cAMP-dependent protein kinases and consequent phosphorylation of various intracellular proteins that appear to mediate the effects of the ligand­receptor interaction.
Inositol phospholipids, Ca2+, and protein kinase C A second major intracellular signal transduction cascade involves the turnover of membrane phospholipids, specifically the inositol phospholipids. Receptors are linked to this pathway through a G protein, followed by phospholipase C-induced hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) to diacylglycerol and inositol triphosphate (IP3) [229]. IP3 causes the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores, and diacylglycerol promotes the translocation of a Ca2+/phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (i.e., PKC) from the cytoplasm to its active site on the cell membrane [230,231]. Increases in [Ca2+]i activate various Ca2+-dependent enzyme systems, such as the calmodulin kinases, and promote the translocation and activation of PKC.
Although receptor activation was originally thought to be linked to a single signal transduction cascade, it is evident that interactions between postreceptor signaling pathways can occur at multiple levels [170]. One example of this in gastric secretion is the ability of the histamine H2 receptor to stimulate increases in cAMP and [Ca2+]i through separate pathways [232]. Del Valle and colleagues [232] showed that

EXTRACELLULAR

L1

SPACE

L2

L3

PI PIP PKC

PIP2 PLC

R1 G

PLASMA MEMBRANE

R2 Gs AC

R3 Gi

Protein

DAG

Protein ­ P

Endoplasmic reliculum

IP3

CYTOPLASM Ca++

GTP GDP ATP

GTP GDP

cAMP

PKA Protein

Calmodulin kinases
Figure 13.7 Signal transduction pathways in parietal cells. Ligands (L) interact with receptors (R) to initiate the target cell response. The left panel shows the membrane inositol phospholipid pathway activated by gastrin and acetylcholine (L1). A guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G) activates phospholipase C (PLC), which hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol 4,5bisphosphate (PIP2) to diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3). DAG activates protein kinase C (PKC), which phosphorylates (P) target proteins, whereas IP3 induces intracellular calcium mobilization, which

Protein ­ P
activates kinases. The right panel depicts the cAMP pathway used by histamine (L2) and somatostatin (L3) in parietal cells. The histamine receptor (R2) acts through a stimulatory G protein (Gs), which activates adenylate cyclase (AC) and generates cAMP. An increased level of cytoplasmic cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates parietal cell effector proteins. The somatostatin receptor (R3) activates an inhibitory G protein (Gi), which inhibits adenylate cyclase and decreases cAMP levels.

299

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

stimulation of the cloned canine H2 receptor leads to an increase in adenylate cyclase and IP3 or [Ca2+]i activity through independent pathways.
The acid stimulatory action of histamine appears to be
mediated primarily through its ability to increase cAMP
production in parietal cells [233]. This increase parallels the
ability of histamine to stimulate aminopyrine uptake and
oxygen consumption. Histamine increases cAMP-dependent
protein kinase activity in enriched rabbit parietal cells [234].
The substrates for this enzyme activity have not been fully
characterized, but they are thought to mediate the effects of
histamine stimulation [235].
The acid stimulatory actions of gastrin and carbachol appear to be mediated by Ca2+-dependent pathways. Gastrin
and carbachol exert similar effects on membrane inositol
phospholipid turnover in parietal cells. Both agents induce
a time-dependent decrease in PIP2 and increase in the formation of IP3 [178]. These effects parallel increases in [14C]aminopyrine accumulation. The increase in IP3 may mediate the mobilization of [Ca2+]i observed in parietal cells stimulated with gastrin or carbachol. In the case of carbachol, increased [Ca2+]i may occur as a result of enhanced mobilization of Ca2+ from intracellular stores or through influx of extracellular Ca2+ across the cell membrane [236­238]. It is presumed that the elevated levels of cytoplasmic Ca2+ then
activate several enzyme cascades, including the calmodulin
kinase family and, in concert with diacylglycerol, the second
product of PIP2 breakdown, PKC. Gastrin and carbachol dose-dependently increase membrane-associated PKC activ-
ity [185]. Although gastrin and carbachol increase mem-
brane inositol phospholipid turnover and PKC activity in
canine gastric parietal cells to a similar degree, carbachol is a
more potent stimulant of acid production [185]. Takeda and
associates [239] observed that carbachol is more efficacious than gastrin in stimulating the entry of extracellular Ca2+ into
parietal cells. These two secretagogues appear to regulate the entry of Ca2+ into parietal cells by distinct mechanisms. Gastrin stimulates Ca2+ entry from extracellular sites by opening Ca2+ channels. Carbachol opens similar Ca2+ chan-
nels and also opens channels that are not regulated by the depletion of [Ca2+]i pools. These differences in Ca2+ regulation may account for the more potent stimulatory action of
carbachol on canine gastric parietal cells.
Furthermore, research suggests that the induction of [Ca2+]i release in response to gastrin but not carbachol is a function of activation of the cAMP pathway [240]. In fact,
incubation of rabbit parietal cells with gastrin in the presence
of the histamine H2 receptor blocker cimetidine inhibits gastrin-mediated increases in [Ca2+]i. The addition of dibutyryl adenosine 3,5-phosphate in addition to cimetidine com-
pletely restores this response, suggesting that, in the rabbit,
H2 receptor activity potentiates the effect of gastrin on parietal cell function. Athmann and colleagues [241] confirmed
these observations, demonstrating that, in isolated rabbit

gastric glands, ranitidine blocks [Ca2+]i release induced by gastrin (1 nM). Interestingly, these investigators also reported that a supraphysiological, 10-fold higher dose of gastrin (10 nM) induced a Ca2+ signal that was not inhibited by ranitidine [241]. The specific intracellular targets and the biological significance of this ranitidine-insensitive Ca2+ signal remain to be elucidated.
Although it appears that the plateau or steady phase of carbachol-mediated increases in [Ca2+]i is essential for activation of the secretory process [242], this may not be the only signaling event that is important in muscarinic receptormediated acid secretion. Similar Ca2+ levels can be achieved with the calcium ionophore ionomycin and the Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin [243], but a corresponding increase in acid production similar to that observed with carbachol is not observed. The additional signaling events linking M3 receptor activation and acid secretion require further investigation, but they may include differential activation of downstream kinase pathways.
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is one of the best-characterized targets of [Ca2+]i. Tsunoda and colleagues [244] showed that carbachol can lead to the activation of CaMKII in parietal cells. The specific components of the carbachol-activated signaling cascade remain largely unknown. Parente and colleagues [245] purified and cloned a novel Ca2+-sensitive phosphoprotein of 28 kDa (CSPP28) from rabbit parietal cells. CSPP28 was phosphorylated by CaMKII in response to cholinergic stimulation, but not when cells were treated with phorbol esters. CSPP28 may represent an important element in Ca2+ signal transduction, but its specific role in parietal cell biology remains unknown. Because CaMKII regulates cytoskeletal function, it may play a role in the dramatic morphological transformation of parietal cells during stimulation.
Carbachol-mediated stimulation of various cell types leads to alterations in cell volume that are linked to the regulation of ion channel conductance. Negulescu and colleagues [246] examined the role of parietal cell volume in regulating carbachol-mediated changes in cytosolic Ca2+. These investigators observed that carbachol-mediated opening of Ca2+ channels leads to the loss of ions and water from the parietal cell and subsequent cell shrinkage. The decrease in cell volume may inhibit Ca2+ channels, providing a feedback mechanism to reduce further cell shrinkage resulting from ion fluxes.
The action of PKC in parietal cells is complex. Direct activation of PKC with phorbol esters results in enhanced acid secretory activity [247], and inhibition of PKC by the specific inhibitor Ro 31-8220 blocks carbachol-stimulated aminopyrine uptake in isolated rat parietal cells [248]. However, pretreatment of canine parietal cells with phorbol esters decreases the stimulatory effects of subsequent treatment with carbachol and gastrin [247], whereas Ro 31-8220 potentiates [14C]aminopyrine uptake from isolated rabbit gastric glands stimulated by both carbachol and histamine

300

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

[249]. Numerous factors may account for these contradictory observations. PKC may induce down-regulation of muscarinic and gastrin receptors on parietal cells [247]. The mechanism for this effect is unclear but may involve receptor phosphorylation. In addition, because PKC comprises a large family of proteins with different biochemical and functional properties [250], species-specific differences in both the function and the cellular localization of PKC isoforms may exist [249]. Chew and colleagues [249] analyzed the different PKC subtypes in rabbit parietal cells and reported abundant levels of both the novel isoforms PKC- and PKC- and the atypical isoforms PKC-, PKC-, and PKC-. In contrast to a previous study performed in canine parietal cells [251], low levels of the classic isoforms PKC- and - were measured in the rabbit parietal cells. Confocal microscopy revealed that PKC- is localized to a parietal cell compartment which bears a resemblance to that containing filamentous actin, suggesting that PKC could negatively regulate gastric acid secretion through phosphorylation and modification of cytoskeletal proteins [249]. In addition, characterization of protein kinase D (PKD) revealed that it is induced by phorbol esters [252,253]. Although it is unknown whether PKD or other related protein kinases are present in gastric cells, this intriguing finding suggests that protein kinases other than PKC may mediate the effects of phorbol esters on acid secretion. Further studies will clarify the function of PKC in the stomach.
Mitogen-activated protein kinases In addition to these well-established signal transduction pathways, mammalian parietal cells express multiple members of a family of protein kinases known as mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) [254­256]. In particular, parietal

cells appear to express the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERKs) [254­256], the Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) [257], and the p38 kinases [258], molecules known to regulate multiple important cellular functions [259,260] (Fig. 13.8). The ERKs are important elements in a cascade of biochemical reactions that involves the small GTP-binding protein Ras, as well as upstream protein kinases such as Raf and MAPK/ERK [261,262]. ERK activation is known to target numerous cellular proteins, including downstream protein kinases such as the 90-kDa S6 kinase (RSK) [261­264] and transcription factors, such as Elk-1, that regulate the activity of the promoter of the early response gene c-fos through the serum response element (SRE) [263,264]. These kinases appear to play a crucial role in the process of amplification, integration, and transmission of extracellular signals from the cell surface to the nucleus, leading to the induction of cellular growth and proliferation and, in some systems, cellular differentiation [260­262].
Several studies have examined the regulation of ERKs by gastric acid secretagogues. Takeuchi and colleagues [256] reported that carbachol was the most potent inducer of ERK2 activity in isolated gastric canine parietal cells. Gastrin and EGF had weaker stimulatory effects, whereas histamine induced no response. The effect of carbachol appeared to be independent of Ca2+ signaling. PD98059, a selective inhibitor of the upstream ERK activator MEK, dose-dependently inhibited both carbachol- and EGF-stimulated ERK2 activity [256,265]. Similarly, Nakamura and associates [254] observed that carbachol and EGF induced the ERKs in isolated rabbit parietal cells.
The functional relevance of ERK activation in the stomach has been the focus of continued investigation. Initial studies

Stress, growth factors, cytokines, neurotransmitters, gastrointestinal hormones

GPCRs, RTKs

GPCRs, RTKs

GPCRs, RTKs

MKKK: Raf, MEKK1, MEKK2, MEKK3

MKKK: MEKK1, MEKK2, MEKK3, MEKK4

MKKK: TAK1, ASK1, SPRK, PAK

MKK: MEK1, MEK2

MKK: MKK4, MKK7

MKK: MKK3, MKK6

MAPK: ERK1, ERK2

MAPK: JNK1, JNK2, JNK3

MAPK: p38 a, p38 b, p38 l, p38 d

Cell growth and differentiation, cell survival, secretion

Cell growth and differentiation, cell survival, apoptosis

Cell growth and differentiation, cell survival, apoptosis, secretion

Figure 13.8 Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in the gastric parietal cell. Many different extracellular signals activate kinase cascades that lead to the induction of members of the MAPK family of protein kinases. These include the extracellular signal-regulated protein

kinases (ERKs), p38 kinases, and the Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs). These protein kinases appear to regulate several important cellular functions, including growth, apoptosis, survival, differentiation, and secretion. GPCRs, G protein-coupled receptors; RTKs, receptor tyrosine kinases.

301

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

reported the divergent effects of EGF on gastric acid secretion. Under acute conditions, EGF had an inhibitory effect on acid secretion, whereas prolonged administration of EGF increased both basal and maximal acid secretion in vivo and acid production in isolated parietal cells in vitro [255,266,267]. Some studies suggested that these effects of EGF could be mediated by the activation of protein tyrosine kinases because they were fully reversed by the addition of protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors [255,266]. In addition, Chew and associates [255] observed that inhibition of the chronic stimulatory effect of EGF by these agents was associated with a decrease in phosphorylation of a 44-kDa protein identified as an ERK isoform. Taken together, these results suggested that both the ERKs and an unidentified protein tyrosine kinase were likely to be important in the regulation of gastric parietal cells.
Understanding of the function and physiological role of the ERK pathway was significantly enhanced by the use of PD98059. To examine further the importance of ERK activation in gastric acid secretion, Takeuchi and colleagues [256] tested the effect of PD98059 on carbachol-stimulated uptake of [14C]aminopyrine. Acute inhibition of the ERKs by PD98059 led to a small increase in [14C]aminopyrine uptake and to complete reversal of the inhibitory effect of EGF on parietal cell activation induced by either carbachol or histamine [256]. In contrast, exposure of the cells to PD98059 for 16 h reversed the chronic stimulatory effect of EGF on [14C]aminopyrine uptake induced by carbachol, leading the investigators to conclude that, whereas the acute effect of the ERKs on gastric acid secretion appears to be inhibitory, the activation of transcription factors and of early gene expression could produce chronic stimulatory effects (Fig. 13.9) [256]. Further research showed that the acute inhibitory effect of EGF on gastric acid secretion could be mediated by a PKC-dependent pathway [251]. Thus, because PKC has been shown to activate c-Raf, a kinase involved in the activation of the ERKs, it is possible that the acute inhibitory effect of EGF on aminopyrine uptake could be mediated by a signaling cascade involving activation of PKC, c-Raf, and MEK, leading finally to induction of the ERKs [268]. Furthermore, Kaise and associates [267] demonstrated that EGF is able to induce transcription of the -subunit of the H+,K+-ATPase gene through a novel EGF response element (ERE) located between bases ­162 and ­156 (5-GACATGG3) relative to the cap site. This ERE is homologous to the 3 half-site of the c-fos serum response element. Accordingly, the authors suggested that the stimulatory effect of EGF on gastric acid secretion could be mediated by induction of the H+,K+-ATPase gene [267]. Although a direct link between induction of the ERKs and c-fos and stimulation of the H+,K+ATPase gene has not been demonstrated, it is possible that this gene may contain specific DNA regulatory elements that receive input from signaling pathways involving the ERKs and c-fos.

Ach AchR

EGF EGFR

ERKs +

c-fos Gene expression

-

+
H+ H+ H+ H+ H+
H+ H+ H+ H+ Figure 13.9 Function of the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERKs) in the gastric parietal cell. Both acetylcholine (Ach) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) induce a cascade of events in parietal cells that results in the activation of ERKs. Whereas the acute effect of the ERKs on gastric acid secretion appears to be inhibitory, the activation of transcription factors and early gene expression may be responsible for their chronic stimulatory effects.
p38 kinase is another member of the MAPK family of protein kinases [259]. Like the MAPKs, p38 kinase is regulated by a multistep cascade of biochemical reactions. One of the first steps in the complex chain of events that leads to the induction of p38 kinase is the activation of Rac and Cdc42, small GTP-binding proteins belonging to the Rho family of GTPases [259]. These molecules are responsible for the induction of downstream protein kinases such as the dualspecificity kinases MKK3 and MKK6, which, in turn, phosphorylate p38 kinase on both tyrosine and threonine residues, leading to its activation [259]. Research indicates that p38 kinase is activated in response to both physical and chemical stress, cytokines, hematopoietic growth factors, neurotransmitters such as carbachol and isoproterenol, and CCK [258,259,269,270]. Activation of p38 kinase has been

302

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

linked to regulation of programmed cell death, differentiation of skeletal muscle, organization of the cellular cytoskeleton, and phosphorylation of transcription factors [259,270­272]. Pausawasdi and colleagues [258] used SB-203580, a specific p38 kinase inhibitor [272], to investigate the regulation and the functional relevance of p38 kinase in carbacholstimulated gastric acid secretion. They observed that SB203580 dose-dependently potentiates carbachol induction of aminopyrine uptake in isolated and cultured canine gastric parietal cells, suggesting that p38 kinase has a negative regulatory effect on gastric acid secretion [258].
Because p38 kinase is known to play an important role in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton, a possible mechanism of p38 kinase-induced inhibition of gastric acid secretion could involve changes in the actin cytoskeleton of gastric parietal cells [259,270]. The cytoskeleton is an important element in secretagogue-stimulated gastric acid secretion because, during this process, the parietal cell undergoes dramatic morphological modifications that lead to the translocation of H+,K+-ATPase from cytoplasmic tubulovesicular structures to the apical plasma membrane [2­4]. Accordingly, p38 induction could result in phosphorylation of cytoskeletal proteins and significant changes in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton. These events could be responsible for alterations in the process of H+,K+-ATPase insertion into the parietal cell apical membrane and for the inhibition of gastric acid production.
Considering the lack of specific JNK inhibitors, it is unclear whether these kinases are involved in the process of gastric acid secretion. However, studies conducted in canine parietal cells suggest that JNK activation may be an important step in the parietal cell response to stress and inflammation [257]. The observation that mice deficient in the JNK1 gene appear to be resistant to the development of cold-/restraint stress-induced gastric lesions further supports this hypothesis [273].
Akt Another signal transduction pathway that has been shown to play an important role in the mediation of some of the physiological actions of EGF is that involving phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and protein kinase B/Akt [274­277]. Activation of Akt is known to induce cellular growth and survival and to promote the expression and maintenance of highly differentiated cellular phenotypes [274,275,278,279]. Furthermore, Akt has been shown to contribute to the regulation of vesicular trafficking and endocytosis [279]. Akt is homologous to the PKA and PKC families of protein kinases, and its activity is regulated by growth factors through the induction of PI3K [275,280]. Phosphorylation of Akt appears to be critical for its activation [275,280,281]. Todisco and associates [282] reported that EGF regulates the expression of the H+,K+-ATPase -subunit gene through a signal transduction pathway that involves the activation of Akt. These

findings suggest a novel role for Akt in the regulation of the secretory function of gastric parietal cells.
The hedgehog signal transduction pathway Sonic hedgehog, indian hedgehog, and desert hedgehog are members of the family of hedgehog (Hh) proteins, which are known to have important regulatory functions in embryonic patterning and growth in a large number of tissues [283,284]. In the mammalian stomach, sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an important factor in the regulation of gastric epithelial cell maturation and differentiation [6,7,283­285]. Indeed, the gastric epithelium of Shh null mice exhibits intestinal transformation [283]. Moreover, Shh appears to be crucial for the induction and maintenance of a normal fundic gland cell phenotype, as the mucosa of patients with gastric atrophy and intestinal metaplasia is characterized by loss of Shh expression [285]. It has also been reported that inhibition of Shh signaling in the gastric mucosa leads to enhanced cellular proliferation. [6]
The intracellular signal transduction pathways that mediate the actions of Shh on target cells have been the focus of several studies. Shh is known to bind to a transmembrane receptor protein known as "patched" (Ptc), which, in the absence of Shh, exerts an inhibitory effect on the seventransmembrane receptor "smoothened" (Smo). The binding of Shh to Ptc blocks the inhibitory effect of Ptc on Smo (Fig. 13.10). Once activated, Smo induces a complex series of intracellular reactions that target the Gli family of transcription factors [286,287]. At least three members of this family of nuclear proteins have been identified in mammalian tissues [287]; whereas Gli1 and Gli2 are transcriptional activators, Gli3 seems to function primarily as a transcriptional repressor [287]. Gli2 appears to be the principal effector of Shh signaling, as disruption of the Gli2 gene leads to developmental defects involving several Shh target tissues whereas Gli1 null mice are born without detectable abnormalities [287­293]. The Gli transcription factors accumulate in the nucleus where they activate hedgehog-responsive genes, such as Ptc, Gli1, BMP4, HNF3, Hox genes, and hedgehoginteracting protein (HIP), an extracellular hedgehog antagonist [286]. Of these genes, the up-regulation of Ptc and HIP appears to be involved in a negative feedback response to Shh signaling [286]. The functional significance of the Shh signal transduction pathway in the stomach was initially characterized in studies of isolated canine parietal cells [6]. It was shown that these cells express Shh and Ptc and that incubation of the cells with EGF for 16 h induces both the release and the expression of Shh through mechanisms that involve the activation of Akt. Furthermore, Shh induces H+,K+-ATPase -subunit gene expression and enhances the stimulatory action of histamine on gastric acid production. Considered together, these observations suggest that Shh mediates EGF action in the stomach through both paracrine and autocrine mechanisms.

303

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Unstimulated

Shh treated

­ Ptc

Smo

Shh Smo
­
Ptc +

Gli transcription factors
Activation of gene expression

Gli transcription factors
Activation of gene expression
Gastric epithelial differentiation

Figure 13.10 Activation of sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Shh binds to the transmembrane receptor protein "Patched" (Ptc) which, in the absence of Shh, exerts an inhibitory effect on the seven-transmembrane receptor "Smoothened" (Smo). Binding of Shh to Ptc blocks the inhibitory effect of Ptc on Smo. Once activated, Smo induces a complex series of intracellular reactions that target the Gli family of transcription factors.

Smad signaling In the stomach, Shh has been shown to regulate the expression of BMP4, a member of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family of regulatory peptides. BMP4 expression has been detected in myofibroblast-like cells located in the submucosal layers of the stomach but not in gastric epithelial cells, in contrast to Shh, which is expressed in parietal cells [6,7]. The stimulatory effect of Shh on BMP4 expression appears to be highly specific, as Shh fails to affect the expression of BMP2, another member of the BMP family whose expression has been documented in the gastric epithelium [7]. Thus, BMP4, but not BMP2, seems to be a target of the Shh signal transduction pathway in the stomach. The BMPs activate several complex signal transduction pathways to exert their biological actions [294­296]. In particular, the binding of BMPs to the BMP type I receptor (BMPR-I) leads to the dimerization of BMPR-I with the BMP type II receptor (BMPR-II), a molecule that has serine/threonine kinase activity. This event triggers the phosphorylation of BMPR-I and Smad 1, 5, and 8, proteins known to mediate the intracellular actions of BMP. Once phosphorylated, Smad 1, 5, and 8 each associate with Smad 4 to form a heterodimeric complex that translocates to the nucleus, where it activates gene transcription [294­296].
BMP signaling plays a crucial role in the regulation of growth and differentiation of the gastrointestinal epithelium [296]. Studies of isolated parietal cells have shown that BMP4 stimulates the phosphorylation of Smad 1, 5, and 8 and induces H+,K+-ATPase -subunit gene expression [297]. Moreover, BMP4 appears to enhance the stimulatory effect of histamine on gastric acid secretion, suggesting an important role in the regulation of parietal cell maturation and

differentiation. Mice with a targeted mutation of the transcription factor Fkh6 exhibit a decreased expression of BMP4 in the gastric mucosa, along with an increased proliferation of the gastric epithelium and a decreased number of parietal cells [298]. Taken together, these observations support the notion that BMP4, and possibly other BMPs, may be important regulators of gastric epithelial cell biology through the activation of intracellular signal transduction pathways that require the phosphorylation and activation of the Smad proteins.
Nitric oxide Nitric oxide is a physiologically relevant signaling molecule that controls biological processes, such as blood flow, leukocyte and platelet adhesion, and neurotransmission. Nitric oxide may protect gastric cells through its effects on mucosal blood flow and mucus and HCO3- secretion [299]. The intracellular actions of nitric oxide are mediated by soluble guanylyl cyclase [299]. Nitric oxide binds to guanylyl cyclase leading to its conformational modification and activation. Active guanylyl cyclase is responsible for the conversion of GTP into cGMP, the main transducer of the biological actions of nitric oxide. The ability of nitric oxide to stimulate cGMP generation appears to mediate nitric oxide inhibition of gastric acid secretion in isolated parietal cells [299].
Somatostatin-activated signaling pathways The mechanism by which somatostatin inhibits parietal cells has been explored [194]. In the case of histamine-stimulated acid secretion, somatostatin appears to inhibit the generation of cAMP through an inhibitory guanine nucleotide-binding protein that regulates adenylate cyclase activity. However,

304

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

somatostatin is also able to inhibit acid secretion induced by dibutyryl cAMP. In addition, the stimulatory effects of gastrin and carbachol are inhibited without altering the turnover of membrane inositol phospholipids or the activation of PKC induced by these agents. Somatostatin appears to act on parietal cells at a site distal to the activation of the intracellular signal transduction cascades. This action may be mediated through the induction of protein dephosphorylation, the inhibition of cellular secretion, or some other yet undetermined mechanism [300­302]. For example, somatostatin inhibits the induction of the early response gene c-fos in canine parietal cells stimulated by both carbachol and histamine [303]. As in many other physiological systems, c-fos plays an important role in cellular activation. Thus, the inhibitory effect of somatostatin on c-fos expression may represent an important regulatory mechanism in gastric parietal cell physiology.
Regulation of parietal cell genes The stimulation of parietal cells induces several cellular events, including morphological transformation, rapid changes in enzyme location and activity, and opening of ion channels. The resting parietal cell has a collapsed canalicular system and cytoplasmic tubulovesicles containing the gastric proton pump, H+,K+-ATPase. The stimulated cell rapidly develops a richly interdigitating intracellular canalicular system bulging with microvilli with a concomitant loss of cytoplasmic tubulovesicles (Fig. 13.11) [3,304]. The microvilli have a central cytoskeletal core of actin filaments stabilized by other proteins [305]. These filaments appear to mediate the fusion

of tubulovesicles with the canalicular system. This fusion translocates H+,K+-ATPase from vesicular membranes to the canalicular membrane, where it actively pumps H+ ions in exchange for K+ (Fig. 13.12) [306,307]. For each proton that is secreted, an intracellular OH- ion is generated. This alkaline challenge is handled by carbonic anhydrase II (CAII)mediated conversion of OH- to HCO3-, which is exchanged for Cl- at the basolateral membrane.
There are many proteins involved in the generation and secretion of gastric acid. Stimulation of parietal cells presumably involves the activation of nascent proteins and the induction of the genes responsible for these effector molecules. The effects of acid secretagogues on the genes coding for these enzymes and structural proteins have been analyzed.
The induction of specific gene transcription has been studied in isolated canine parietal cells [308]. Significant increases in CAII mRNA levels were induced by carbachol, gastrin, and histamine. Maximal stimulation was reached within 20 min for histamine and carbachol and within 60 min for gastrin. To determine whether the observed increases in mRNA levels were the result of increased transcription or decreased degradation, nuclear run-off experiments were performed. They revealed increased transcription within 15 min for each agent. H+,K+-ATPase mRNA levels were also induced in the same fashion as for CAII [309]. This coordinated induction of both enzymes could be blocked with the competitive inhibitors of each secretagogue.
Because CAII appears to be the catalyst of the reaction responsible for the elimination of OH- produced in the generation of H+, increased expression of CAII mRNA in

Golgi complex
Basal folds Basement lamina

Golgi complex
Tubulovesicular membrane
Intracellular canaliculus
Mitochondria Basal folds Basement lamina

Intracellular canaliculus
Mitochondria Tubulovesicular
membrane
Intracellular canaliculus

(a) Parietal cell (nonsecreting)

(b) Parietal cell (secreting)

Figure 13.11 (a) Resting nonsecretory parietal cell. (b) Stimulated acid secretory parietal cell. The stimulated cell develops a richly interdigitating intracellular canalicular system that bulges with microvilli. There is a concomitant loss of cytoplasmic tubulovesicles. From Ito [4].

305

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Resting

Stimulated

HCI KCI

Canaliculus H,K ATPase

H3O+

KCI

Ca cAMP

Gastrin

Tubulovesicles Active pumps ACh Histamine

Figure 13.12 Functional transformation of a secreting parietal cell. This model illustrates a resting parietal cell (left) with collapsed secretory canaliculi and cytoplasmic tubulovesicles expressing H+,K+-ATPase, and a stimulated parietal cell (right) with formed secretory canaliculi expressing active H+,K+-ATPase pumps. Adapted from Hershey & Sachs [348].

stimulated parietal cells could result as a secondary effect of the induction of H+,K+-ATPase. To explore this possibility, parietal cells were pretreated with omeprazole, an agent known to inactivate H+,K+-ATPase irreversibly [310]. Under these circumstances, carbachol still induced expression of CAII mRNA, with the same kinetics as in untreated cells. Carbachol appears to stimulate CAII gene expression without dependence on OH- ion generation by H+,K+-ATPase.
Secretagogues stimulate actin expression. Although actin is often used as a control or housekeeper gene for such studies because its expression tends to remain constant, in the case of the parietal cell, actin plays a crucial role in the acid secretory process. The induction of actin gene expression may serve as a particularly useful marker for acid secretion instead of using H+ generation. This type of analysis can elucidate the effect of acid secretagogues on parietal cell function at the molecular level.
Muraoka and associates [311] undertook an extensive evaluation of the regulatory elements controlling H+,K+ATPase gene expression. They transfected cultured canine gastric parietal cells with reporter gene constructs composed of the first exon and various lengths of the 5-upstream regulatory region of the canine H+,K+-ATPase -subunit ligated to a luciferase reporter plasmid. Their data indicate that basal transcriptional activity of the H+,K+-ATPase gene is mediated through binding of the nuclear transcriptional factor SP1 to the 5-GCTCCGCCTC-3 nucleotide sequence residing between bases ­47 and ­38 relative to the putative cap site [311].
Shigehiko and Maeda and their colleagues [312,313] identified regions within the promoters of both the - and -subunits of the H+,K+-ATPase gene that are recognized by gastric-specific nuclear proteins. These investigators subse-

quently cloned two novel nuclear proteins, named GATAGT1 and GATA-GT2, from pig gastric mucosa. These bind specifically to the sequences (G or C)RR(G or C)NGAT(A or T)RY, in which R and Y are unspecified purine and pyrimidine bases respectively. GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2 belong to the family of GATA transcription factors that are known to play an important role in tissue-specific gene expression [313]. Northern blot analysis of several different tissues revealed that these nuclear proteins are expressed predominantly in the gastric mucosa and to a lesser degree in the intestine, but not in the brain, heart, liver, kidney, spleen, or lung [312]. Maeda's group speculated that these transcription factors are responsible for the specific expression of the H+,K+-ATPase gene in the gastric mucosa.
The regulation of parietal cell gene expression by gastrin has been analyzed using flow cytometry-purified parietal cells isolated from gastrin knockout mice. The expression levels of several genes involved in the regulation of gastric acid secretion ­ the H+,K+-ATPase - and -subunits, the KCNQ1 potassium channel, the aquaporin-4 water channel, and creatinine kinase B ­ were reduced in the parietal cells of the gastrin-deficient mice [314]. The involvement of gastrin in the regulation of these genes was confirmed by the reversal of these observations after a 1-week infusion of gastrin [314].
Acid secretory processes The gastric epithelium secretes a fluid of almost isotonic HCl through an active transport process. Acid is secreted at a pH of 0.8, but the parietal cell cytosolic pH is about 7.2. The parietal cell alone is responsible for this remarkable H+ ion concentration gradient of 2.5 million-fold. Significant amounts of mitochondrial energy are required when the parietal cell is signaled to transform from a relatively quiet resting state to an actively secreting state. Dramatic changes in cellular membranes, cytoskeletal architecture, membrane ion conductances, and ATPase activities are only a portion of the events that accompany cell activation. Equally impressive is the compressed time frame over which these changes occur. It has been suggested that the family of isoenzymes, creatine kinase/phosphocreatine (CK/PCr), which catalyze the exchange of high-energy phosphate groups between phosphocreatine and ADP, are involved in parietal cell transformation. The CK/PCr system couples to the H+,K+-ATPase [315] and the Ca2+-ATPase found in sarcoplasmic reticulum [316]. The brain-type CCK isoform, BB-CK, has been identified in the parietal cells of different species [317], and this enzyme appears to colocalize with H+,K+-ATPase in purified vesicles prepared from porcine parietal cells. These data suggest that H+,K+-ATPase may obtain the required ATP from BB-CK colocalized in the same cellular compartment [318].
The stimulation of parietal cells induces the formation of a dense apical meshwork of intracellular canaliculi packed with long microvilli [319]. The apical cell membrane sur-

306

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

face area increases five- to tenfold after stimulation. This increase coincides with the disappearance of most of the cytoplasmic tubulovesicles seen in the resting parietal cell. The mechanism of this increase in surface area appears to be the fusion of tubulovesicles and apical membrane. Immunocytochemical studies using a monoclonal antibody to H+,K+-ATPase demonstrate the translocation of this enzyme from tubulovesicles in the resting cell to the apical membranes in stimulated cells, supporting the concept of secretagogue-induced membrane fusion and enzyme redistribution [306]. The fusion of tubulovesicles with the apical membrane is directed by cytoskeletal microfilaments composed of actin and other regulatory proteins. Membranes are recycled back to the tubulovesicles as cells return to the resting state, a process that also appears to be mediated by actin-containing microfilaments [305]. These microfilaments anchor at regularly spaced intervals in the apical membrane and do not appear to associate with resting tubulovesicles. Cytochalasins, agents that inhibit actin polymerization, inhibit acid secretion [320]. Colchicine and vinblastine are also capable of inhibiting acid secretion [321]. These studies indicate the essential importance of actinmediated H+,K+-ATPase translocation in the initiation of acid secretion.
Forte and colleagues [322] analyzed the biochemical and functional properties of actin in gastric parietal cells. In a series of elegant studies, these authors showed that most parietal cell actin exists in the filamentous form (F-actin), which is an important component of the apical cell microvilli, whereas only a small fraction appears to be in the monomeric state (G-actin).
In some systems of regulated vesicular transport, F-actin is known to form a meshwork of filaments just beneath the cell surface, creating a barrier for the recruitment of vesicles to the apical plasma membrane. According to this model, F-actin depolymerization to the monomeric G form facilitates vesicle translocation. In contrast to this theory, Forte's group [322] did not detect any significant changes in the steady-state ratio of F-actin to G-actin during the process of parietal cell activation by gastric acid secretagogues. Thus, although these observations do not exclude the possibility that rapid exchange between F-actin and G-actin may occur, it appears that during induction of gastric acid secretion, the parietal cell maintains actin in a highly polymerized state [322].
Forte's laboratory also demonstrated that parietal cells contain pools of actin that display considerable functional differences [323]. Using latrunculin B, a compound known to bind to and inhibit the function of G-actin, they showed that, whereas G-actin is important for lammellipodia formation, F-actin, which is less sensitive to latrunculin B, appears to play a crucial role in the process of secretagogue-stimulated gastric acid secretion. In fact, alteration of F-actin function by either a high dose of latrunculin B or by cytochalasin D,

an agent known to fragment F-actin filaments, resulted in inhibition of gastric acid secretion [323].
Hanzel and colleagues [324] identified one of the membrane proteins involved in parietal cell cytoskeletal transformation as ezrin, an 80-kDa membrane protein found in several cell types. Ezrin is associated with the actin filaments in the microvilli of stimulated parietal cells and is phosphorylated during cAMP-mediated stimulation. Actin, an important structural protein for cellular scaffolding, is expressed as several isoforms, including the - and -subtypes found in parietal cells [325]. In a series of elegant experiments using ultrastructural immunocytochemistry and biochemical protein purification, Yao and associates [326] confirmed that -actin is localized in canalicular microvilli and in the apical portion of parietal cells [326]. The authors also reported the selective association of ezrin with -actin. These important observations support a potential role for ezrin in parietal cell secretion. Moreover, they support the novel concept that actin isoforms may be distributed in different cellular domains, exerting differential functions by association with isoform-specific actin-binding proteins.
The molecular events regulating the dramatic recycling of H+,K+-ATPase-containing membranes have been the focus of intense investigative efforts. Studies of other cell systems have begun to elucidate the important factors involved in the secretion process. One such family of factors is the lowmolecular-weight GTP-binding proteins [327]. The members of this superfamily of proteins have certain characteristics: molecular weights of 20­30 kDa, significant homology with the oncogenic peptide Ras, ubiquitous expression, and involvement in a host of cellular functions, including vesicle trafficking. Several members of the Rab category of Ras proteins are expressed in gastric parietal cells [328­332]. Rab 25, Rab 324, and Rab 11 (previously thought to be Rab 2) have been identified in rabbit parietal cells [330,331]. More importantly, these specific proteins cosegregate with -H+,K+ATPase during parietal cell activation, suggesting a role for these small GTP-binding proteins in membrane recycling [330­332]. The importance of Rab 11a in the process of parietal cell activation has been demonstrated by Duman and colleagues [333]. Transduction of isolated and cultured rabbit parietal cells with an adenoviral vector expressing a dominant negative Rab 11a gene led to a block in the translocation of the H+,K+-ATPase to the apical plasma membrane and to the inhibition of gastric acid secretion [333].
Developments in the field of cell biology have enabled the molecular pathways that are important in cellular secretory processes to be elucidated. Studies in neuronal systems and yeast have demonstrated the potential involvement of highly conserved protein complexes in vesicle fusion and docking, such as the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs) [334,335]. These can be vesicle-related (v-SNARE) or target membrane-related (t-SNARE), binding to each other to provide a molecular

307

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

framework for the attachment of soluble factors [336]. Members of these protein families include VAMP-2 (vesicleassociated membrane protein 2, identified as a v-SNARE in brain) and the syntaxin 1A/1B and SNAP-25 (synaptosomeassociated protein), which are categorized as t-SNAREs and are thought to play a role in the recycling of synaptic vesicles [337]. The secretory carrier membrane proteins or SCAMPs found in pancreatic zymogen granules and synaptic vesicles may also play a role in vesicle recycling. Calhoun and Goldenring [332] explored the potential role of these novel trafficking-related proteins in the parietal cell secretory process. The involvement of VAMP-2, SCAMPs, Rab 11, and Rab 25 in membrane trafficking was determined by immunoisolation of highly purified parietal cell tubulovesicles. These investigators reported that VAMP-2, SCAMPs, and the two Rab proteins are present on H+,K+-ATPase-containing tubulovesicles and suggested that Rab proteins take part in the assembly of the SNARE complex. These observations support a theory originally proposed by Forte that parietal cell tubulovesicles may be derived from a cell surface recycling system.
Other studies have demonstrated that the cytoskeletal proteins actin, spectrin, and ankyrin copurify with the H+,K+ATPase from parietal cell microsomal membranes and cosegregate with H+,K+-ATPase in resting and secreting parietal cells. Ankyrin may mediate the interaction of H+,K+-ATPase with the structural membrane proteins actin and spectrin and may thereby function to maintain the polarized distribution of the enzyme to the apical portion of the parietal cell. Festy and colleagues [338] screened a cDNA bank from rabbit gastric fundic mucosa using a two-hybrid assay and demonstrated that the rabbit H+,K+-ATPase binds through its Nterminal end to the spectrin-binding domain of ankyrin III. The two proteins bind directly to one another, constituting an important anchoring system for the H+,K+-ATPase to the plasma membrane [338].
Studies of H+,K+-ATPase activity have been performed using membrane vesicles obtained from resting and stimulated parietal cells [319]. Vesicles from light microsomal membrane fractions, presumably containing the tubulovesicles, exhibit most of the H+,K+-ATPase activity in resting parietal cells [339]. Heavier membrane vesicles associated with microfilaments contain most of the H+,K+-ATPase activity in stimulated parietal cells. The membranes of these acid-secreting vesicles have a K+/Cl- cotransport system that is lacking in membrane preparations from resting cells [340].
Studies have confirmed that the H+,K+-ATPase requires extracellular K+ for electroneutral exchange with H+ [341,342]. It appears that, concomitant with membrane or enzyme translocation, associated K+ and Cl- conductances are activated [340]. Opening of this conductance as it moves from tubulovesicles to the canalicular membrane allows H+,K+-ATPase to generate H+. The K+/Cl- conductance is intim-

ately associated with the H+,K+-ATPase, and its function is
required for acid secretion. Several other ion channels are
involved in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis during
acid secretion. A schematic representation of parietal cell conductances and pumps is shown in Figure 13.13. Each H+
ion that is generated results in the formation of an intracellular OH- ion, which reacts with CO2 in a reaction catalyzed by CAII to form HCO3-. A mechanism located on the basolateral membrane permits the exchange of intracellular HCO3- for extracellular Cl-. This Cl- provides part of the intracellular pool for transport by the apical K+/Cl- conductance system. Several types of Cl-/HCO3- exchanger have been described. The exchanger expressed in parietal cell basolateral mem-
branes has been identified as the anion exchanger 2 [343]. Parietal cells also express the Na+/H+ exchanger NHE1 on
basolateral membranes, but to a much lesser degree than in
mucous neck and chief cells. Moreover, the level of CAII
expression appears to correlate with the level of NHE1
expression in these cells. The low level of NHE1 in parietal
cells may suggest that another exchanger such as NHE4
[344] may play a more important role in the acid secretory process. Although not shown in Figure 13.13, a Na+/HCO3- cotransporter has also been located on parietal cells [345].

APICAL

H+
ATP Cl­ K+
ADP
K+

Cl­ Na+ 2K+
ATP K+
ADP
HCO3­ H+ 3Na+ BASOLATERAL
Figure 13.13 Ion transport pathways in parietal cells. The apical membrane contains the H+,K+-ATPase pump and K+ and Cl- conductances. The basolateral membrane also has a K+ conductance, Cl-/HCO3- exchange, Na+/H+ exchange, and Na+,K+-ATPase to maintain cellular homeostasis during secretory and resting states.

308

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

The role of this cotransporter in maintaining parietal cell
homeostasis has not been determined.
A second mechanism located on the basolateral cell membrane allows the exchange of extracellular Na+ for intracellular H+. The Na+/H+ and Cl-/HCO3- exchangers are coupled functionally as cellular pH monitors to handle excess acid or
base loads respectively. Although physically separate, these exchange mechanisms act as a functional basolateral Na+ and Cl- cotransport mechanism. The basolateral membrane also has a K+ conductance, which allows intracellular K+ to follow the concentration gradient. K+ uptake by the parietal cell can occur by means of a basolateral Na+,K+-ATPase or a Na+ pump, which appears to translocate three intracellular Na+ ions for two extracellular K+ ions. The net effect of these ion
channels is to maintain cellular homeostasis in the face of
HCl secretion. The osmotically active HCl generated in the
canalicular lumen results in the flow of H2O across the cell. This flow leads to the formation of gastric fluid associated
with acid secretion. The gastric H+,K+-ATPase or H+ ion pump has been studied
in detail [346]. This membrane protein is a member of the P-

ATPase family that includes the Na+- or K+- and Ca+-ATPases. Structural homology between these family members suggests that they probably diverged from a common ancestor molecule [347].
The structural characteristics of the gastric H+,K+-ATPase are well understood [348]. This critical enzyme in parietal cell biology consists of two subunits,  and , with the -subunit being larger. The amino acid sequences of the rat, pig, and rabbit enzymes have been deduced from the corresponding cloned cDNA structures [347,349,350]. Interspecific conservation of the -subunit sequence is greater than 97%; the protein length ranges from 1033 amino acids in the rat to 1035 residues in the rabbit. The gene corresponding to the human -subunit has been cloned and sequenced [351]; it contains 22 exons and has a corresponding deduced protein length of 1035 amino acids.
Several experimental procedures have been used to establish the secondary structure of the -subunit (Fig. 13.14). Initial hydropathy plots of the deduced amino acid sequence suggested that this protein was anchored by seven to nine potential transmembrane domains with a large cytoplasmic

Cytoplasmic ATP

a

KFARQ
SKFEQ
EHFVD RATLS
VTLTK LHMIOSEAKE R P RNPKRDRLVNE
SLRRTKR A FQQ GFFRNR
YY
U......RTAR

10 9

87

654

32

1

Membrane

107 LAGGLQCLAWVAAAICUA-AI

158 YYGFCGTVVVVAILALAL KL

303 ILAGLAILFGATFFIVAIICIGY T R

353 LCVTVTALLGEPVVAVVAIMFF

192 NPELTPVLIVITVSVPLPLC

833 YALSVSPFIDTCLEIFL

853

M

IT

CASEG

NoDTTLD

PLAAYSYFQIGAIQSFAGFT DYTAMAQFGWFPL,CI-GLRPQE

945 ILVDAIQCMESIFFVTVCTYQQYL

963 ILVIAIVFQVCIGCFLCYCPG

1014 IEDYVFILLGFPMPVLWWQF

38

ISLYYAAFYVVAAFVVVMTGLFAL

R A

N RQGFTWEQGYSDQLDQLHH

NIFNF

RIPM

CHO

Figure 13.14 Model of the two-dimensional structure of the H+,K+-ATPase illustrating the a- and b-subunits. The a-subunit contains 10 putative transmembrane domains. Hydrophilic amino acids within the postulated membraneanchored domains are shown. Adapted from Hershey & Sachs [348].

CHO

CHO

S
Sb

CHO

S CHO S S
S
Extracytoplasmic

CHO

309

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

site containing an ATP-binding region [347]. Although still controversial, subsequent studies, capitalizing on a combination of proteolytic cleavage of the enzyme and in vitro translation and inhibitor-binding experiments, suggest that the -subunit may contain ten transmembrane segments with a large cytoplasmic domain [348]. The cytoplasmic domain is presumed to include ATP-binding, phosphorylation, and energy transduction sites. Labeling studies suggest that the proton pump inhibitors omeprazole, lansoprazole, and pantoprazole bind to the cysteine residues located at positions 813 and 822. These residues lie near a predicted extracytoplasmic loop between transmembrane domains five and six, and they are thought to be essential for the inhibition of H+,K+-ATPase [352­354].
The cDNA of the H+,K+-ATPase -subunit has been isolated and sequenced from several species, including rabbit [355], rat [356­358], hog [359], mouse [360], and human [361]. The average length of this subunit ranges from 290 to 294 amino acids, and hydropathy plots suggest a single transmembrane domain. Although the role of the -subunit has not been established, several lines of investigation suggest that it may be important for assembly and stabilization of the functional -subunit. Insight into the functional role of the H+,K+-ATPase -subunit has been gained by studies conducted in transgenic animals [362]. Courtois-Coutry and colleagues [362] noted that the cytoplasmic tail of the H+,K+-ATPase -subunit contains a four-residue sequence that is homologous to tyrosine-based endocytic signals. Mutation of the tyrosine residue in this motif and expression of the mutated H+,K+-ATPase -subunit in transgenic animals lead to constitutive secretion of acid and the continuous expression of the mutated H+,K+-ATPase at the cell surface. Thus, the H+,K+-ATPase -subunit appears to play an important role in the process of H+,K+-ATPase internalization and in the termination of gastric acid secretion [362].
The timing of the association between the - and subunits of the H+,K+-ATPase and the initial steps in cellular trafficking for this enzyme have been determined. Crothers and associates [363] used in vivo protein metabolic labeling in conjunction with subcellular fractionation to examine these issues in rabbit parietal cells. These investigators observed that the - and -subunits associated early in the endoplasmic reticulum. Moreover, the newly synthesized H+,K+-ATPase migrated sequentially through at least three distinct membrane pools.
H+,K+-ATPase can be inactivated completely by omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, and pantoprazole. These compounds become cyclic in the presence of acid and react with available sulfhydryl groups to form a covalent interaction that irreversibly inactivates the enzyme. The blockade of proton transport is virtually complete and has been used clinically as described in Chapter 40.

Other gastric secretory products
Histamine Histamine plays a critical role in regulating gastric acid secretion through the activation of the parietal cell H2 receptor. There is evidence that histamine mediates in part the stimulatory effect of other secretagogues (e.g., gastrin, carbachol) on parietal cells. The relative importance of the two histaminecontaining cell types found in the stomach (i.e., mast cells and ECL cells) in regulating gastric acid secretion has been the source of some debate. The ratio of the two cell types in gastric mucosa depends on the species examined. Early studies using isolated mast cells obtained from canine gastric mucosa indicated that gastrin and cholinergic agents did not stimulate histamine release, and this observation was used to support the contention that these secretagogues induced acid secretion by direct action on parietal cells rather than by stimulating histamine release. However, these data were at odds with studies demonstrating that pentagastrin stimulated the release of histamine from gastric mucosal preparations. Chuang and colleagues [364] shed light on this controversy by successfully isolating and characterizing a population of non-mast cells from canine oxyntic mucosa that contain histamine and have the morphological characteristics of ECL cells. Gastrin and carbachol stimulate histamine release from ECL cells when they are isolated and cultured. It is possible that the secretagogue actions of gastrin and carbachol can be mediated, at least in part, through the action of histamine. Such studies reinforce the concept that regulation of gastric acid secretion involves a complex interplay between multiple pathways and receptors.
Development of the isolated ECL cell model has facilitated the study of this important source of gastric histamine. Gastrin-stimulated histamine release from ECL cells occurs through the CCK2/gastrin receptor, which is coupled to a Ca2+ signaling pathway [365,366]. Histamine release is also stimulated by factors that increase cAMP, such as agonists of the -adrenergic receptor, forskolin, and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) [365,367]. Research indicates that the PACAP type 1 receptor subtype regulates histamine release and [Ca2+]i mobilization [368]. As one would anticipate, ECL cells are also under inhibitory restraints. Somatostatin binds to an SSTR2 receptor subtype, inhibiting histamine release and Ca2+ signaling [369]. Histamine appears to regulate its own release through an H3 receptor subtype located on ECL cells, thus creating an autocrine feedback loop [365]. Peptide YY has also been observed to inhibit histamine release through a Y1 receptor subtype [367].
Histamine is generated in ECL cells by decarboxylation of histidine by the enzyme histidine decarboxylase [370,371]. Histidine decarboxylase is transcriptionally activated by both gastrin and acetylcholine. Studies by Hocker and colleagues

310

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

[372,373] have demonstrated that gastrin stimulates histidine decarboxylase transcription through a PKC- and MAP kinase-dependent pathway. In view of reports demonstrating the development of ECL hyperplasia and gastric carcinoid tumors in animals receiving large doses of proton pump inhibitors, there has been increased interest in understanding the regulation of ECL cell proliferation [374]. Both in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that gastrin has a direct proliferative effect on these cells, thus supporting the concept that hypergastrinemia resulting from potent acid suppression is responsible for increased ECL proliferation in these animal models [375­381]. The relevance of these observations to human physiology is unclear, considering the studies demonstrating that the human ECL cell is terminally differentiated and is not capable of undergoing proliferation [382].
An attempt to determine the relative importance of histamine-containing mast cells and ECL cells in the regulation of gastric acid secretion has also been made by Stechschulte and colleagues [383]. These investigators observed that mast cell-deficient mice had about 50% of the normal quantity of gastric histamine in addition to diminished basal and stimulated acid secretory activity. They concluded that non-mast cell histamine may account for only part of the basal and stimulated gastric secretory response.
Pepsinogen The secretion of pepsinogen by the gastric mucosa occurs in response to food ingestion, as described by Langley and Edkins in 1886 [384]. Pepsinogens are inactive proenzymes that are autocatalytically cleaved under acidic conditions to generate their active form, pepsin. The proenzyme is synthesized in exocrine chief cells found at the base of oxyntic glands and in mucous neck and mucous cells in cardiac, oxyntic, and pyloric glands [385]. Chief cells package pepsinogen in apical granules, where it is stored until the cells are stimulated. Stimulation of chief cells by various secretagogues induces exocytosis of granule contents into the glandular lumen. Concomitant stimulation of parietal cells provides the acidic lumenal conditions needed for rapid production of pepsin, the major acid protease activity in the stomach. Pepsin is a member of the group of proteolytic enzymes classified as aspartic proteases [386]. Members of this enzyme family are found in an array of organisms extending from plants and retroviruses to humans. The stomach is the best source of aspartic proteases in mammals, and pepsin is the representative member.
Pepsin initiates protein digestion and is particularly active in the proteolysis of collagen, a major protein component of meat. Peptides generated by the proteolytic activity of pepsin act as signals for the secretion of digestive hormones such as gastrin and CCK. These peptide signals initiate the coordinated digestive response necessary for the absorption of nutrients.

Pepsinogens have been electrophoretically separated into seven isozymogens [387]. Five fractions (i.e., fractions 1­5) that migrate rapidly toward the anode are immunologically similar and have been named group I pepsinogens (PGI or PGA). Group II pepsinogens (i.e., fractions 6 and 7; PGII, PGC, or progastricsin) migrate slightly slower than PGI and are antigenically similar. Both groups are active in acidic conditions (pH 2­3.5) and are inactivated at a pH higher than 5. Despite these similarities, there are many biochemical and immunochemical differences between PGI and PGII, which are the subject of intense investigation.
The distribution of the two pepsinogen groups in gastrointestinal tissues varies. Although both groups are found in the gastric body, PGI being the most abundant, only PGII are found in the gastric antrum, proximal duodenum, and the Brunner glands. The presence of different isozymogens could be the result of multiple gene loci, multiple alleles at a single gene locus, alternate posttranscriptional processing of RNA, or posttranslational modifications of primary gene products. Genetic analysis has revealed that the two groups have different gene loci. A human PGI gene has been isolated, sequenced, and localized to chromosome 11q12­13 [388­ 390]. Analysis of its locus indicates the presence of multiple PGI genes [391]. This type of multigene protein polymorphism is rare and suggests that the pepsinogen gene complex is undergoing evolutionary gene duplication and selection. Other mechanisms of isozymogen diversity, such as posttranslational modification, may also be active.
Taggart and colleagues [392] isolated and sequenced the cDNA and gene coding human PGII. Analysis of the genomic clones suggests that there is a single gene for PGII located on chromosome 6. Structural comparisons between PGI and PGII demonstrate that they share 60% nucleotide and 50% amino acid identity. No immunological cross-reactivity was detected between the two groups of human pepsinogens. This lack of immunological cross-reactivity may result from divergent evolution of sequences located on the surface of the enzymes, in contrast to the highly conserved sequences at the biologically active sites of the zymogen located within the binding cleft of the enzyme.
The stimulation of pepsinogen secretion has been analyzed in intact animals, gastric mucosal preparations, gastric glands, and isolated chief cells. Despite the use of different species in these models, certain generalizations about the mechanisms of chief cell activation are supported by the data. Acetylcholine and its analogues appear to stimulate chief cells directly through muscarinic receptors [393,394]. Other neuronal mediators, such as gastrin-releasing peptide, may also mediate vagal stimulation of pepsinogen secretion [395]. The adrenergic agonist isoproterenol (isoprenaline) has a stimulatory effect in vitro [396], although the physiological significance of this effect has not been demonstrated in intact animals. The ability of histamine to stimulate pepsinogen

311

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

secretion remains controversial, and conflicting data preclude any definitive conclusion [385]. Secretin has been reported to stimulate pepsinogen secretion in vivo and in vitro [397,398].
Although gastrin stimulates chief cells only weakly, CCK-8 is a potent stimulus of pepsinogen secretion in vitro [397]. The finding that peripherally administered CCK in vivo only weakly stimulates pepsinogen secretion may reflect the function of CCK as a neurocrine, rather than endocrine, mediator of chief cell stimulation. Alternatively, it may reflect the mixed effects of a direct stimulatory effect on chief cells and an indirect inhibitory effect such as could be mediated by CCK-induced somatostatin release.
The intracellular signal transduction mechanisms activated by the various chief cell secretagogues have been analyzed. Secretin, isoproterenol, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide stimulate pepsinogen release through cell surface receptors linked to the activation of adenylate cyclase and cAMP formation [385]. Several peptide hormones including somatostatin, neuropeptide Y, and peptide YY have been found to inhibit pepsinogen release from isolated chief cells through a pertussis toxin-sensitive mechanism. Other secretagogues, such as cholinergic agonists and CCK, stimulate pepsinogen release in chief cells by activating the IP3 and [Ca2+]i signaling pathway [399,400]. Activation of the chief cell muscarinic receptor leads to a modest increase (15%) in PKC enzyme activity while stimulating a threefold increase in pepsinogen secretion [401]. Of interest, doses of carbachol capable of inducing pepsinogen release did not alter PKC activity, suggesting that other pathways independent of PKC, such as changes in cytosolic Ca2+, may be sufficient for enzyme release. However, a maximal stimulatory effect of carbachol on pepsinogen release was achieved only at doses that also led to PKC activation. From these data, it appears that PKC, although not essential for enzyme release, may be involved in modulating the maximal response achieved by activation of the muscarinic receptor.
Further insight into the postreceptor events involved in secretagogue-mediated pepsinogen secretion has been gained. The involvement of the Ca2+ signaling pathway as an important mechanism for chief cell activation has been reaffirmed [402]. Moreover, it appears that the increase in [Ca2+]i is important for the ability of ligands such as CCK-8 to potentiate the stimulatory effect of agents such as secretin, which activates cAMP production in chief cells. This potentiation in pepsinogen release occurs independently of the Ca2+ source (intracellular or extracellular). As is the case in other cell systems, Ca2+/CaMKII is also involved in Ca2+-mediated pepsinogen secretion [403]. Protein phosphatase 2B (calcineurin) is a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine protein phosphatase involved in cell signaling in a variety of tissues [404,405]. Raufman and colleagues [406] showed that gastric chief cells express this phosphatase and that it modulates Ca2+-induced potentiation of the cAMP signaling

pathways at the level of adenylate cyclase [407]. Moreover, this specific phosphatase appears to be involved in Ca2+induced pepsinogen secretion by facilitating dephosphorylation of a specific 55-kDa cytoskeletal protein, which, in turn, regulates exocytosis.
As in gastric parietal cells, Rab proteins appear to be involved in chief cell intracellular trafficking [408,409]. Specifically, Rab3 proteins appear to regulate pepsinogen secretion at one of the final steps of exocytosis [408]. Chief cells also express two isoforms of Rab­GDP dissociation inhibitor (Rab-GDI) [409], which are proteins that, in addition to inhibiting the dissociation of GDP from Rab, inhibit the binding of GTP to GDP-bound Rab, thus removing Rab proteins from membranes [410­412].
The mechanism by which PKC modulates (i.e., augments) Ca2+-induced pepsinogen secretion is unclear. A member of the family of proteins known as MARCKS (myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate) has been suggested to play an important role in mediating the cross-talk between PKC and Ca2+/calmodulin-stimulated pepsinogen secretion [413]. Specifically, a MARCKS protein may serve as a Ca2+/calmodulin buffer, which, on phosphorylation, releases calmodulin from membranes and makes it available to bind and activate other signaling proteins such as Ca2+/CaMKII and calcineurin [414]. In a series of immunological and biochemical studies, Raufman's group presented evidence to suggest that an acidic 72-kDa protein (pp72) serves as a MARCKS protein in chief cells. It appears that PKCinduced phosphorylation and Ca2+/calmodulin binding compete for similar regions on pp72. Therefore, PKC may enhance Ca2+-induced pepsinogen secretion by phosphorylating MARCKS, decreasing its affinity for calmodulin, and facilitating activation of downstream targets that are important for pepsinogen secretion such as Ca2+/CaMKII and calcineurin [414].
An additional signaling pathway involved in pepsinogen secretion is the nitric oxide (NO) system [415,416]. Gastric chief cells express a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent NO synthase that initially was observed to mediate pepsinogen secretion stimulated by leukotrienes (LTB4, LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4) [415]. This pathway also appears to be involved in the action of Ca2+-dependent agonists such as carbachol, gastrin, CCK, thapsigargin, and Ca2+ ionophore.
Pepsinogens are found in the gastric secretions, serum, urine, and seminal fluid [417,418]. Their physiological role in nongastric fluids is unknown. Measurement of pepsinogens in these fluids is performed with a specific radioimmunoassay [417]. Attempts to correlate serum pepsinogen groups with risk of peptic ulcer disease have proven to be of modest clinical value (see Chapter 40). Azuma and colleagues [419], studying Japanese patients with gastric ulcers, found no genetic polymorphism for the pepsinogen A gene, but observed a 100-base pair insertion­deletion restriction fragment length polymorphism in the pepsinogen C gene.

312

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

Genotypes that contained the small fragment were significantly more common in patients with gastric body ulcers than in patients with angular or antral ulcers or in control subjects. The clinical implication of this interesting observation has not been determined. Advances in the understanding of pepsinogen physiology and pathophysiology may lend these measurements new clinical significance.
Mucus Gastric epithelium is partially protected from acidic autodigestion by a mucous gel that covers the entire surface of the stomach (for further discussion of gastric mucosal defense mechanisms, see Chapter 40). This gel acts as a barrier, protecting the gastric mucosa from acid, pepsin, bile salts, alcohol, and other injurious agents. The barrier consists of an unstirred layer of mucus, HCO3-, surface phospholipids, and water. A prominent pH gradient extending from the lumen (pH 2) to the epithelial cell surface (pH 7) is maintained by this gel [420]. Bhaskar and colleagues [421] shed light on the physicochemical basis for the barrier function of gastric mucus. In a series of elegant in vitro experiments, these researchers demonstrated that injection of HCl through solutions of porcine gastric mucin produces viscous fingering patterns that depend on pH, mucin concentration, and acid flow rate. If the pH is greater than 4, discrete fingers are observed; at a pH of less than 4, these fingers are not seen, and HCl does not penetrate the mucin solution. Acid secreted by the gastric gland that exists in an environment of pH 5­7 can penetrate the mucous gel layer through narrow fingers. In contrast, HCl in the gastric lumen (pH 2) is prevented from diffusing back to the epithelium by the high viscosity of the gastric mucous gel on the lumenal side.
Mucin, a high-molecular-weight glycoprotein, is secreted by surface mucous cells, mucous neck cells, and glandular mucous cells. Polymerization of mucin subunits by means of disulfide bonds is essential for the formation of the hydrated gel [422]. The precise structural organization and approximate molecular weight of mucin polymers are unknown. Two significantly different models of gastric mucin polymerization have been proposed and are described in other reviews [423,424]. The peptide backbone of mucin contains many serine, threonine, and proline residues (> 40% molecular weight) that serve as the amino acid anchors for the glycosyl residues that branch from the protein. Partial and complete cDNA clones for mucin have been isolated, and deduced peptide sequences confirm this amino acid preponderance [425­ 428]. The structural analysis indicates that the mucin backbone contains extended arrays of tandemly repetitive peptides rich in threonine or serine residues which are potential sites for O-glycosylation.
Multiple mucin gene products are expressed at various sites. Specific cDNA clones coding for mucins found in submaxillary glands, the tracheobronchial tree, and intestinal mucosa have been isolated and characterized [429­432].

Toribara and colleagues [428] isolated a cDNA clone coding for human gastric mucin, which is characterized by tandem repeat sequences rich in threonine, serine, and proline [428]. This gastric mucin gene, which has been called MUC6, is expressed primarily in the stomach and the gallbladder and has been localized to chromosome 11 (11p15.4­ 11p15.5).
The mucin that is synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum undergoes vesicular transport to the Golgi apparatus for glycosylation. The major portion of mucin is heavily glycosylated, and nonglycosylated or "naked" regions of the peptide are joined to other mucins by disulfide bridges. The initial peptide­carbohydrate linkage involves glycosidic bond formation between N-acetylgalactosamine and the hydroxyl groups of serine or threonine residues. This type of O-linked glycosylation involves the addition of individual carbohydrate moieties, rather than the transfer of preassembled oligosaccharides, to gradually lengthening chains [433]. Fucose, galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, and N-acetylgalactosamine make up more than 95% of the sugar moieties in each chain [434]. Each mucin peptide contains up to several hundred linear or branched-chain oligosaccharides. This high carbohydrate content (> 50% by weight) results in a highly viscoelastic substance that expands when hydrated. These properties may be essential for the protective function served by gastric mucus.
The intracellular transport of mucin proceeds through the cis-, medial-, and trans-Golgi cisternae before transfer to the apical mucous granule. Cytoplasmic transport vesicles presumably bud off Golgi membranes and transfer mucus to its target organelles. Fusion of vesicle and granule membranes results in gradually enlarging mucous granules that ultimately pack the apical cytoplasm. Intact microtubules appear to be needed for transport of secretory granules from the Golgi apparatus to the cell surface. Basal secretion of mucus occurs continually throughout the life span of mucous cells [435]. In vitro pulse labeling of human mucous granules reveals that intracellular transit and release occurs in 20­24 h. In contrast to basal secretion, stimulation of mucous cells results in fairly rapid fusion of granular and apical cell membranes or extrusion of mucous granule contents. Fusion of subjacent mucous granules enhances the secretory response. This process is called compound exocytosis and results in a dramatically cavitated apical cell surface during stimulated secretion.
Study of the regulation of mucous cell secretion has been impeded by the inherent difficulties in quantitatively retrieving and measuring secreted mucus. Hydration of secreted mucus forms a viscous gel that adheres to mucosal cells. Attempts to quantify mucus secretion by morphological methods [436], release of radiolabeled glycoproteins [437], and radioimmunoassay [438] have met with only limited success. Despite these limitations, several factors that affect mucin secretion have been identified and can be summarized.

313

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Cholinergic agonists stimulate secretion in a portion of gastric mucous cells, but adrenergic neurotransmitters do not appear to influence release of secretory granules. Gastrin and CCK may increase feline gastric lumenal carbohydrate content, but the source of this presumed mucus secretion has not been determined [439]. Similarly, secretin has also been shown to increase the carbohydrate content of secreted gastric mucus in humans, but the cellular origin of this effect is also unknown [440]. PGE and PGF have been reported to stimulate the release of soluble and insoluble mucin from gastric mucosa, with a resultant increase in mucous gel thickness [441,442]. This increase may be produced by prostaglandininduced HCO3- secretion, creating an outward alkaline flow carrying previously secreted mucins from gastric crypts and glands [443]. After gastric mucosal injury has occurred, multiple inflammatory and immune cytokines may be present in the mucosa. It seems plausible that these factors directly or indirectly stimulate mucous cell secretion as part of the reparative process [422]. Candidate secretagogues include leukotrienes, immune complexes, and mast cell histamine.
Boland and colleagues [444] established a system for isolating and culturing canine gastric mucous cells and demonstrated that the cells synthesize and secrete mucin and phospholipids [444]. Mucin glycoprotein and surface-active phospholipids may form a biochemical complex that is analogous to pulmonary surfactant, and it is this complex that may be critical for providing the gastric epithelium with its protective barrier. PGE2 may enhance mucosal defense through the release of surface-active phospholipids by gastric mucous cells. Other studies have demonstrated that the same secretagogues that stimulate gastric acid secretion (e.g., histamine, gastrin, carbachol) can stimulate mucin synthesis and release of surface-active phospholipids [445,446]. Gastrin, in particular, has been shown to stimulate the biosynthesis of mucin in surface mucous cells of the rat through a NO-dependent mechanism, because NO synthase inhibitors were able to block the stimulatory action of gastrin [447]. These observations suggest that gastric acid secretion (i.e., aggressive factor) and gastric mucosal defense are regulated in a coordinated or parallel fashion.
Mucous cells presumably have various receptors mediating stimulatory effects on the basolateral membrane, but no specific receptors have been demonstrated on these cells. Part of the difficulty in performing radioreceptor binding studies in this cell type is the high level of nonspecific ligand binding to the mucous gel. Functional studies have suggested that carbachol, histamine, and gastrin act directly on gastric mucous cells. Seidler and Pfeiffer [448] demonstrated that acetylcholine stimulates IP3 formation, [Ca2+]i mobilization, and mucin release from isolated gastric mucous cells. However, neither dibutyryl AMP nor phosphodiesterase inhibitors have been shown to stimulate mucin release from intestinal mucous cells [449]. Conversely, a Ca2+ ionophore has been shown to induce visible loss of mucous granules

from guinea pig gastric mucosa and to increase the thickness
of the mucous gel [450]. Together, these results suggest that
gastric mucous cells may be stimulated by secretagogues that use Ca2+-mediated intracellular pathways.
Research has indicated that activation of protease-
activated receptor 2 (PAR-2) leads to the secretion of gastric
mucus through the release of calcitonin gene-related peptide
and tachykinins from sensory neurons, suggesting a novel
mechanism for the regulation of mucus secretion in the
stomach [451]. Much remains to be learned about the
regulation of gastric mucous cell secretion in the basal and
stimulated states.
Bicarbonate Gastric mucosal defense depends on a mucus­HCO3- barrier coating the entire lumen of the stomach. This barrier exists as
a gel with a pH gradient that provides a neutral microenvir-
onment at the epithelial surface. The gradient is generated by the secretion of HCO3- by gastric surface mucous cells. HCO3- uptake at the basolateral membrane and secretion at the apical membrane are metabolically dependent processes [452]. Carbonic anhydrase, the enzyme responsible for HCO3- generation, has also been localized to the apical matrix and microvillous cores of surface epithelial cells [453]. HCO3- secretion appears to be mediated by a Cl- and HCO3- exchange mechanism on the lumenal surface of gastric epithelial cells [454]. In addition to active secretion, passive efflux of HCO3- presumably occurs through a paracellular route. Mucosal delivery of HCO3- ions is enhanced by fenestrations of the capillaries supplying the epithelial cells [36]. The relative proportions of passive and active HCO3- secretion in the basal and stimulated state have been difficult to determine and
depend on the type of model studied. Several models have been used to measure gastric HCO3-
secretion. Mucosal membranes can be mounted in chambers
and bathed with appropriate solutions [455­457]. Titration of lumenal secretions is used to calculate HCO3- release. In vivo measurements have been performed in fundic and
antral pouches and are described elsewhere [458,459]. In humans, gastric HCO3- secretion can be measured in vivo by back-titration after complete pharmacological inhibition of
acid secretion [460]. Another technique involves rapid
perfusion of the stomach (30 mL/min) with continuous
measurement of PCO2 and pH in the gastric aspirate [461]. HCO3- and H+ secretion can then be calculated using the Henderson­Hasselbalch equation. This technique relies on
the assumption that all lumenal CO2 results from neutralization of H+ ions by HCO3-.
Because of the quantitative differences observed with the
various methods used, Odes and colleagues [462] performed
detailed in vivo and in vitro studies using the different
techniques outlined. They observed that in the acid-suppressed stomach, gastric HCO3- is accurately determined by back-titration. However, measurement of HCO3- in the

314

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

acid-secreting stomach is not accurate with any of the meth-
ods tested. Despite these quantitative differences, responses
to various stimuli are qualitatively similar with all of the
techniques. Regulation of gastric HCO3- secretion is an important com-
ponent of gastric mucosal defense. Sham feeding and electrical stimulation of the vagus induce gastric HCO3- secretion [463­465]. This neural control mechanism is effectively
blocked by atropine and benzilonium bromide. Intravenous
infusion of cholinergic agents such as bethanechol also stimulates HCO3- and H+ secretion [460,466]. The coordinated stimulation of acid and HCO3- secretion by vagal transmitters is not reproduced by gastrin or histamine. Local regulation of HCO3- secretion is initiated by the presence of lumenal acid. Studies using canine denervated pouches [467] and isolated
frog mucosal strips [468] suggest that a humoral factor that stimulates HCO3- secretion is released in response to lumenal acid. Although exogenous prostaglandins have been shown to stimulate gastric and duodenal HCO3- secretion, the physiological role of endogenous prostaglandins in HCO3- control is less clear [452,469]. The inhibition of gastric HCO3- secretion is not well characterized. Vagal stimuli and lumenal acid appear to stimulate surface mucous cells to secrete HCO3-. Acid stimulation also results in delivery of HCO3- from the parietal cells to the surface epithelium by ascending mucosal
capillaries (i.e., the alkaline tide). These regulatory controls ensure simultaneous secretion of gastric acid and HCO3-.
Intrinsic factor Intrinsic factor (IF), a 45-kDa glycoprotein present in gastric
secretions, is essential for the absorption of cobalamin
(vitamin B-12) in the terminal ileum by receptor-mediated
endocytosis. Its existence was first postulated by Castle in
1929 [470]. Human IF is synthesized and secreted by parietal
cells [471]. Parietal cells are also the source of IF in cats,
rabbits, monkeys, guinea pigs, and oxen [472]. In rodents
such as the rat and mouse, chief cells produce IF, whereas its
source in pigs is gastric mucous cells [473,474]. The structure
of rat IF, as deduced from a cDNA clone, indicates a primary
amino acid sequence of 421 amino acids, with a putative
signal sequence of 22 amino acids [474]. The cobalamin-
binding domain is thought to reside in the N-terminal half of
the protein. There is 80% identity between the predicted
amino acid sequences of rat IF and human IF [475]. The sin-
gle human IF gene is located on chromosome 11; human IF
appears to have a high degree of conservation with monkey,
rat, mouse, and cow IF.
IF is secreted in amounts far exceeding that necessary
for cobalamin absorption [476]. Secretion of IF is stimulated
by the same pharmacological agents that stimulate acid
secretion ­ pentagastrin, histamine, and cholinergic agonists
­ but this secretory response is not linked to acid secre-
tion [477]. For example, omeprazole does not alter basal or
stimulated IF secretion in humans, nor does it alter the

absorption of labeled cobalamin [478,479]. The intracellular responses mediating IF secretion involve the cAMP pathway when stimulated by histamine [477]. Whether pentagastrin and acetylcholine, which appear to act through Ca2+/ phospholipid-dependent pathways when stimulating acid secretion, act in a similar fashion when stimulating IF secretion is unknown.
Inhibitory regulation of IF secretion is poorly understood. Somatostatin inhibits histamine- or pentagastrin-stimulated IF secretion in isolated guinea pig gastric glands [480]. EGF is reported to inhibit histamine-stimulated IF secretion in isolated rabbit gastric glands and in humans [481,482]. The physiological significance of these observations is unknown.
IF resists digestion by gastric acid and proteolytic enzymes under normal circumstances. A rare kindred with cobalamin malabsorption caused by an abnormal IF that is susceptible to acid and proteolysis has been reported [483]. An absence of IF secretion occurs rarely in those with normal acid secretion, usually in children [484,485]. The significance of IF in health and disease is discussed further in Chapter 20.
Human tissue studies have demonstrated that IF is expressed not only in parietal cells but also in gastric chief cells and enteroendocrine cells [486]. The expression of IF in these sites appears to be lower than the level of expression in parietal cells. Some investigators have suggested that the principal reason for the differential expression of IF in different cell types lies in the variation between the untranslated regions of the human IF and rat IF genes [487]; however, the observation that IF can also be expressed in human chief cells goes somewhat against this theory [486]. Questions still remain regarding the interspecific variation in IF expression and the cellular pathways that regulate IF synthesis and secretion.
Prostaglandins The role of prostaglandins in gastric acid secretion and mucosal defense has been an area of active research. Prostaglandins are 20-carbon fatty acid derivatives that have diverse biological activities and which are produced in many different tissues. They are synthesized from arachidonic acid, a product of enzymatic cleavage of cell membrane phospholipids by phospholipases, particularly phospholipase A2 [488]. Cyclooxygenase rapidly metabolizes free arachidonic acid to cyclic endoperoxides, which are transformed to various prostaglandin subtypes by tissue-specific processing enzymes (Fig. 13.15). PGE2 and PGI2 (or prostacyclin) are synthesized and secreted by the gastric mucosa of various species. The presence of these two predominant forms in homogenates of gastric mucosa has been confirmed by bioassay, radioimmunoassay, and gas chromatography with mass spectrometry. Biosynthetic studies using radiolabeled arachidonic acid have confirmed that gastric mucosa can synthesize both of these prostaglandins. The specific mucosal cell types synthesizing the various prostaglandins have not

315

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Lipoxins

Membrane bound phospholipids Phospholipase A2

Lipoxygenase

Arachidonic acid

Lipoxygenase

COOH

Leukotrienes

Prostacyclin (PGl2)

Cyclooxygenase
Cyclic endoperoxides (PGG2, PGH2)
PGE2 PGD2 PGF2a

Thromboxanes (TXA2, TXB2)

Figure 13.15 Pathways of arachidonic acid metabolism.

been identified. Although canine and rat parietal cell fractions appear to form several prostaglandin subtypes, other cells, such as mucous and chief cells, may also synthesize prostaglandins.
Gastric prostaglandins are likely to have paracrine effects on other gastric mucosal cells. One example is direct inhibition of acid secretion by prostaglandins. Studies of canine parietal cells show that PGE2 decreases [14C]aminopyrine accumulation and cAMP production [201]. This effect appears to be mediated through prostaglandin receptors activating inhibitory guanine nucleotide-binding proteins [489]. Inhibition of parietal cells could be one effect of a prostaglandin-mediated negative-feedback loop regulating gastric acid secretion.
Prostaglandins may also function as lumenal hormones. PGE2 has been demonstrated in the gastric juice of several species, including human, cat, dog, and rat [488]. Secretion of PGE2 into lumenal fluid is maximal during pentagastrinstimulated acid secretion. The presence of prostaglandins in gastric juice and gastric mucosa may facilitate the diverse cytoprotective functions ascribed to these agents, in addition to their antisecretory effects. These functions include stimulation of mucus, phospholipid, and HCO3- secretion; enhancement of mucosal blood flow; reduction of mucosal H+ ion back-diffusion; and stimulation of mucosal cell turnover. Prostaglandins may function in this way to mediate mucosal defense.
Prostaglandin deficiency may predispose to gastric mucosal injury. Cyclooxygenase inhibitors such as aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents produce a spectrum of mucosal injuries in the stomach. Immunization against prostaglandins has caused ulcers in rabbits [490,491]. Part of

the cause of these ulcerations is a decrease in prostaglandinmediated mucosal defense. These observations have served as the basis for the development of prostaglandins for use in the treatment of acid or peptic diseases of the stomach (see Chapter 40).
Mouse models for the study of gastric secretion
Molecular approaches with various types of transgenic and knockout mouse models have been used to unravel the molecular signals directing the maturation, differentiation, and biological functions of the distinct gastric cell lineages.
Gastric epithelial cell maturation and differentiation Li and colleagues [8] capitalized on the unique expression of the -subunit of H+,K+-ATPase in parietal cells to target the expression of the simian virus 40 T antigen (SV40TAg) to gastric glands [8]. These investigators successfully amplified the population of preparietal cells in this animal model and noted a block in cell differentiation accompanied by hypochlorhydria and iron deficiency. In addition, SV40TAginduced preparietal cell proliferation was accompanied by apoptosis, which appeared to occur in a p53-independent manner. The block in the development of mature parietal cells in this model was accompanied by the absence of zymogenic cells. This key observation supports the concept that mature parietal cells generate signals that are important in regulating the differentiation of other cell lineages within the stomach. This hypothesis was further confirmed by analyz-

316

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

ing the gastric glands of transgenic mice in which parietal cells were ablated by either diphtheria or cholera toxins [9,492]. In addition to inhibited development of mature parietal cells, these investigators observed that the differentiation of zymogenic cells was blocked, with the accumulation of preneck cells and the amplification of pit cells. These studies corroborate the hypothesis that the interaction between different cell lineages is important in regulating cell differentiation in the stomach. Moreover, these observations emphasize the importance of parietal cells in the regulation of the growth and differentiation of multiple cell lineages in the gastric mucosa.
Some of the mechanisms regulating the process of zymogenic cell differentiation and maturation have been defined in studies conducted in mice lacking the transcription factor Mist1 [493]. The zymogenic cells of Mist1 knockout mice exhibit multiple apical cytoplasmic structural abnormalities. Moreover, the fundic glands of these animals exhibit a significant increase in the number of transitional cells that retain molecular and ultrastructural characteristics of both enzyme-secreting zymogenic cells and mucus-secreting neck cells [493]. Thus, Mist1 may be an important factor in the maturation of mucus-secreting gastric epithelial progenitors into digestive enzyme-secreting zymogenic cells.
Significant alterations in gastric mucosal morphology and gastric acid secretion have also been detected in mice deficient in the trefoil factor 2 (TFF2)/spasmolytic polypeptide (SP) gene [494]. TFF2/SP is a small polypeptide that is secreted by mucous neck cells [494]. Expression of TFF2/SP appears to be increased at sites of gastrointestinal ulceration and inflammation, suggesting that it plays an important role in the stimulation of reparative and cytoprotective mechanisms [494]. TFF2/SP-deficient mice appear to have an increased number of activated parietal cells, increased gastric acid secretion, and undetectable gastrin levels. In addition, these animals exhibit a decrease in gastric mucosal thickness and gastric mucosal proliferation rates, and an increase in susceptibility to indomethacin (indometacin)-induced gastric ulcerations [494]. Taken together, these observations suggest that TFF2/SP promotes mucosal healing through the stimulation of cell proliferation and the inhibition of gastric acid secretion. The precise mechanisms responsible for TFF2/SP-mediated inhibition of gastric acid secretion remain to be elucidated.
Ligands and their receptors Genetically engineered mice in which the CCK2 receptor or the peptide gastrin have been ablated develop achlorhydria accompanied by a reduced number of parietal and ECL cells. These findings confirm the importance of both gastrin and the CCK2 receptor in the regulation of gastric mucosal cell development and differentiation [495,496].
Ablation of the gene encoding the histamine H2 receptor causes a series of morphological abnormalities of the gastric

mucosa [497]. In particular, the histamine H2 receptor knockout mice have elevated gastrin levels and a markedly hypertrophic gastric mucosa with enlarged folds. Immunohistochemical analysis of the gastric mucosa of these mice reveals an increased number of parietal and ECL cells. Similar, although less severe, abnormalities have also been detected in mice with targeted disruption of the gene for histidine decarboxylase, the key enzyme in the synthesis of histamine [498,499]. Interestingly, the parietal cells of both the histamine H2 receptor- and the histidine decarboxylasedeficient mice appear to be smaller than in the wild-type mice. These morphological changes cause abnormalities in gastric acid secretion.
Impaired gastric acid secretion also occurs in M3 muscarinic receptor knockout mice [500]. These animals exhibit a higher intragastric pH, a lower proportion of active parietal cells, higher serum gastrin levels, and a markedly impaired acid secretory response to carbachol, histamine, gastrin 17, and 2-deoxy-D-glucose. Interestingly, although the M3 muscarinic receptor knockout mice display a significant level of hypergastrinemia, the oxyntic mucosa of these mice does not exhibit any hypertrophic response [500]. These observations suggest that the M3 receptors play a crucial role in the regulation of both basal and stimulated gastric acid secretion and that they mediate the trophic actions of gastrin in the stomach. Studies conducted with genetically engineered mice in which both the M5 and the M1 receptors are ablated indicate that, in addition to the M3 receptor, the M5, but not the M1, receptor mediates cholinergically stimulated gastric acid secretion [501]. Interestingly, pirenzepine, a putative M1 receptor antagonist, inhibits gastric acid secretion in the M1 receptor knockout mice, suggesting that inhibition of gastric acid secretion by pirenzepine is unlikely to result from M1 receptor inhibition [501].
Ion transporters Selective deletion of either the H+,K+-ATPase - or -subunit gene causes significant abnormalities in the morphology of parietal cells. The parietal cells of animals with either deletion exhibit enlarged secretory canaliculi and a reduced number of microvilli and tubulovescicles [502,503]. In addition, the H+,K+-ATPase -, but not -, subunit knockout mice display significant decreases in the numbers of parietal and chief cells and increases in the numbers of pit and neck cells, suggesting that the -subunit of the H+,K+-ATPase might be required for the normal maintenance and distribution of several cell types in the gastric glands [502,503].
Similarly, targeted deletion of the genes for the Na+/H+ exchanger isoforms 2 (NHE2) and 4 (NHE4) leads to hypochlorhydria, a decrease in the number of parietal and zymogenic cells, and a marked increase in parietal cell degeneration, indicating that these molecules play an important role in parietal cell maturation, differentiation, and viability [504,505].

317

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Genetic ablation of the voltage-gated potassium channel gene KCNQ2 also leads to hypochlorydria and an increase in the number of non-acid secretory cells in the gastric epithelium, underscoring the importance of these transporters in the regulation of gastric epithelial cell homeostasis [506].
Finally, targeted disruption of the AE2 gene encoding the Cl-/HCO3- exchanger leads to the development of achlorhydria and of morphologically abnormal parietal cells, characterized by immature secretory canaliculi and few tubulovescicles [507].
Considered together, these observations suggest that disruption of the normal mechanisms that regulate ion exchange and membrane gradients can alter the morphology of the gastric mucosa. The exact mechanisms responsible for these observations remain to be characterized.
References
1. Feldman M. Gastric secretion in health and disease. In: Sleisenger MH, Fordtran JS (eds). Gastrointestinal Disease, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1989:713.
2. Forte JG, Forte TM, Black JA, et al. Correlation of parietal cell structure and function. J Clin Gastroenterol 1983;5(Suppl1):17.
3. Forte TM, Machen TE, Forte JG. Ultrastructural changes in oxyntic cells associated with secretory function: a membrane-recycling hypothesis. Gastroenterology 1977;73:941.
4. Ito S. Functional gastric morphology. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:817.
5. Beauchamp RD, Barnard JA, McCutchen CM, et al. Localization of transforming growth factor alpha and its receptor in gastric mucosal cells. Implications for a regulatory role in acid secretion and mucosal renewal. J Clin Invest 1989;84:1017.
6. Stepan V, Ramamoorthy S, Nitsche H, et al. Regulation and function of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signal transduction pathway in isolated gastric parietal cells. J Biol Chem 2005;280:15700.
7. van den Brink GR, Hardwick JC, Tytgat GN, et al. Sonic hedgehog regulates gastric gland morphogenesis in man and mouse. Gastroenterology 2001;121:317.
8. Li Q, Karam SM, Gordon JI. Simian virus 40 T antigen-induced amplification of pre-parietal cells in transgenic mice. Effects on other gastric epithelial cell lineages and evidence for a p53independent apoptotic mechanism that operates in a committed progenitor. J Biol Chem 1995;270:15777.
9. Li Q, Karam SM, Gordon JI. Diphtheria toxin-mediated ablation of parietal cells in the stomach of transgenic mice. J Biol Chem 1996;271:36716.
10. Canfield V, West AB, Goldenring JR, Levenson R. Genetic ablation of parietal cells in transgenic mice: a new model for analyzing cell lineage relationships in the gastric mucosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:2431.
11. Goldenring JR, Ray GS, Coffey RJ, et al. Reversible drug-induced oxyntic atrophy in rats. Gastroenterology 2000;118:1080.
12. Judd LM, Gleeson PA, Toh BH, van Driel IR. Autoimmune gastritis results in disruption of gastric epithelial cell development. Am J Physiol 1999;277:G209.
13. Matsuyama M, Suzuki H. Differentiation of immature mucous cells into parietal, argyrophil and chief cells in stomach grafts. Science 1970;169:385.
14. Lipkin M. Proliferation and differentiation of normal and diseased gastrointestinal cells. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:255.

15. Spicer SS, Katsuyama T, Sannes PL. Ultrastructural carbohydrate cytochemistry of gastric epithelium. Histochem J 1978;10:309.
16. Spicer SS, Sun DC. The role of the mucous barrier in the defense of the stomach vs. peptic ulceration. II. Carbohydrate histochemistry of gastric epithelial secretions in dog. Ann NY Acad Sci 1967;140: 762.
17. Stevens CE, Leblond CP. Renewal of the mucous cells in the gastric mucosa of the rat. Anat Rec 1953;115:231.
18. Zalewsky CA, Moody FG. Mechanisms of mucous release in exposed canine gastric mucosa. Gastroenterology 1979;77:719.
19. Grube D, Forssmann WG. Morphology and function of the enteroendocrine cells. Horm Metab Res 1979;11:603.
20. Greider MH, Steinberg V, McGuigan JE. Electron microscopic identification of the gastrin cell of the human antral mucosa by means of immunocytochemistry. Gastroenterology 1972;63:572.
21. Orci L. Morphologic events underlying the secretion of peptide hormones. In: James VHT (ed.). Endocrinology, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica, 1977:7.
22. Lichtenberger LM, Delansorne R, Graziani LA. Importance of amino acid uptake and decarboxylation in gastrin release from isolated G cells. Nature 1982;295:698.
23. Del Valle J, Yamada T. Amino acids and amines stimulate gastrin release from canine antral G-cells via different pathways. J Clin Invest 1989;85:139.
24. Larsson LI, Goltermann N, Demagistris L, et al. Somatostatin cell processes as pathways for paracrine secretion. Science 1979;205: 1393.
25. Soll A, Berglindh T. Physiology of isolated gastric glands and parietal cells: receptors and effectors regulating function. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:883.
26. Soll AH, Lewin K, Beaven MA. Isolation of histamine-containing cells from canine fundic mucosa. Gastroenterology 1979;77:1283.
27. Soll AH, Lewin K, Beaven MA. Isolation of histamine-containing cells from rat gastric mucosa: biochemical and morphologic differences from mast cells. Gastroenterology 1981;80:717.
28. Karam SM, Leblond CP. Dynamics of epithelial cells in the corpus of the mouse stomach. I. Identification of proliferative cell types and pinpointing of the stem cell. Anat Rec 1993;236:259.
29. Karam SM, Leblond CP. Dynamics of epithelial cells in the corpus of the mouse stomach. II. Outward migration of pit cells. Anat Rec 1993;236:280.
30. Karam SM, Leblond CP. Dynamics of epithelial cells in the corpus of the mouse stomach. III. Inward migration of neck cells followed by progressive transformation into zymogenic cells. Anat Rec 1993;236:297.
31. Karam S, Yao X, Forte JG. Functional heterogeneity of parietal cells along the pit-gland axis. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G161.
32. Goyal RK, Crist JR. Neurology of the gut. In: Sleisenger MH, Fordtran JS (eds). Gastrointestinal Disease, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1989:21.
33. Kuo DC, Drauthamer GM, Yamosaki DS. The organization of visceral sensory neurons in thoracic dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of the cat studied by horseradish peroxidase (HRP) reaction using the cryostat. Brain Res 1981;208:187.
34. Kuo DC, Yang CG, Yamasaki DS, et al. A wide field electron microscopic analysis of the fiber constituents of the major splanchnic nerve in cat. J Comp Neurol 1982;210:49.
35. Guth PH, Leung FW. Physiology of the gastric circulation. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:1031.
36. Gannon B, Browning J, O'Brien P, et al. Mucosal microvascular architecture of the fundus and body of human stomach. Gastroenterology 1984;86:866.
37. Cheung LY. Topical effects of 16,16 dimethyl prostaglandin E2 on gastric blood flow in dogs. Am J Physiol 1980;238:514.
38. Delaney JP, Grim E. Experimentally induced variations in canine gastric blood flow and its distribution. Am J Physiol 1965;208:353.

318

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

39. Holm L, Perry MA. Role of blood flow in gastric acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1988;254:281.
40. Perry MA, Haedicke GH, Bulkley GB, et al. Relationship between acid secretion and blood flow in the canine stomach: role of oxygen consumption. Gastroenterology 1983;85:529.
41. Jacobson ED, Linford RH, Grossman MI. Gastric secretion in relation to mucosal blood flow studied by a clearance technique. J Clin Invest 1966;45:1.
42. Furness JB. The adrenergic innervation of the vessels supplying and draining the gastrointestinal tract. Z Zellforsch 1971;113:67.
43. Yano S, Fujiwara A, Ozaki Y, et al. Gastric blood flow responses to autonomic nerve stimulation and related pharmacological studies in rats. J Pharm Pharmacol 1983;35:641.
44. Reed JD, Sanders DJ, Thorpe V. The effect of splanchnic nerve stimulation on gastric acid secretion and mucosal blood flow in the anesthetized cat. J Physiol (Lond) 1971;214:1.
45. Jansson G, Kampp M, Lundgren O, et al. Studies on the circulation of the stomach. Acta Physiol Scand 1966;68(Suppl277):91.
46. Ross G. Escape of mesenteric vessels from adrenergic and nonadrenergic vasoconstriction. Am J Physiol 1971;221:1217.
47. Grossman MI. Neural and hormonal stimulation of gastric secretion of acid. In: Code CF (ed.). Handbook of Physiology, Section 6: Alimentary Canal. Washington, DC: American Physiological Society, 1967:837.
48. Koop H, Willemer S, Steinbech F, et al. Influence of chronic drug-induced achlorhydria by substituted benzimidazoles on the endocrine stomach in rats. Gastroenterology 1987;92:406.
49. Gillespie IE, Grossman MI. Potentiation between Urecholine and gastrin extract and between Urecholine and histamine in the stimulations of Heidenhain pouches. Gut 1964;5:71.
50. Grossman MI, Konturek SJ. Inhibition of acid secretion in dog by metiamide: a histamine antagonist acting on H2 receptors. Gastroenterology 1974;66:517.
51. Debas HT. Peripheral regulation of gastric acid secretion. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:931.
52. Blair AJ, 3rd, Feldman M, Barnett C, et al. Detailed comparison of basal and food-stimulated gastric acid secretion rates and serum gastrin concentrations in duodenal ulcer patients and normal subjects. J Clin Invest 1987;79:582.
53. Card WI, Marks IN. The relationship between the acid output of the stomach following histamine stimulation and the parietal cell mass. Clin Sci 1960;19:147.
54. Baron JH. Lean body mass, gastric acid and peptic ulcer. Gut 1969;10:637.
55. Feldman M, Richardson CT, Walsh JH. Sex-related differences in gastrointestinal and parietal cell sensitivity to gastrin in healthy human beings. J Clin Invest 1983;71:751.
56. Christie DL, Ament ME. Gastric acid hypersecretion in children with duodenal ulcer. Gastroenterology 1976;71:242.
57. Venzant FR, Alvarez WC, Eusterman CB, et al. The normal range of gastric acidity from youth to old age. Arch Intern Med 1932;49: 343.
58. Fordtran JS, Walsh JH. Gastric acid secretion rate and buffer content of the stomach after eating: results in normal subjects and in patients with duodenal ulcer. J Clin Invest 1973;72:645.
59. Blair AJ, 3rd, Richardson CT, Walsh JH, et al. Variable contribution of gastrin to gastric acid secretion after a meal in humans. Gastroenterology 1987;92:944.
60. Feldman M, Richardson CT. Total 24 hour gastric acid secretion in patients with duodenal ulcer: comparison with normal subjects and effects of cimetidine and parietal cell vagotomy. Gastroenterology 1986;90:540.
61. Savarino V, Mela GS, Scalabrini P, et al. Twenty-four hour study of intragastric acidity in duodenal ulcer patients and normal subjects using continuous intraluminal pH-metry. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33:1077.
62. Colson RH, Walson BW, Fairclough PD, et al. An accurate, long-

term, pH-sensitive radiopill for ingestion and implantation. Biotelem Patient Monit 1981;8:213. 63. Moore JC, Wolfe M. The relation of plasma gastrin to circadian rhythm of gastric acid secretion in man. Digestion 1973;9:97. 64. Gillespie IE, Clark DH, Kay AW, et al. Effect of antrectomy vagotomy with gastrojejunostomy and antrectomy with vagotomy on the spontaneous and maximal gastric acid output in man. Gastroenterology 1960;38:361. 65. Melrose AG, Russell RI, Dick A. Gastric mucosal structure and function after vagotomy. Gut 1964;5:546. 66. Tepperman BL, Walsh JH, Preshaw RM. Effect of antral denervation on gastrin release by sham feeding and insulin hypoglycaemia in dogs. Gastroenterology 1972;63:973. 67. Farrell JL. Contributions to the physiology of gastric secretion: the vagi as the sole efferent pathway of the cephalic phase of gastric secretion. Am J Physiol 1928;85:685. 68. Richardson CT, Walsh JH, Cooper KA, et al. Studies of the role of cephalic-vagal stimulation in the acid secretory response to eating in normal human subjects. J Clin Invest 1977;60:435. 69. Feldman M, Richardson CT. Role of thought, sight, smell and taste of food in the cephalic phase of gastric acid secretion in humans. Gastroenterology 1986;90:428. 70. Feldman M, Walsh JH. Acid inhibition of sham feeding-stimulated gastrin release and gastric acid secretion: effect of atropine. Gastroenterology 1980;78:772. 71. Feldman M, Richardson CT, Taylor IL, et al. Effect of atropine on vagal release of gastrin and pancreatic polypeptide. J Clin Invest 1979;63:294. 72. Feldman M, Unger RH, Walsh JH. Effect of atropine on plasma gastrin and somatostatin concentrations during sham feeding in man. Regul Pept 1985;12:265. 73. Farooq O, Walsh JH. Atropine enhances serum gastrin responses to insulin in man. Gastroenterology 1975;68:662. 74. Walsh JH, Yalow RS, Berson SA. The effect of atropine on plasma gastrin in response to feeding. Gastroenterology 1971;60:16. 75. Lucey MR, Wass JA, Fairclough PD, et al. Autonomic regulation of postprandial plasma somatostatin, gastrin and insulin. Gut 1985;26:683. 76. Feldman M, Dickerman RM, McClelland RN, et al. Effect of selective proximal vagotomy on food-stimulated gastric acid secretion and gastrin release in patients with duodenal ulcer. Gastroenterology 1979;76:926. 77. Stadil F, Rehfeld JF. Gastrin response to insulin after selective, highly selective and truncal vagotomy. Gastroenterology 1974; 66:7. 78. Walsh JH, Csendes A, Grossman MI. Effect of truncal vagotomy on gastrin release and Heidenhain pouch acid secretion in response to feeding in dogs. Gastroenterology 1972;63:543. 79. Kovacs TO, Lloyd KC, Lawson DC, et al. Inhibition of sham feedingstimulated acid secretion in dogs by immunoneutralization of gastrin. Am J Physiol 1997;273:G399. 80. Fox EA, Powley TL. Longitudinal columnar organization within the dorsal motor nucleus represents separate branches of the abdominal vagus. Brain Res 1985;341:269. 81. Gwyn DG, Leslie RA, Hopkins DA. Observations on the afferent and efferent organization of the vagus nerve and the innervation of the stomach in the squirrel monkey. J Comp Neurol 1985;239:163. 82. Shiraishi T. Effects of lateral hypothalamic stimulation on medulla oblongata and gastric vagal neural responses. Brain Res 1980;5: 245. 83. Wyrwicka W, Garcia R. Effect of electrical stimulation on the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve on gastric acid secretion in cats. Exp Neurol 1979;65:315. 84. Kerr FW, Preshaw RM. Secromotor function of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. J Physiol (Lond) 1969;205:405. 85. Kadekaro M, Timo Iaria C, Vicentini ML. Gastric secretion provoked by functional cytoglucopoenia in the nuclei of the solitary tract in the cat. J Physiol (Lond) 1980;299:397.

319

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

86. Ridley PT, Brooks FP. Alterations in gastric secretion following hypothalamic lesions producing hyperphagia. Am J Physiol 1965; 209:319.
87. Ishikawa T, Ngata M, Osumi Y. Dual effects of electrical stimulation of ventromedial hypothalamic neurons on gastric acid secretion in rats. Am J Physiol 1983;245:G265.
88. Colin Jones DG, Himsworth RL. The location of the chemoreceptor controlling gastric acid secretion during hypoglycaemia. J Physiol (Lond) 1970;206:397.
89. Kadekaro M, Timo Iaria C, Valle LE. Site of action of 2-deoxy-Dglucose mediating gastric secretion in the cat. J Physiol (Lond) 1972;221:1.
90. Kadekaro M, Savaki H, Sokoloff L. Metabolic mapping of neural pathways involved in gastrosecretory response to insulin hypoglycaemia in the rat. J Physiol (Lond) 1980;300:393.
91. Kadekaro M, Timo Iaria C, Valle LE. Neural systems responsible for the gastric secretion provoked by 2-deoxy-D-glucose cytoglucopoenia. J Physiol (Lond) 1975;252:565.
92. Cervervo F. Sensory innervation of the viscera: peripheral basis of visceral pain. Physiol Rev 1991;74:95.
93. Goghegan JG, Pappas TN. Central peptergic control of gastric acid secretion. Gut 1997;40:164.
94. Tache Y, Vale W, Brown M. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone: CNS action to stimulate gastric acid secretion. Nature 1980;287:149.
95. Morley JE, Levine AS, Silvis SE. Intraventricular calcitonin inhibits gastric acid secretion. Science 1981;214:671.
96. Pappas TN, Hamel D, Debas HT, et al. Cerebroventricular bombesin inhibits gastric acid secretion in dogs. Gastroenterology 1985;89: 43.
97. Pappas TN, Tache Y, Debas HT. Cerebroventricular somatostatin stimulates gastric acid secretion in the dog. In: Lewin MJ, Bonfils S (eds). Regulatory Peptides in Digestive, Nervous, and Endocrine Systems. INSERM Symposium No. 25. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1987: 323.
98. Lenz HJ, Raedler A, Greten H, et al. Stress induced gastrointestinal secretory and motor responses are mediated by endogenous corticotropin-releasing factor. Gastroenterology 1988;95:1510.
99. Zhang L, Xing LP, Demers L, et al. Central neurotensin inhibits gastric acid secretion: an adrenergic mechanism in rats. Gastroenterology 1989;97:1130.
100. Geoghagen JG, Lawson DC, Pappas TN. Neuropeptide Y and galanin: opposite central and peripheral effects on gastric acid secretion. J Neurosci 1990;16:189.
101. Rache Y. Inhibition of gastric acid secretion and ulcers by calcitonin gene-related peptide. Ann NY Acad Sci 1992;657:240.
102. Tache Y, Saperas E. Potent inhibition of gastric acid secretion and ulcer formation by centrally and peripherally administered interleukin-1. Ann NY Acad Sci 1992;664:353.
103. Geoghegan JG, Lawson DC, Cheng CA, et al. Intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y increases gastric and pancreatic secretion in the dog. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1069.
104. Scoto GM, Parenti C. Prevention of stress-induced gastric ulcers by mu- and delta-opioid agonists in the rat. J Physiol (Paris) 1993;87:385.
105. Grotzmyer U, Bergegard S, Olbe L. Effect of atropine and proximal gastric vagotomy on the acid response to fundic distension in man. Gut 1977;18:303.
106. Strunz HT, Grossman MI. Effect of intragastric pressure on gastric emptying and secretion. Am J Physiol 1978;235:552.
107. Soares EC, Zaterka S, Walsh JH. Acid secretion and serum gastrin at graded intragastric pressures in man. Gastroenterology 1977; 72:676.
108. Debas HT, Konturek SJ, Walsh JH, et al. Proof of a pylorooxyntic reflex for stimulation of acid secretion in the dog. Gastroenterology 1974;66:526.
109. Schiller LR, Walsh JH, Feldman M. Distension-induced gastrin release and gastric acid secretion: effects of luminal acidification and intravenous atropine. Gastroenterology 1980;78:912.

110. Debas HT, Walsh JH, Grossman MI. Evidence of oxyntopyloric reflex for release of antral gastrin. Gastroenterology 1975;68:691.
111. Cooke AR. Potentiation of acid output in man by a distension stimulus. Gastroenterology 1970;58:633.
112. Schoon IM, Olbe L. Inhibitory effect of cimetidine on gastric acid secretion vagally activated by physiological means in duodenal ulcer patients. Gut 1978;19:27.
113. Richardson CT, Walsh JH, Hicks MI, et al. Studies on the mechanisms of food-stimulated acid secretion in normal human subjects. J Clin Invest 1976;58:623.
114. Feldman M, Walsh J, Wong HC, et al. Role of gastrin heptadecapeptide in the acid secretory response to amino acids in man. J Clin Invest 1977;61:308.
115. Taylor IL, Byrne WJ, Christie DL, et al. Effect of individual L-amino acids on gastric acid secretion and serum gastrin and pancreatic polypeptide release in humans. Gastroenterology 1982;83:273.
116. Lichtenberger LM, Graziani LA, Dubinsky UP. Importance of dietary amines in meal-induced gastric release. Am J Physiol 1978; 243:341.
117. Thirlby RC, Richardson CT, Chew P, et al. Effect of terbutaline, a 2 adrenoceptor agonist on gastric acid secretion and serum gastrin concentrations in humans. Gastroenterology 1988;95:913.
118. Singer MV, Lehman C, Eysselein VE, et al. Action of ethanol and some alcoholic beverages on gastric acid secretion and release of gastrin in humans. Gastroenterology 1987;93:1247.
119. Lenz HJ, Ferrari-Taylor J, Isenberg JI. Wine and five percent ethanol are potent stimulants of gastric acid secretion in human. Gastroenterology 1983;85:1082.
120. Peterson WL, Barnett C, Walsh JH. Effect of intragastric infusion of ethanol and wine on serum gastrin concentration and gastric acid secretion. Gastroenterology 1986;91:1390.
121. Cano R, Isenberg JI, Grossman MI. Cimetidine inhibits caffeinestimulated acid secretion in man. Gastroenterology 1976;78:1082.
122. McArthur K, Hogan D, Isenberg JI. Relative stimulatory effects of commonly ingested beverages on gastric acid secretion in humans. Gastroenterology 1982;83:199.
123. Levant JA, Walsh JH, Isenberg JI. Stimulation of gastric secretion and gastrin release by single oral doses of calcium carbonate in man. N Engl J Med 1973;289:555.
124. Konturek SJ, Radecki T, Kwiecien N. Stimuli for intestinal phase of acid secretion in dogs. Am J Physiol 1978;234:64.
125. Kauffman GL Jr, Grossman MI. Serum gastrin during the intestinal phase of acid secretion in dogs. Gastroenterology 1979;77: 26.
126. Debas HT, Slaft G, Grossman MI. Intestinal phase of gastric acid secretion: augmentation of maximal response of Heidenhain pouch to gastrin and histamine. Gastroenterology 1975;68:691.
127. Isenberg JI, Ippoliti AF, Maxwell V. Perfusion of the proximal small intestine with peptone stimulates gastric acid secretion in man. Gastroenterology 1977;73:746.
128. Gregory RA, Ivy AC. The humeral stimulation of gastric secretion. Q J Exp Physiol 1941;31:111.
129. Isenberg JI, Maxwell V. Amino acids stimulate gastric acid secretion in man. N Engl J Med 1978;298:27.
130. Vagne M, Mutt V. Enterooxyntin: a stimulant of gastric acid secretion extracted from porcine intestine. Scand J Gastroenterol 1980; 15:17.
131. Wider MD, Vinik AI, Heldsinger A. Isolation and partial characterization of an enterooxyntin from porcine ileum. Endocrinology 1984;115:1484.
132. Walz DA, Wider MD, Snow JW, et al. The complete amino acid sequence of porcine gastrotropin, an ileal protein which stimulates gastric acid and pepsinogen secretion. J Biol Chem 1988;263: 14189.
133. Gantz I, Nothwehr SR, Lucey MR, et al. Gastrotropin: not an enterooxyntin but a member of a family of cytoplasmic hydrophobic ligand binding proteins. J Biol Chem 1989;264:20248.
134. Lenz HJ, Klapdor R, Hester SE, et al. Inhibition of gastric acid secre-

320

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

tion by brain peptides in the dog: role of the autonomic nervous system and gastrin. Gastroenterology 1986;91:905. 135. Soon-Shiong P, Debas HT. Pyloro-oxyntic neurohumoral inhibitory reflex of acid secretion. J Surg Res 1980;28:198. 136. Schoon IM, Bergegarde S, Grotzmger U, et al. Evidence for defective inhibition of pentagastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion by antral distension in the duodenal ulcer patient. Gastroenterology 1978;75:363. 137. Walsh JH, Richardson CT, Fordtran JS. pH dependence of acid secretion and gastrin release in normal and ulcer patients. J Clin Invest 1975;55:462. 138. Schubert ML, Edwards NF, Arimura A, et al. Paracrine regulation of gastric acid secretion by fundic somatostatin. Am J Physiol 1987;252:485. 139. Schubert ML, Edwards NF, Makhlouf GM. Regulation of gastric somatostatin secretion in mouse by luminal acidity: a local feedback mechanism. Gastroenterology 1988;94:317. 140. Lucey MR, Wass JA, Rees LH, et al. Relationship between gastric acid and elevated plasma somatostatin immunoreactivity after a mixed meal. Gastroenterology 1989;97:867. 141. Lichtenberger LM, Nelson AA, Graziani LA. Amine trapping: physical explanation for the inhibitory effect of gastric acidity on postprandial release of gastrin. Gastroenterology 1986;90:1223. 142. Colturi TJ, Unger RH, Feldman M. Role of circulating somatostatin in regulation of gastric acid secretion, gastrin release and islet cell function: studies in healthy subjects and duodenal ulcer patients. J Clin Invest 1984;74:417. 143. Feng TP, Hou HC, Lim RSK. On the mechanism of inhibition of gastric secretion by fat. Chinese J Physiol 1929;3:371. 144. Lucey MR. Somatostatin as mediator of fat-induced inhibition of gastric functions [Letter]. Gastroenterology 1988;95:1437. 145. Seal AM, Liu E, Buchan A, Brown J. Immunoneutralization of somatostatin and neurotensin: effect on gastric acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1988;255:40. 146. Lucey MR, Fairclough PD, Wass JAH, et al. Response of circulating somatostatin, insulin, gastrin, and GIP to intraduodenal infusion of nutrients in man. Clin Endocrinol 1984;21:209. 147. Mogard MH, Maxwell V, Sytnik B, Walsh JH. Regulation of gastric acid secretion by neurotensin in man: evidence against a hormonal role. J Clin Invest 1987;80:1064. 148. Yamagishi T, Debas H. Gastric inhibitory polypeptide is not the primary mediator of the enterogastrone action of fat in the dog. Gastroenterology 1980;78:931. 149. Guo YS, Singh P, Gomez G, et al. Effect of peptide YY on cephalic, gastric and intestinal phases of gastric acid secretion and a release of gastrointestinal hormones. Gastroenterology 1987;92:1202. 150. Wolfe M, Hocking M, Maico D, et al. Effects of antibodies to gastric inhibitory peptide on gastric acid secretion and gastrin release in the dog. Gastroenterology 1983;84:941. 151. You CH, Chey WY. Secretin is an enterogastrone in humans. Dig Dis Sci 1987;32:466. 152. Rangachari PK. Histamine release by gastric stimulants. Nature 1975;253:53. 153. Ekblad EB, Licko V. Conservative and nonconservative inhibitors of gastric acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1987;253:G359. 154. Harty RF, Maico DG, McGuigan JE. Postreceptor inhibition of antral gastrin release by somatostatin. Gastroenterology 1985;88:675. 155. Wolfe MM, Short GM, McGuigan JE. -Adrenergic stimulation of gastrin release mediated by gastrin-releasing peptide in rat antral mucosa. Regul Pept 1987;17:133. 156. Berglindh T, Obrink KJ. A method for preparing isolated glands from the rabbit gastric mucosa. Acta Physiol Scand 1976;96:150. 157. Soll AH. The actions of secretagogues on oxygen uptake by isolated mammalian parietal cells. J Clin Invest 1978;61:370. 158. Yamada T. Isolation and primary culture of endocrine cells from canine gastric mucosa. Methods Enzymol 1989;192:176. 159. Chew CS, Ljunstrom M. HCl secretion and [Ca2+]i in cultured parietal cells. J Intern Med 1990;228:9.

160. Moody FG. Oxygen consumption during thiocyanate inhibition of gastric acid secretion in dogs. Am J Physiol 1968;215:127.
161. Kowalewski K, Kolodej A. Relation between hydrogen ion secretion and oxygen consumption by ex vivo isolated canine stomach, perfused with homologous blood. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1972; 50:955.
162. Davidson WD, Klein KL, Kurokawa K, et al. Instantaneous and continuous measurement of 14CO2 by minute tissue specimens: an ionization chamber method. Metabolism 1981;30:596.
163. Berglindh T, DiBona DR, Ito S, et al. Probes of parietal cell function. Am J Physiol 1980;238:165.
164. Berglindh T, Helander HF, Obrink KJ. Effects of secretagogues on oxygen consumption, aminopyrine accumulation and morphology in isolated gastric glands. Acta Physiol Scand 1976;97:401.
165. Ljunstrom J, Chew CS. Calcium oscillations and morphological transformations in single cultured gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1991;260:67.
166. Soroka CJ, Chew CS, Hanzel DK, et al. Characterization of membrane and cytoskeletal compartments in cultured parietal cells: immunofluorescence and confocal microscopic examination. Eur J Cell Biol 1993;60:76.
167. Sanders MJ, Soll AH. Characterization of receptors regulating secretory function in the fundic mucosa. Annu Rev Physiol 1986; 48:89.
168. Gantz I, Schäffer M, Del Valle J, et al. Molecular cloning of a gene encoding the histamine H2 receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:429.
169. Bell GI, Reisine T. Molecular biology of somatostatin receptors. Trends Neurosci 1993;16:34.
170. Venter JC, Fraser CM. Receptor mechanisms: structure and molecular biology of transmitter receptors. Am Rev Respir Dis 1990;141(Suppl):S99.
171. Kopin AS, Lee YM, McBride EW, et al. Expression cloning and characterization of the canine parietal cell gastrin receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:S3605.
172. Soll AH. The interaction of histamine with gastrin and carbamylcholine on oxygen uptake by isolated mammalian parietal cells. J Clin Invest 1978;61:381.
173. Soll AH. Secretagogue stimulation of [14C]aminopyrine accumulation by isolated canine parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1980;238:G366.
174. Del Valle J, Tsunoda Y, Williams JA, et al. Regulation of [Ca2+]i by secretagogue stimulation of canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1992;262:420.
175. Mezey E, Palkovits M. Localization of targets for anti-ulcer drugs in cells of the immune system. Science 1992;258:1662.
176. Diaz J, Vizuete ML, Traiffort E, et al. Localization of the histamine H2 receptor and gene transcripts in rat stomach: back to parietal cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994;3:1195.
177. Gantz I, Del Valle J, Wang L, et al. Molecular basis for the interaction of histamine with the histamine H2 receptor. J Biol Chem 1992;267:20840.
178. Chiba T, Fisher SK, Junk P, et al. Carbamoylcholine and gastrin induce inositol lipid turnover in canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1988;255:99.
179. Wilkes JM, Kajimura M, Scott DR, et al. Muscarinic responses of gastric parietal cells. J Membr Biol 1991;122:97.
180. Leonard A, Cuq P, Magous R, et al. M3-subtype muscarinic receptor that controls intracellular calcium release and inositol phosphate accumulation in gastric parietal cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1991; 42:839.
181. Pfeiffer A, Rochlitz H, Herz A, et al. Stimulation of acid secretion and phosphoinositol production by rat parietal cell muscarinic M2 receptors. Am J Physiol 1988;254:622.
182. Soumarmon A, Cheret AM, Lewin MJ. Localization of gastrin receptors in intact isolated and separated rat fundic cells. Gastroenterology 1977;73:900.
183. Soll AH, Amirian DA, Thomas LP, et al. Gastrin receptors on isolated canine parietal cells. J Clin Invest 1984;73:1434.

321

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

184. Matsumoto M, Park J, Yamada T. Gastrin receptor characterization: affinity cross-linking of the gastrin receptor on canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1987;252:143.
185. Baldwin GS, Chandler R, Scanlon DB, et al. Identification of a gastrin binding protein in porcine gastric mucosal membranes by covalent cross-linking with iodinated gastrin. J Biol Chem 1986;261:12252.
186. Song I, Brown DR, Wiltshire RN, et al. The human gastrin/cholecystokinin type B receptor gene: alternative splice donor site in exon 4 generates two variant mRNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90: 9085.
187. Dickinson CJ, Seva C, Yamada T. Gastrin processing: from biochemical obscurity to unique physiological actions. News Physiol Sci 1997;12:9.
188. Seva C, Dickinson CJ, Yamada T. Growth-promoting effects of glycine-extended progastrin. Science 1994;265:410.
189. Kaise M, Muraoka A, Seva C, et al. Glycine-extended progastrin processing intermediates induce H+,K+-ATPase -subunit gene expression through a novel receptor. J Biol Chem 1995;270:11155.
190. Masahiro M, Park J, Sugano K, Yamada T. Biological activity of progastrin posttranslational processing intermediates. Am J Physiol 1987;252:G315.
191. Dickinson CJ, Marino L, Yamada T. Inhibition of the -amidation of gastrin: effects on gastric acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1990;258: G810.
192. Higashide S, Gomez G, Greeley GH Jr, et al. Glycine-extended gastrin potentiates gastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion in rats. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G220.
193. Chen D, Zhao CM, Dockray GJ, et al. Glycine-extended gastrin synergizes with gastrin 17 to stimulate acid secretion in gastrindeficient mice. Gastroenterology 2000;119:756.
194. Park J, Chiba T, Yamada T. Mechanisms for direct inhibition of canine gastric parietal cells by somatostatin. J Biol Chem 1987; 262:14190.
195. Park J, Del Valle J, Yakabi K, et al. Cross-linking of somatostatin receptors on canine gastric parietal cells [Abstract]. Biomed Res 1988;9(Suppl1):93.
196. Krempels K, Hunyady B, O'Carroll AM, et al. Distribution of somatostatin receptor messenger RNAs in the rat gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 1997;112:1948.
197. Lloyd KC, Wang J, Aurang K, et al. Activation of somatostatin receptor subtype 2 inhibits acid secretion in rats. Am J Physiol 1995;268:G102.
198. Zaki M, Harrington L, McCuen R, et al. Somatostatin receptor subtype 2 mediates inhibition of gastrin and histamine secretion from human, dog, and rat antrum. Gastroenterology 1996;111:119.
199. Martinez V, Curi AP, Torkian B, et al. High basal gastric acid secretion in somatostatin receptor subtype 2 knockout mice. Gastroenterology 1998;114:1125.
200. Prinz C, Sachs G, Walsh JH, et al. The somatostatin receptor subtype on rat enterochromaffinlike cells. Gastroenterology 1994;107: 1067.
201. Soll AH. Specific inhibition by prostaglandins E2 and I2 of histamine-stimulated [14C]aminopyrine accumulation and cyclic adenosine monophosphate generation by isolated canine parietal cells. J Clin Invest 1980;65:1222.
202. Tepperman B, Soper B. Prostaglandin E2-binding sites and cAMP production in porcine fundic mucosa. Am J Physiol 1981;241:313.
203. Beinborn M, Netz S, Staar U, Sewing KF. Enrichment and characterization of specific 3H-PGE2 binding sites in the porcine gastric mucosa. Eur J Pharmacol 1988;147:217.
204. Tepperman BL, Soper BD. Subcellular distribution of [3H]prostaglandin E2 binding sites in porcine gastric mucosa. Prostaglandins 1983;25:425.
205. Seidler U, Beinborn M, Sewing KF. Inhibition of acid formation in rabbit parietal cells by prostaglandins is mediated by the prostaglandin E2 receptor. Gastroenterology 1989;96:314.
206. Ding M, Kinoshita Y, Kishi K, et al. Distribution of prostaglandin

E receptors in the rat gastrointestinal tract. Prostaglandins 1997; 53:199. 207. Dufner MM, Kirchhoff P, Remy C, et al. The calcium-sensing receptor acts as a modulator of gastric acid secretion in freshly isolated human gastric glands. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G1084. 208. Busque SM, Kerstetter JE, Geibel JP, Insogna K. L-type amino acids stimulate gastric acid secretion by activation of the calcium-sensing receptor in parietal cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;89:G664. 209. Beales I, Calam J. Effect of N-alpha-methyl-histamine on acid secretion in isolated cultured rabbit parietal cells: implications for Helicobacter pylori associated gastritis and gastric physiology. Gut 1997;40:14. 210. Yamada T, Soll AH, Park J, et al. Autonomic regulation of somatostatin release: studies with primary cultures of canine fundic mucosal cells. Am J Physiol 1984;247:567. 211. Soll AH, Toomey M. -Adrenergic and prostanoid inhibition of canine fundic mucosal mast cells. Am J Physiol 1989;256:727. 212. Yokotani K, Del Valle J, Park J, et al. Dual stimulatory and inhibitory actions of gastrin in isolated canine parietal cells. Gastroenterology 1989;96:560. 213. Gregory H. Isolation and structure of urogastrone and its relationship to epidermal growth factor. Nature 1975;257:325. 214. Konturek SJ, Chieszowski M, Jaworek J, et al. Effects of epidermal growth factor on gastrointestinal secretion. Am J Physiol 1984; 246:580. 215. Rhodes JA, Tam JP, Finke U, et al. Transforming growth factor  inhibits secretion of gastric acid. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986;83: 3844. 216. Mori S, Morishita Y, Sakai K, et al. Electron microscopic evidence for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R)-like immunoreactivity associated with the basolateral surface of gastric parietal cells. Acta Pathol Jpn 1987;37:1909. 217. Beauchamp RD, Barnard JA, McCutchen CM, et al. Localization of transforming growth factor  and its receptors in gastric mucosal cells. J Clin Invest 1989;84:1017. 218. Shaw GP, Hatt JF, Anderson NG, et al. Action of epidermal growth factor on acid secretion by rat isolated parietal cells. Biochem J 1987;244:699. 219. Lewis JJ, Goldenring JR, Asher VA, et al. Effects of epidermal growth factor on signal transduction in rabbit parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1990;258:476. 220. Lewis JJ, Goldenring JR, Modlin IM, et al. Inhibition of parietal cell H+ secretion by transforming growth factor alpha: a possible autocrine regulatory mechanism. Surgery 1990;108:200. 221. Wang L, Lucey MR, Fras AM, et al. Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor- directly inhibit parietal cell function through a similar mechanism. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1993; 265:308. 222. Beales IL, Calam J. Interleukin 1 beta and tumour necrosis factor alpha inhibit acid secretion in cultured rabbit parietal cells by multiple pathways. Gut 1998;42:227. 223. Yakabi K, Mimura H, Iwabuchi H, et al. Interleukin-8 enhances tetragastrin-stimulated acid secretion in vivo. Dig Dis Sci 1998;43: 2317. 224. Soll AH, Amirian DA, Park J, et al. Cholecystokinin potently releases somatostatin from canine fundic mucosal cells in shortterm culture. Am J Physiol 1985;248:569. 225. Jain DK, Wolfe MM, McGuigan JE. Functional and anatomical relationships between antral gastrin cells and gastrin-releasing peptide neurons. Histochemistry 1985;82:463. 226. Schubert ML, Saffouri B, Walsh JH, et al. Inhibition of neurallymediated gastrin secretion by bombesin anti-serum. Am J Physiol 1985;248:456. 227. Yamada T. Local regulatory actions of gastrointestinal peptides. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:131.

322

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

228. Stryer L, Bourne HR. G proteins: a family of signal transducers. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1986;2:391.
229. Majerus PW, Connolly TM, Deckmyn H, et al. The metabolism of phosphoinositide-derived messenger molecules. Science 1986;234: 1519.
230. Berridge MJ, Irvine RF. Inositol triphosphate, a novel second messenger in cellular signal transduction. Nature 1984;312:315.
231. Nishizuka Y. The molecular heterogeneity of protein kinase C and its implications for cellular regulation. Nature 1988;334:661.
232. Del Valle J, Wang L, Gantz I, et al. Characterization of H2 histamine receptor: linkage to both adenylate cyclase and [Ca2+]i signaling systems. Am Physiol 1992;263:967.
233. Soll AH, Wollin A. Histamine and cyclic AMP in isolated canine parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1979;237:444.
234. Chew CS. Parietal cell protein kinases. J Biol Chem 1985;260: 7540.
235. Chew CS, Brown MR. Histamine increases phosphorylation of 27- and 40-kDa parietal cell proteins. Am J Physiol 1987;253:823.
236. Negulescu PA, Machen TE. Release and reloading of intracellular Ca stores after cholinergic stimulation of the parietal cell. Am J Physiol 1988;254:498.
237. Muallem S, Sachs G. Ca2+ metabolism during cholinergic stimulation of acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1985;248:216.
238. Del Valle J, Tsunoda Y, Williams JA, et al. Regulation of [Ca2+]i via secretagogue stimulation of isolated canine parietal cells. Gastroenterology 1989;95:118.
239. Takeda H, Yamada T, Del Valle J. Differential stimulation of Ca2+ influx into canine gastric parietal cells by carbachol and gastrin. Gastroenterology 1993;104:204.
240. Geibel J, Abraham R, Modlin I, et al. Gastrin-stimulated changes in Ca2+ concentration in parietal cells depends on adenosine 3', 5'-cyclic monophosphate levels. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1060.
241. Athmann C, Zeng N, Scott DR, et al. Regulation of parietal cell calcium signaling in gastric glands. Am J Physiol 2000;279:G1048.
242. Wilkes JM, Kajimura M, Scott DR, et al. Muscarinic responses of gastric parietal cells. J Membr Biol 1991;122:97.
243. Chew CS, Petropolous AC. Thapsigargin potentiates histaminestimulated HCl secretion in gastric parietal cells but does not mimic cholinergic responses. Cell Regul 1991;2:27.
244. Tsunoda Y, Funasaka M, Modlin IM, et al. An inhibitor of Ca2+/ calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, KN-62, inhibits cholinergic-stimulated parietal cell secretion. Am J Physiol 1992;262: 118.
245. Parente JA Jr, Goldenring JR, Petropoulos AC, et al. Purification, cloning, and expression of a novel, endogenous, calcium-sensitive, 28-kDa phosphoprotein. J Biol Chem 1996;271:20096.
246. Negulescu PA, Munck B, Machen TE. Volume-sensitive Ca influx and release from intracellular pools in gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1992;263:584.
247. Chiba T, Fisher SK, Agranoff BW, et al. Autoregulation of muscarinic and gastrin receptors on gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1989;256:G356.
248. McKenna JP, Hanson PJ. Inhibition by Ro 31-8220 of acid secretory activity induced by carbachol indicates a stimulatory role for protein kinase C in the action of muscarinic agonists on isolated rat parietal cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1993;46:583.
249. Chew CS, Zou CJ, Parente JA Jr. Ca2+-independent protein kinase C isoforms may modulate parietal cell HCl secretion. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G246.
250. Dekker LV, Parker PJ. Protein kinase C: a question of specificity. Trends Biochem Sci 1994;19:73.
251. Wang L, Wilson EJ, Osburn J, Del Valle J. Epidermal growth factor inhibits carbachol-stimulated canine parietal cell function via protein kinase C. Gastroenterology 1996;110:469.
252. Valverde AM, Sinnett-Smith J, Van Lint J, et al. Molecular cloning and characterization of protein kinase D: a target for diacylglycerol and phorbol esters with a distinctive catalytic domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:8572.

253. Van Lint JV, Sinnett-Smith J, Rozengurt E. Expression and characterization of PKD, a phorbol ester and diacylglycerol-stimulated serine protein kinase. J Biol Chem 1995;270:1455.
254. Nakamura K, Zhou CJ, Parente J, Chew CS. Parietal cell MAP kinases: multiple activation pathways. Am J Physiol 1996;271: G640.
255. Chew CS, Nakamura K, Petropoulos AC. Multiple actions of epidermal growth factor and TGF- on rabbit gastric parietal cell function. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G818.
256. Takeuchi Y, Yamada J, Yamada T, et al. Functional role of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases in gastric acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1997;273:G1263.
257. Nagahara A, Wang L, Del Valle J, et al. Regulation of c-Jun NH2terminal kinases in isolated canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1998;38:G740.
258. Pausawasdi N, Ramamoorthy S, Stepan V, et al. Regulation and function of p38 protein kinase in isolated canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 2000;278:G24.
259. Widmann C, Gibson S, Jarpe MB, et al. Mitogen-activated protein kinase: conservation of a three-kinase module from yeast to human. Physiol Rev 1999;79:143.
260. Ullrich A, Schlessinger J. Signal transduction by receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. Cell 1990;61:203.
261. Davis JR. The mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway. J Biol Chem 1993;268:14553.
262. Cobb MH, Goldsmith EJ. How MAP kinases are regulated. J Biol Chem 1995;270:14843.
263. Marais R, Wynne J, Treisman R. The SRF accessory protein Elk-1 contains a growth factor-regulated transcriptional activation domain. Cell 1993;73:381.
264. Treisman R. Journey to the surface of the cell: fos regulation and the SRE. EMBO J 1995;14:4905.
265. Alessi DR, Cuenda A, Cohen P, et al. PD 098059 is a specific inhibitor of the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in vitro and in vivo. J Biol Chem 1995;270:27489.
266. Tsunoda Y, Modlin IM, Goldenring JR. Tyrosine kinase activities in the modulation of stimulated parietal cell acid secretion. Am J Physiol 1993;264:G351.
267. Kaise M, Muraoka A, Yamada J, et al. Epidermal growth factor induces H+, K+-ATPase -subunit gene expression through an element homologous to the 3' half-site of the c-fos serum response element. J Biol Chem 1995;270:18637.
268. Kolch W, Heidecker G, Kochs G, et al. Protein kinase C activates RAF-1 by direct phosphorylation. Nature 1993;364:249.
269. Yamauchi J, Nagao M, Kaziro Y, et al. Activation of p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase by signaling through G protein-coupled receptors. J Biol Chem 1997;272:27771.
270. Schäfer C, Ross SE, Bragado MJ, et al. A role for the p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase/HSP 27 pathway in cholecystokinininduced changes in the actin cytoskeleton in rat pancreatic acini. J Biol Chem 1998;273:24173.
271. Zetser A, Gredinger E, Bengal E. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway promotes skeletal muscle differentiation. J Biol Chem 1999;274:5193.
272. Lee JC, Laydon JT, McDonnell PC, et al. A protein kinase involved in the regulation of inflammatory cytokine biosynthesis. Nature 1994;372:739.
273. Kasugai K, Watson SJ, Flavell RA, et al. Crucial rolel of c-Jun NH2terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) in cold-restraint stress-induced gastric lesions in mice. Dig Dis Sci 2007;52:1698.
274. Cantley LC, Neel BG. New insights into tumor suppression: PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96: 4240.
275. Chan TO, Rittenhouse SE, Tsichlis PN. AKT/PKB and other D3 phosphoinositide-regulated kinases: kinases activation by phosphoinositide-dependent phosphorylation. Annu Rev Biochem 1999;68:965.

323

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

276. Wang X, McCullough KD, Franke TF, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor-dependent Akt activation by oxidative stress enhances cell survival. J Biol Chem 2000;275:14624.
277. Okano J, Gaslightwala I, Birnbaum MJ, et al. Akt/protein B isoforms are differentially regulated by epidermal growth factor stimulation. J Biol Chem 2000;275:30934.
278. Jiang BH, Aoki M, Zheng JZ, et al. Myogenic signaling of phosphoinositol 3-kinase requires the serine-threonine kinase Akt/protein kinase B. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:2077.
279. Kohn AD, Summers SA, Birnbaum MJ, et al. Expression of a constitutively active Akt Ser/Thr kinase in 3T3-L1 adipocytes stimulates glucose uptake and glucose transporter 4 translocation. J Biol Chem 1996;271:31372.
280. Alessi DR, Andjelkovic M, Caudwell B, et al. Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B by insulin and IGF-1. EMBO J 1996;15:6541.
281. Franke TF, Yang SI, Chan TO, et al. The protein kinase encoded by the Akt proto-oncogene is a target of the PDGF-activated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Cell 1996;81:727.
282. Todisco A, Pausawasdi N, Ramamoorthy S, et al. Functional role of protein kinase B/Akt in gastric acid secretion. J Biol Chem 2001;276:46436.
283. Ramalho-Santos M, Melton DA, McMahon AP. Hedgehog signals regulate multiple aspects of gastrointestinal development. Development 2000;127:2763.
284. Lees C, Howie S, Sartor RB, Satsangi J. The hedgehog signalling pathway in the gastrointestinal tract: implications for development, homeostasis, and disease. Gastroenterology 2005;129:1696.
285. van den Brink, GR, Hardwick C, Nielsen C, et al. Sonic hedgehog expression correlates with fundic gland differentiation in the adult gastrointestinal tract. Gut 2002;51:628.
286. Ingham PW, McMahon AP. Hedgehog signaling in animal development: paradigms and principles. Genes Dev 2001;15:3059.
287. Sasaki H, Nishizaki Y, Hui C, et al. Regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 activities by an amino-terminal repression domain: implication of Gli2 and Gli3 as primary mediators of Shh signaling. Development 1999;126:3915.
288. Park HL, Bai C, Platt KA, et al. Mouse Gli1 mutants are viable but have defects in SHH signaling in combination with a Gli2 mutation. Development 2000;127:1593.
289. Mo R, Freer AM, Zinyk DL, et al. Specific and redundant functions of Gli2 and Gli3 zinc finger genes in skeletal patterning and development. Development 1997;124:113.
290. Motoyama J, Liu J, Mo R, et al. Hui. Essential function of Gli2 and Gli3 in the formation of lung, trachea and oesophagus. Nat Genet 1998;20:54.
291. Hardcastle Z, Mo R, Hui CC, Sharpe PT. The Shh signalling pathway in tooth development: defects in Gli2 and Gli3 mutants. Development 1998;125:2803.
292. Matise MP, Epstein DJ, Park HL, et al. Gli2 is required for induction of floor plate and adjacent cells, but not most ventral neurons in the mouse central nervous system. Development 1998;125:2759.
293. Ding Q, Motoyama J, Gasca S, et al. Diminished Sonic hedgehog signaling and lack of floor plate differentiation in Gli2 mutant mice. Development 1998;125:2533.
294. Wrana JL. Regulation of Smad activity. Cell 2000;100:189. 295. Rosendahl A, Pardali E, Speletas M, et al. Activation of bone mor-
phogenetic protein/Smad signaling in bronchial epithelial cells during airway inflammation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2002;27:160. 296. Haramis AP, Begthel H, van den Born M, et al. De novo crypt formation and juvenile polyposis on BMP inhibition in mouse intestine. Science 2004;303:1684. 297. Nitsche H, Ramamoorthy S, Sareban M, et al. Functional role of bone morphogenetic protein-4 in isolated canine parietal cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007;293:G607. 298. Kaestner KH, Silberg DG, Traber PG, Schutz G. The mesenchymal winged helix transcription factor Fkh6 is required for the control of gastrointestinal proliferation and differentiation. Genes Dev 1997;11:1583.

299. Berg A, Redéen S, Grenegård M, et al. Nitric oxide inhibits gastric acid secretion by increasing intraparietal cell levels of cGMP in isolated human gastric glands. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;289:G1061.
300. Reyl FJ, Lewin MJ. Intracellular receptor for somatostatin in gastric mucosal cells: decomposition and reconstitution of somatostatin-stimulated phosphoprotein phosphatases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982;79:978.
301. Hierowski MT, Liebow C, du Sapin K, et al. Stimulation by somatostatin of dephosphorylation of membrane proteins in pancreatic cancer MIA PaCa-2 cell line. FEBS Lett 1985;179:252.
302. Green R, Shields D. Somatostatin discriminates between the intracellular pathways of secretory and membrane proteins. J Cell Biol 1984;99:97.
303. Todisco A, Campbell V, Dickinson CJ, et al. Molecular basis for somatostatin action: inhibition of c-fos expression and AP-1 binding. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G245.
304. Ito S, Schofield GC. Studies on the depletion and accumulation of microvilli and changes in the tubulovesicular compartment of mouse parietal cells in relation to gastric acid secretion. J Cell Biol 1974;63:364.
305. Vial JD, Garrido J. Actin-like filaments and membrane rearrangement in oxyntic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1976;73:4032.
306. Smolka A, Helander HF, Sachs G. Monoclonal antibodies against the gastric H++ K+ ATPase. Am J Physiol 1983;245:589.
307. Forte JG, Black JA, Forte TM, et al. Ultrastructural changes related to functional activity in gastric oxyntic cells. Am J Physiol 1981; 241:349.
308. Campbell VW, Del Valle J, Hawn M, et al. Carbonic anhydrase II gene expression in isolated canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1989;256:631.
309. Campbell VW, Yamada T. Acid secretagogue-induced stimulation of gastric parietal cell gene expression. J Biol Chem 1989;264:11381.
310. Campbell VW, Yamada T. Effect of omeprazole on gene expression in canine gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1991;260:434.
311. Muraoka A, Kaise M, Guo Y, et al. Canine H+-K+-ATPase -subunit gene promoter: studies with canine parietal cells in primary culture. Am J Physiol 1996;271:1104.
312. Shigehiko T, Wang XH, Maeda M, et al. Gastric DNA-binding proteins recognize upstream sequence motifs of parietal cell-specific genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:10876.
313. Maeda M. Gastric proton pump (H+/K+-ATPase): structure and gene regulation through GATA DNA-binding protein(s). J Biochem 1994;115:6.
314. Jain RN, Brunkan CS, Chew CS, Samuelson LC. Gene expression profiling of gastrin target genes in parietal cells. Physiol Genomics 2006;24:124.
315. Grosse R, Spitzer E, Kupriyanov V, et al. Coordinate interplay between (Na++ K+)-ATPase and creatine phosphokinase optimizes (Na+/K+)-antiport across the membrane of vesicles formed from the plasma membrane of cardiac muscle cell. Biochim Biophys Acta 1980;603:142.
316. Korge P, Campbell KB. Local ATP regeneration is important for sarcoplasmic reticulum. Am J Physiol 1994;267:C357.
317. Sistermans EA, de Kok YJ, Peters W, et al. Tissue- and cell-specific distribution of creatine kinase B: a new and highly specific monoclonal antibody for use in immunohistochemistry. Cell Tissue Res 1995;280:435.
318. Sistermans EA, Klaasen CH, Peters W, et al. Co-localization and functional coupling of creatine kinase B and gastric H+/K+-ATPase on the apical membrane and the tubulovesicular system of parietal cells. Biochem J 1995;311:445.
319. Forte JG, Wolosin JM. HCl secretion by the gastric oxyntic cell. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:853.
320. Culp DJ, Forte JG. An enriched preparation of basolateral plasma membranes from gastric glandular cells. J Membr Biol 1981;59: 135.

324

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

321. Kasbekar DK, Gordon GS. Effects of colchicine and vinblastine on in vitro gastric secretion. Am J Physiol 1979;236:550.
322. Forte JG, Ly B, Rong Q, et al. State of actin in gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1998;274:C97.
323. Ammar DA, Nguyen PN, Forte JG. Functionally distinct pools of actin in secretory cells. Am J Physiol 2001;281:C407.
324. Hanzel D, Reggio H, Bretscher A, et al. The secretion-stimulated 80K phosphoprotein of parietal cells is ezrin, and has properties of a membrane cytoskeletal linker in the induced apical microvilli. EMBO J 1991;10:2363.
325. Yao X, Chaponnier C, Gabbiani G, et al. Polarized distribution of actin isoforms in gastric parietal cells. Mol Biol Cell 1995;6:541.
326. Yao X, Cheng L, Forte JG. Biochemical characterization of ezrinactin interaction. J Biol Chem 1996;271:7224.
327. Wagner AC, Williams JA. Low molecular weight GTP-binding proteins: molecular switches regulating diverse cellular functions. Am J Physiol 1994;266:G1.
328. Tang LH, Stoch SA, Modlin IM, et al. Identification of rab2 as a tubulovesicle-membrane-associated protein in rabbit gastric parietal cells. Biochem J 1992;285:715.
329. Goldenring JR, Shen KR, Vaughan HD, et al. Identification of a small GTP-binding protein, rab 25, expressed in the gastrointestinal mucosa, kidney, and lung. J Biol Chem 1993;268:18419.
330. Goldenring JR, Soroka CJ, Shen KR, et al. Enrichment of rab11, a small GTP-binding protein, in gastric parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G187.
331. Goldenring JR, Smith J, Vaughan HD, et al. Rab 11 is an apically located small GTP-binding protein in epithelial tissues. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G515.
332. Calhoun BC, Goldenring JR. Two Rab proteins, vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP-2) and secretory carrier membrane proteins (SCAMPs), are present on immunoisolated parietal cell tubulovesicles. Biochem J 1997;325:559.
333. Duman JG, Tyagarajan K, Kolsi MS, et al. Expression of rab11a N124I in gastric parietal cells inhibits stimulatory recruitment of the H+-K+-ATPase. Am J Physiol 1999;277:C361.
334. Bennett MK, Scheller RH. The molecular machinery for secretion is conserved from yeast to neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:2559.
335. Ferro-Novick S, Jahn R. Vesicle fusion from yeast to man. Nature 1994;370:191.
336. Sollner T, Whiteheart SW, Brunner M, et al. SNAP receptors implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion. Nature 1993;362:318.
337. Walch-Solimena C, Blasi J, Edelmann L, et al. The t-SNAREs syntaxin 1 and SNAP-25 are present on organelles that participate in synaptic vesicle recycling. J Cell Biol 1995;128:637.
338. Festy F, Robert JC, Brasseur R, et al. Interaction between the Nterminal domain of gastric H,K-ATPase and the spectrin binding domain of ankyrin III. J Biol Chem 2001;276:7721.
339. Ganser AL, Forte JG. K+-stimulated ATPase in purified microsome of bullfrog oxyntic cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1973;307:169.
340. Wolosin JM, Forte JG. Stimulation of oxyntic cell triggers K+ and Cl- conductances in apical (H++ K+)-ATPase membrane. Am J Physiol 1984;246:537.
341. Sachs G, Chang HH, Rabon E, et al. A non-electrogenic H+ pump in plasma membranes of hog stomach. J Biol Chem 1976;251: 7690.
342. Schackmann RA, Schwartz A, Saccomani G, et al. Cation transport by gastric H+: K+ ATPase. J Membr Biol 1977;32:361.
343. Stuart-Tilley A, Sardet C, Pouyssegur J, et al. Immunolocalization of anion exchanger AE2 and cation exchanger NHE-1 in distinct adjacent cells of gastric mucosa. Am J Physiol 1994;266:C559.
344. Orlowski J, Kandasamy RA, Shull GE. Molecular cloning of putative members of the Na/H exchanger gene family. J Biol Chem 1992;267:9331.
345. Townsley MC, Machen TE. Na-HCO3 cotransport in rabbit parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1989;257:G350.
346. Sachs G. The gastric proton pump: the H+,K+-ATPase. In: Johnson

LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:865. 347. Shull GE, Lingrel JB. Molecular cloning of the rat stomach (H++ K+)ATPase. J Biol Chem 1986;261:16788. 348. Hershey SJ, Sachs G. Gastric acid secretion. Physiol Rev 1995;75: 155. 349. Maeda M, Ishizaki J, Futal M. cDNA cloning and sequence determination of pig gastric (H++ K+)-ATPase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988;157:203. 350. Bamberg K, Sachs G. cDNA cloning and membrane topology of the rabbit gastric H+/K+-ATPase alpha-subunit. Biochim Biophys Acta 1992;1131:69. 351. Maeda M, Oshiman K, Tamura S, et al. Human gastric (H++ K+)ATPase gene: similarity to (Na++ K+)-ATPase genes in exon/inton organization but difference in control region. J Biol Chem 1990; 265:9027. 352. Besancon M, Shin JM, Mercier F, et al. Membrane topology and omeprazole labeling of the gastric H+,K+-adenosine-triphosphatase. Biochemistry 1993;32:2345. 353. Sachs G, Shin JM, Besancon M, et al. The continuing development of gastric acid pump inhibitors. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1993;7(Suppl1):4. 354. Shin JM, Besancon M, Simon A, et al. The site of action of pantoprazole in the gastric H+/K+-ATPase. Biochim Biophys Acta 1993;1148:223. 355. Reuben MA, Lasater LS, Sachs G. Characterization of a beta subunit of the gastric H+/K+-transporting ATPase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990;87:6767. 356. Canfield VA, Okamoto CT, Chow D, et al. Cloning of the H, KATPase beta subunit: tissue-specific expression, chromosomal assignment, and relationship to Na, K-ATPase beta subunits. J Biol Chem 1990;265:19878. 357. Shull GE. cDNA cloning of the beta-subunit of the rat gastric H, K-ATPase. J Biol Chem 1990;265:12123. 358. Maeda M, Oshiman K, Tamura S, et al. The rat H+/K+-ATPase beta subunit gene and recognition of its control region by gastric DNA binding protein. J Biol Chem 1991;266:21584. 359. Toh BH, Gleeson PA, Simpson RH, et al. The 60- to 90-kDa parietal cell autoantigen associated with autoimmune gastritis is a beta subunit of the gastric H+/K+-ATPase (proton pump). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990;87:6418. 360. Canfield VA, Levenson R. Structural organization and transcription of the mouse gastric H+, K+-ATPase beta subunit gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:8247. 361. Ma JY, Song YH, Sjostrand SE, et al. cDNA cloning of the betasubunit of the human gastric H, K-ATPase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991;180:39. 362. Courtois-Coutry N, Roush D, Rajendran V, et al. A tyrosine-based signal targets H/K-ATPase to a regulated compartment and is required for the cessation of gastric acid secretion. Cell 1997; 90:501. 363. Crothers JM Jr, Chow DC, Scalley ML, et al. In vivo trafficking of nascent H+-K+-ATPase in rabbit parietal cells. Am J Physiol 1995;269:G883. 364. Chuang C, Tanner M, Chen MCY, et al. Gastrin induction of histamine release from primary cultures of canine oxyntic mucosal cells. Am J Physiol 1992;263:460. 365. Prinz C, Kajimura M, Scott DR, et al. Histamine secretion from rat enterochramaffin-like cells. Gastroenterology 1993;105:449. 366. Prinz C, Scott DR, Hurwitz D, et al. Gastrin effects on isolated rat enterochromaffin-like cells in primary culture. Am J Physiol 1994;267:G663. 367. Zeng N, Bayle DB, Walsh JH, et al. Localization of PACAP receptor on rat fundic ECL cells and D cells. Gastroenterology 1996;110: A1131. 368. Zeng N, Athmann C, Kang T, et al. PACAP type I receptor activation regulates ECL cells and gastric acid secretion. J Clin Invest 1999;104:1383.

325

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

369. Prinz C, Sachs G, Walsh J, et al. The somatostatin receptor subtype on rat enterochromaffinlike cells. Gastroenterology 1994;107: 1067.
370. Hakanson R, Boettcher G, Ekblad F, et al. Histamine in endocrine cells in the stomach. Histochemistry 1986;86:5.
371. Chen D, Monstein HJ, Nylander AG, et al. Acute responses of rat stomach ECL cells to gastrin: secretory activation and adaptation. Gastroenterology 1994;107:18.
372. Hocker M, Zhang Z, Fenstermacher DA, et al. Rat histidine carboxylase promoter is regulated by gastrin through a protein kinase C pathway. Am J Physiol 1996;270:G619.
373. Hocker M, Zhang Z, Merchant JL, et al. Gastrin regulates the human histidine decarboxylase promoter through an AP-1-dependent mechanism. Am J Physiol 1997;272:G822.
374. Boettcher G, Hakanson R, Nilsson G, et al. Effects of long-term hypergastrinemia on the ultra-structure of enterochromaffin-like cells in the stomach of the rat, hamster, and guinea pig. Cell Tissue Rev 1989;256:247.
375. Tielemanns Y, Willems G, Sundler F, et al. Self replication of enterochromaffin-like cells in the mouse stomach. Digestion 1989;35:23.
376. Tielemanns Y, Hakanson R, Sundler F, et al. Proliferation of enterochromaffin-like cells in omeprazole treated hypergastrinemic rats. Gastroenterology 1989;96:723.
377. Tielemanns Y, Axelson J, Sundler F, et al. Serum gastrin affects the self-replication of enterochromaffin-like cells in the rat stomach. Gut 1990;31:274.
378. Ryberg B, Tielemanns Y, Axelson J, et al. Gastrin stimulates the self replication of enterochromaffin like cells in the rat stomach: effects of omeprazole, ranitidine, and gastrin-17 in antrectomized rats. Gastroenterology 1990;99:935.
379. Lee H, Hakanson R, Karlsson A, et al. Lansoprazole and omeprazole have similar effects on plasma gastrin levels, enterochromaffinlike cells, gastrin cells and somatostatin cells in the rat stomach. Digestion 1992;51:125.
380. Hakanson R, Tielemanns Y, Chen D, et al. Time-dependent changes in enterochromaffinlike cell kinetics in stomach of hypergastrinemic rats. Gastroenterology 1993;105:15.
381. Modlin IM, Tang LH. The gastric enterochromaffin-like cell: an enigmatic cellular link. Gastroenterology 1996;111:783.
382. Barrett P, Hobbs RC, et al. Endocrine cells of the human gastrointestinal tract have no proliferative capacity. Histochem J 1995;27:482.
383. Stechschulte DJ Jr, Morris DC, Jilka RL, et al. Impaired gastric acid secretion in mast cell-deficient mice. Am J Physiol 1990;259:41.
384. Langley JN, Edkins JS. Pepsinogen and pepsin. J Physiol (Lond) 1886;7:371.
385. Hersey SJ. Pepsinogen Secretion. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:947.
386. Szecsi PB. The aspartic proteases. Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl 1992;52:5.
387. Samloff IM. Pepsinogens, pepsins, and pepsin inhibitors. Gastroenterology 1971;60:586.
388. Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Mizukami Y, et al. Primary structure of human pepsinogen gene. J Biol Chem 1983;258:5306.
389. Nakai H, Byers MG, Shows TB, et al. Assignment of the pepsinogen gene complex (PGA) to human chromosome region 11q13 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1986;43:215.
390. Zelle B, Geurts van Kessel A, de Wit J, et al. Assignment of human pepsinogen A locus to the q12-pter region of chromosome 11. Hum Genet 1985;70:337.
391. Taggart RT, Mohanda TK, Shows TB, et al. Variable numbers of pepsinogen genes are located in the centromeric region of human chromosome 11 and determine the high-frequency electrophoretic polymorphism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985;82:6240.
392. Taggart RT, Cass LG, Mohandas TK, et al. Human pepsinogen C (progastricsin): isolation of cDNA clones, localization to chromosome

6, and sequence homology with pepsinogen A. J Biol Chem 1989; 264:375. 393. Sanders MJ, Amirian DA, Ayalon A, et al. Regulation of pepsinogen release from canine chief cells in primary monolayer culture. Am J Physiol 1983;245:641. 394. Hirschowitz BI, Fong J, Molina E. Effects of pirenzepine and atropine on vagal and cholinergic gastric secretions and gastrin release and on heart rate in the dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1983;225:263. 395. Skak-Nielsen T, Holst JJ, Nielsen OV. Role of gastrin-releasing peptide in the neural control of pepsinogen secretion from the pig stomach. Gastroenterology 1988;95:1216. 396. Koetz HR, Hersey SJ, Sachs G, et al. Pepsinogen release from isolated gastric glands. Am J Physiol 1982;243:218. 397. Kasbekar DK, Jensen RT, Gardner JD. Pepsinogen secretion from dispersed glands from rabbit stomach. Am J Physiol 1983;244:392. 398. Berstad A, Petersen H. Dose-response relationship of the effect of secretin on acid and pepsin secretion in man. Scand J Gastroenterol 1970;5:647. 399. Raufman J-P, Kasbekar DK, Jensen RT, et al. Potentiation of pepsinogen secretion from dispersed glands from rat stomach. Am J Physiol 1983;245:525. 400. Raufman JP. Gastric chief cells: receptors and signal-transduction mechanisms. Gastroenterology 1992;102:699. 401. Raffaniello RD, Raufman JP. Carbachol activates protein kinase C in dispersed gastric chief cells. Biochem J 1994;300:21. 402. Kitsukawa Y, Felley C, Metz DC, et al. Thapsigargin defines roles of Ca2+ in initial, sustained, and potentiated stimulation of pepsinogen secretion. Am J Physiol 1994;29:613. 403. Okayama N, Itoh M, Joh T, et al. Mediation of pepsinogen secretion from guinea pig chief cells by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Biochim Biophys Acta 1995;1268:123. 404. Shenolikar S. Protein serine/threonine phosphatases: new avenues for cell regulation. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1994;10:55. 405. Wera S, Hemmings BA. Serine/threonine protein phosphatases. Biochem J 1995;311:17. 406. Raufman JP, Lin J, Raffaniello RD. Calcineurin mediates calciuminduced potentiation of adenylyl cyclase activity in dispersed chief cells from guinea pig stomach. J Biol Chem 1996;33:19877. 407. Raufman JP, Malhotra R, Raffaniello RD. Regulation of calciuminduced exocytosis from gastric chief cells by protein phosphatase2B (calcineurin). Biochim Biophys Acta 1997;1357:73. 408. Singh G, Raffaniello RD, Eng J, et al. Actions of Rab3 effector domain peptides in chief cells from guinea pig stomach. Am J Physiol 1995;269:400. 409. Raffaniello R, Lin J, Raufman JP. Actions and expression of RABGDP dissociation inhibitor in dispersed chief cells from guinea pig stomach. Biochem Biophys Res Comm. 1996;225:232. 410. Sasaki T, Kikuchi A, Araki S, et al. Purification and characterization from bovine brain cytosol of a protein that inhibits the dissociation of GDP from and the subsequent binding of GTP to smg p25A, a ras p21-like GTP-binding protein. J Biol Chem 1990;4:2333. 411. Ullrich O, Stenmark H, Alexandrov K, et al. Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor as a general regulator for the membrane association of Rab proteins. J Biol Chem 1993;24:18143. 412. Elazar Z, Mayer T, Rothman JE. Removal of Rab GTP-binding proteins from Golgi membranes by GDP dissociation inhibitor inhibits inter-cisternal transport in the Golgi stacks. J Biol Chem 1994;269:794. 413. Raufman JP, Malhotra R, Xie Q, et al. Expression and phosphorylation of a MARCKS-like protein in gastric chief cells: further evidence for modulation of pepsinogen secretion by interaction of Ca2+/calmodulin with protein kinase C. J Cell Biochem 1997; 64:514. 414. Blackshear PJ. The MARCKS family of cellular protein kinase C substrates. J Biol Chem 1993;268:1501. 415. Fiorucci S, Distrutti E, Santucci L, et al. Leukotrienes stimulate pepsinogen secretion from guinea pig gastric chief cells by a nitric oxide-dependent pathway. 1995;108:1709.

326

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

416. Fiorucci S, Distrutti E, Chiorean M, et al. Nitric oxide modulates pepsinogen secretion induced by calcium-mediated agonist in guinea pig gastric chief cells. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1214.
417. Samloff IM, Liebman WM. Radioimmunoassay of group I pepsinogens in serum. Gastroenterology 1984;66:494.
418. Samloff IM, Liebman WM. Purification and immunochemical characterization of group II pepsinogens in human seminal fluid. Clin Exp Immunol 1972;11:405.
419. Azuma T, Teramae N, Hayakumo T, et al. Pepsinogen C gene polymorphisms associated with gastric body ulcer. Gut 1993;34:450.
420. Allen A, Garner A. Mucus and bicarbonate secretion in the stomach and their possible role in mucosal protection. Gut 1980;21:249.
421. Bhaskar KR, Garik P, Turner BS, et al. Viscous fingering of HCl through gastric mucin. Nature 1992;360:458.
422. Neutra MR, Forstner JF. Gastrointestinal mucus: synthesis, secretion, and function. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:975.
423. Carlstedt I, Sheehan JK. Macromolecular properties and polymeric structure of mucus glycoproteins. In: Nugent J, O'Conner M (eds). Mucus and Mucosa. Ciba Foundation Symposium 109. London: Pitman, 1984:157.
424. Allen A. Structure and function of gastrointestinal mucus. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1981:617.
425. Gendler SJ, Buchell JM, Duhig T, et al. Cloning of partial cDNA encoding differentiation and tumor-associated mucin glycoproteins expressed by human mammary epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987;84:6060.
426. Gendler S, Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Duhig T, et al. A highly immunogenic region of a human polymorphic epithelial mucin expressed by carcinomas is made up of tandem repeats. J Biol Chem 1988;263:12820.
427. Gum JR, Hicks JW, Lagace RE, et al. Molecular cloning of rat intestinal mucin: lack of conservation between mammalian species. J Biol Chem 1991;266:22733.
428. Toribara NW, Roberton AM, Ho SB, et al. Human gastric mucin: identification of a unique species by expression cloning. J Biol Chem 1993;268:5879.
429. Timpte CS, Eckhardt AE, Abernethy JL, et al. Porcine submaxillary gland apomucin contains tandemly repeated, identical sequences of 81 residues. J Biol Chem 1988;263:1081.
430. Porchet N, VanCong N, Dufosse J, et al. Molecular cloning and chromosomal localization of a novel human tracheobronchial mucin cDNA containing tandemly repeated sequences of 48 base pairs. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991;175:414.
431. Gum JR, Byrd JC, Hicks JW, et al. Molecular cloning of human intestinal cloning of human intestinal mucin cDNAs. J Biol Chem 1989;264:6480.
432. Gum JR, Hicks JW, Swallow DM, et al. Molecular cloning of cDNAs derived from a novel human intestinal mucin gene. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990;171:407.
433. Schachter H. Glycoprotein biosynthesis. In: Horiwitz MI, Pigman W (eds). The Glycoconjugate, Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press, 1978:87.
434. Fouad FM, Waldon-Edward D. Isolation and characterization of human and canine gastric mucosal glycoproteins and their degradation by proteases and acid hydrolases. Hoppe Seylers Z Physiol Chem 1980;361:703.
435. Neutra MR, Leblond CP. Radioautographic comparison of the uptake of galactose-3H and glucose-3H in the Golgi region of various cells secreting glycoproteins or mucopolysaccharides. J Cell Biol 1966;30:137.
436. Zalewsky CA, Moody FG, Allen M, et al. Stimulation of canine gastric mucus secretion with intra-arterial acetylcholine chloride. Gastroenterology 1983;85:1067.
437. Neutra MR, Phillips TH, Phillips TE. Regulation of intestinal goblet cells in situ, in mucosal explants and in the isolated epithelium. In: Nugent J, O'Conner M (eds). Mucus and Mucosa. Ciba Foundation Symposium 109. London: Pitman 1984:20.

438. Qureshi R, Forstner GC, Forstner JF. Radioimmunoassay of human intestinal goblet cell mucin. J Clin Invest 1979;64:1149.
439. Vagne M, Perret G. Regulation of gastric mucus secretion. Scand J Gastroenterol 1976;42:63.
440. Andre C, Lambert R, Descos F. Stimulation of gastric mucous secretions in man by secretin. Digestion 1972;7:284.
441. LaMont JT, Ventola AS, Maull EA, et al. Cysteamine and prostaglandin F2 stimulate rat gastric mucin release. Gastroenterology 1983;84:306.
442. Seidler U, Knafla K, Rownatzki R, et al. Effects of endogenous and exogenous prostaglandins on glycoprotein synthesis and secretion in isolated rabbit gastric mucosa. Gastroenterology 1988;95:945.
443. Kauffman G, Reeve JJ, Grossman MI. Gastric bicarbonate secretion: effect of topical and intravenous 16,16-dimethyl-prostaglandin E2. Am J Physiol 1980;239:44.
444. Boland CR, Kraus ER, Scheiman JM, et al. Characterization of mucous cell synthetic functions in a new primary canine gastric mucous cell culture system. Am J Physiol 1990;258:774.
445. Scheiman JM, Kraus ER, Bonnville LA, et al. Synthesis and prostaglandin E2-induced secretion of surfactant phospholipid by isolated gastric mucous cells. Gastroenterology 1991;100:1232.
446. Scheiman JM, Kraus ER, Boland CR. Regulation of canine gastric mucin synthesis and phospholipid secretion by acid secretagogues. Gastroenterology 1992;103:1841.
447. Ichikawa T, Ishihara K, Kusakabe T, et al. Distinct effects of tetragastrin, histamine, and CCh on rat gastric mucin synthesis and contribution of NO. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G138.
448. Seidler U, Pfeiffer A. Inositol phosphate formation and [Ca2+]i in secretagogue-stimulated rabbit gastric mucous cells. Am J Physiol 1991;260:G133.
449. Roomi N, Laburthe J, Fleming N, et al. Cholera-induced mucin secretion from rat intestine: lack of effect of cAMP, cycloheximide, VIP and colchicine. Am J Physiol 1984;247:140.
450. Rutten MJ, Ito S. Ca2+-ionophore stimulates mucus release from in vitro guinea pig gastric mucosa [Abstract]. Fed Proc 1985;44:618.
451. Kawabata A, Kinoshita M, Nishikawa H, et al. The proteaseactivated receptor-2 agonist induces gastric mucus secretion and mucosal cytoprotection. J Clin Invest 2001;107:1443.
452. Flemstrom G. Gastric and duodenal mucosal bicarbonate secretion. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:1011.
453. Sugai N, Ito S. Carbonic anhydrase, ultrastructural localization in the mouse gastric mucosa and improvements in the technique. J Histochem Cytochem 1980;6:511.
454. Flemstrom G. Cl- dependence of HCO3- transport in frog gastric mucosa. Ups J Med Sci 1980;85:303.
455. Mattsson H, Carlsson K, Carlsson E. Omeprazole is devoid of effect on alkaline secretion in isolated guinea pig antral mucosa. In: Allen A, Flemstrom G, Garner A, et al. (eds). Mechanisms of Mucosal Protection in the Upper Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press, 1984:141.
456. Kuo YJ, Shanbour LL, Miller TA. Effects of 16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2 on alkaline secretion in isolated canine gastric mucosa. Dig Dis Sci 1983;12:1121.
457. Machen TE, Silen W, Forte JG. Na+ transport by mammalian stomach. Am J Physiol 1978;234:228.
458. Grossman MI. The secretion of the pyloric glands of the dog. In: Proceedings of the XXI International Congress of Physiological Sciences, Buenos Aires. Bethesada International Union of Physiological Sciences/American Physiological Society, 1959:226.
459. Kauffman GL, Reeve JJ, Grossman MI. Gastric bicarbonate secretion: effect of topical and intravenous 16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2. Am J Physiol 1980;239:44.
460. Konturek SJ, Kwiecien W, Obtulowicz P, et al. Vagal cholinergic control of gastric alkaline secretion in normal subjects and duodenal ulcer patients. Gut 1987;28:739.
461. Forssell H, Olbe L. Continuous computerized determination of gastric bicarbonate secretion in man. Scand J Gastroenterol 1985;20:767.

327

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

462. Odes HS, Hogan DL, Steinbach JH, et al. Measurement of gastric bicarbonate secretion in the human stomach: different methods produce discordant results. Scand J Gastroenterol 1992;27:829.
463. Forssell H, Steinquist B, Olbe L. Vagal stimulation of human gastric bicarbonate secretion. Gastroenterology 1985;89:581.
464. Feldman M. Gastric H+ and HCO3- in response to sham feeding in humans. Am J Physiol 1985;248:188.
465. Nylander O, Fandriks L, Delbro D, et al. Effects of vagal nerve stimulation of gastroduodenal HCO3- secretion in the cat in vivo. Acta Physiol Scand 1985;123:30A.
466. Feldman M. Gastric bicarbonate secretion in humans. J Clin Invest 1983;72:295.
467. Konturek SJ, Bilski J, Tasler J, et al. Gastroduodenal alkaline response to acid and taurocholate in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol 1984;247:149.
468. Heylings JR, Garner A, Flemstrom G. Regulation of gastroduodenal HCO3- transport by luminal acid in the frog in vitro. Am J Physiol 1984;246:235.
469. Feldman M, Colturi TJ. Effect of indomethacin on gastric acid and bicarbonate secretion in humans. Gastroenterology 1984;87:1339.
470. Castle WB. Observations on the etiologic relationship of achylia gastrica to pernicious anemia. Am J Med Sci 1929;178:748.
471. Levine JS, Nakane PK, Allen RH. Immunocytochemical localization of human intrinsic factor: the non-stimulated stomach. Gastroenterology 1980;79:493.
472. Hoedemacker PJ, Abels J, Wachters JJ, et al. Investigations about the site of production of Castle's gastric intrinsic factor. Lab Invest 1964;13:1394.
473. Hoedmaeker PJ, Abels J, Wachters JJ, et al. Further investigations about the site of production of Castle's gastric intrinsic factor. Lab Invest 1966;15:1163.
474. Dieckgraeffe BK, Seetheram B, Banaszak L, et al. Isolation and structural characterization of a cDNA clone encoding rat gastric intrinsic factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988;85:46.
475. Hewitt JE, Gordon MM, Taggart RT, et al. Human gastric intrinsic factor: characterization of cDNA and genomic clones and localization to human chromosome 11. Genomics 1991;10:432.
476. Jeffries GH, Sleisenger MH. The pharmacology of intrinsic factor secretion in man. Gastroenterology 1965;48:444.
477. Donaldson RM. Intrinsic factor and the transport of cobalamin. In: Johnson LR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:959.
478. Kittang E, Aadland E, Schjowsby H. Effect of omeprazole on secretion of intrinsic factor, gastric acid and pepsin in man. Gut 1985;26:594.
479. Kittang E, Aadland E, Schjowsby H, et al. The effect of omeprazole on gastric acidity and absorption of liver cobalamins. Scand J Gastroenterol 1987;22:156.
480. Oddsdottier M, Ballantyne GH, Adrien TE, et al. Somatostatin inhibition of intrinsic factor secretion from isolated guinea pig glands. Scand J Gastroenterol 1987;22:233.
481. Rackoff PJ, Zdon MJ, Tyshkow M, et al. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) inhibits both intrinsic factor secretion and acid secretion in histamine-stimulated isolated gastric glands. Regul Pept 1988; 21:279.
482. Elder JP, Ganguli PC, Gillespie IE, et al. Effect of urogastrone on gastric secretion and plasma gastrin levels in normal subjects. Gut 1975;16:887.
483. Yang T-M, Ducos R, Rosenberg AJ, et al. Cobalamin malabsorption in three siblings due to abnormal intrinsic factor that is markedly susceptible to acid and proteolysis. J Clin Invest 1985;76:2057.
484. Meeroff JC, Zagalsky D, Meeroff M. Intrinsic factor deficiency in adults with normal hydrochloric acid production. Gastroenterology 1981;80:575.
485. Carmel R. Gastric juice in congenital pernicious anaemia contains no immunoreactive intrinsic factor molecules: study of three kindreds with variable ages at presentation, including a patient first diagnosed in adulthood. Am J Hum Genet 1983;35:67.

486. Howard TA, Misra DN, Grove M, et al. Human gastric intrinsic factor expression is not restricted to parietal cells. J Anat 1996; 189:303.
487. Maeda M, Asahara S, Nishi T, et al. The rat intrinsic factor gene: its 5'-upstream region and chief cell-specific transcription. J Biochem 1995;117:1303.
488. Whittle BJR, Vane JR. Prostanoids as regulators of gastrointestinal function. In: Johnson JR (ed.). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd edn. New York: Raven Press, 1987:143.
489. Chen MC, Amirian DA, Toomey M, et al. Prostanoid inhibition of canine parietal cells: mediation by the inhibitory guanosine triphosphate-binding protein of adenylate cyclase. Gastroenterology 1988;94:1121.
490. Olson GA, Leffler CW, Fletcher AM. Gastroduodenal ulceration in rabbits producing antibodies to prostaglandins. Prostaglandins 1985;29:475.
491. Redfern JS, Lee E, Feldman M. Effect of immunization with prostaglandin metabolites on gastrointestinal ulceration. Am J Physiol 1988;255:723.
492. Lopez-Diaz L, Hinkle KL, Jain RN, et al. Parietal cell hyperstimulation and autoimmune gastritis in cholera toxin transgenic mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G970.
493. Ramsey VG, Doherty JM, Chen CC, et al. The maturation of mucussecreting gastric epithelial progenitors into digestive-enzyme secreting zymogenic cells requires Mist1. Development 2007;134: 211.
494. Farrell JJ, Taupin D, Koh TJ, et al. TFF2/SP-deficient mice show decreased gastric proliferation, increased acid secretion, and increased susceptibility to NSAID injury. J Clin Invest 2002;109:193.
495. Nagata A, Ito M, Iwata N, et al. G protein-coupled cholecystokininB/gastrin receptors are responsible for physiological cell growth of the stomach mucosa in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:11925.
496. Koh TJ, Goldenring JR, Ito S, et al. Gastrin deficiency results in altered gastric differentiation and decreased colonic proliferation in mice. Gastroenterology 1997;113:1015.
497. Kobayashi T, Tonai S, Ishihara Y, et al. Abnormal functional and morphological regulation of the gastric mucosa in histamine H2 receptor-deficient mice. J Clin Invest 2000;105:1741.
498. Furutani K, Aihara T, Nakamura E, et al. Crucial role of histamine for regulation of gastric acid secretion ascertained by histidine decarboxylase-knockout mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;307: 331.
499. Nakamura E, Kataoka T, Furutani K, et al. Lack of histamine alters gastric mucosal morphology: comparison of histidine decarboxylasedeficient and mast cell-deficient mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004;287:G1053.
500. Aihara T, Fujishita T, Kanatani K, et al. Impaired gastric secretion and lack of trophic responses to hypergastrinemia in M3 muscarinic receptor knockout mice. Gastroenterology 2003;125:1774.
501. Aihara T, Nakamura Y, Taketo MM, et al. Cholinergically stimulated gastric acid secretion is mediated by M(3) and M(5) but not M(1) muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2005;288:G1199.
502. Spicer Z, Miller ML, Andringa A, et al. Stomachs of mice lacking the gastric H,K-ATPase alpha-subunit have achlorhydria, abnormal parietal cells, and ciliated metaplasia. J Biol Chem 2000;275:21555.
503. Scarff KL, Judd LM, Toh BH, et al. Gastric H(+),K(+)-adenosine triphosphatase beta subunit is required for normal function, development, and membrane structure of mouse parietal cells. Gastroenterology 1999;117:605.
504. Schultheis PJ, Clarke LL, Meneton P, et al. Targeted disruption of the murine Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 2 gene causes reduced viability of gastric parietal cells and loss of net acid secretion. J Clin Invest 1998;101:1243.
505. Gawenis LR, Greeb JM, Prasad V, et al. Impaired gastric acid secretion in mice with a targeted disruption of the NHE4 Na+/H+ exchanger. J Biol Chem 2005;280:12781.

328

Gastric secretion CHAPTER 13

506. Roepke TK, Anantharam A, Kirchhoff P, et al. The KCNE2 potassium channel ancillary subunit is essential for gastric acid secretion. J Biol Chem 2006;281:23740.
507. Gawenis LR, Ledoussal C, Judd LM, et al. Mice with a targeted disruption of the AE2 Cl-/HCO3- exchanger are achlorhydric. J Biol Chem 2004;279:30531.

508. Ito S, Winchester RJ. The final structure of the gastric mucosa in the bat. J Cell Biol 1963;16:541.
509. Koelz HR, Fimmel CJ, Garner A, et al. The stomach and duodenum. In: Kern F, Blum AL (eds). The Gastroenterology Annual, 3rd edn. New York: Elsevier, 1986:28.
510. Feldman M. Acid and gastrin secretion in duodenal ulcer disease. Regul Pept Lett 1989;1:1.

329

14

C SECRETION AND ABSORPTION
Electrolyte secretion and absorption: small intestine and colon
Stephen J. Keely, Marshall H. Montrose, Kim E. Barrett

The intestinal epithelium, 330 Principles of epithelial transport, 334 Electrolyte transport proteins, 336

Transepithelial electrolyte transport, 341 Regulation of electrolyte transport, 348

The goal of this chapter is to review the cellular, molecular, and regulatory aspects of fluid and electrolyte transport in the mammalian intestinal tract. The intestine can absorb vast quantities of fluid from the intestinal lumen. This is a vital function as about 9 L of fluid are presented to the intestine each day (Fig. 14.1). Greater than 98% of this fluid load is absorbed to preserve health. In addition to its ability to absorb fluid, the intestine is also capable of secretion. In fact, most of the daily fluid load originates from secreted rather than ingested fluids. Fluid secretion is necessary to aid in the digestion and absorption of nutrients, by maintaining a fluid environment for the mixing of food with digestive enzymes. The balance between absorptive and secretory processes is closely regulated. A net absorption of fluid is normal but certain conditions may result in excessive stimulation of secretion, which can overwhelm the combined absorptive capacity of the small and large intestines and result in the pathological condition of secretory diarrhea. The most dramatic example is cholera; patients can experience drastic fluid loss in the stool of up to 20 L per day.
Intestinal fluid movement is predominantly controlled by the active transport of Na+, K+, HCO3-, and Cl- ions across the intestinal epithelium. Fluid follows the direction of electrolyte movement to maintain isotonicity between the intestinal lumen and tissue compartments. In addition to this vital role in fluid homeostasis, electrolyte transport has important roles in other physiological processes. For example, mucosal protection in the duodenum is dependent on duodenal secretion of HCO3- [1]. Plasma electrolyte homeostasis is affected by electrolyte transport in both the colon and the kidney [2]. The uptake of peptides, amino acids, sugars,
Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th edition. Edited by Tadataka Yamada, David H. Alpers, Anthony N. Kalloo, Neil Kaplowitz, Chung Owyang, and Don W. Powell. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6911-0

and bile acids requires various specialized ion-dependent transport mechanisms in the small intestine [3­5].
Many dramatic advances have been made in understanding intestinal electrolyte transport, from the molecular to the whole-tissue level. Molecular cloning of transport, regulatory, and structural proteins has provided new insight into the regulation of electrolyte transport processes at the molecular level and has defined the underlying basis for genetic disorders of intestinal transport. Advances in cellular biochemistry have shown how different second messenger pathways interact with one another, with transport proteins, and with the cytoskeleton to allow the intestinal epithelium to respond appropriately to changes in the extracellular environment. Enhanced knowledge of epithelial development and the structure of tight junctions has increased the understanding of cellular diversity and of how the epithelium acts as a barrier to lumenal toxins. At the whole-tissue level, our knowledge of intercellular communication between the mucosal immune system, the enteric nervous system, and the intestinal epithelium is growing constantly. This chapter therefore emphasizes molecular mechanisms of intestinal epithelial ion transport processes as well as the intracellular and extracellular factors involved in their regulation.
The intestinal epithelium
Structural properties of epithelial cells The epithelium is a continuous monolayer of cells that lines the entire lumen of the intestine. The primary functions of the epithelial layer are essentially twofold. First, it must form an effective barrier to prevent the entry of harmful substances, such as pathogens and toxins, from the intestinal contents into the systemic circulation. Second, the epithelium transports ions, nutrients, and fluid to and from the intestinal lumen. Both of these epithelial functions are

330

Electrolyte secretion and absorption: small intestine and colon CHAPTER 14

Gastric juice 2500 mL Bile 500 mL
Intestinal secretion 1000 mL

Oral intake 2000 mL

Saliva 1500 mL

Pancreatic juice
1500 mL

Small intestinal absorption 7000 mL
(78%)

Colonic absorption 1900 mL
(21%)

Stool 100 mL (1%)
Figure 14.1 Daily water balance in the healthy human gastrointestinal tract. The amount of oral intake varies between individuals depending on the types of meals taken. Note that even in health there is a significant secretory flux of fluid from the intestine (1000 mL). The small intestine is responsible for absorbing almost 80% of the daily fluid load, largely in association with nutrient uptake. The colon absorbs most of the remaining fluid, with an efficiency of about 95%, leaving only about 1% of the daily fluid load to be lost to the stool. Reprinted from Barrett KE, Dharmsathaphorn K. Transport of water and electrolytes in the gastrointestinal tract: physiological mechanisms, regulation and methods for study. In: Narins RG (ed.). Maxwell and Kleeman's Clinical Disorders of Fluid and Electrolyte Metabolism, 5th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:493, with permission from McGraw-Hill.

closely integrated in that vectorial transport of fluid and solutes cannot occur when barrier function is compromised. The capacity of the intestine to absorb and secrete fluid and solutes is greatly enhanced by the massive surface area of the epithelial layer, which is amplified by folds, villi, and microvilli.
Two essential features of epithelial cells that enable them to perform their barrier and transport functions are the ability to form intercellular tight junctions with one another and the ability to develop a functionally polarized phenotype.
Tight junctions Toward the lumenal pole of epithelial cells are found the apical junction complexes, which comprise tight junctions

and adherens junctions. These two structures are involved in the generation of barrier function and are therefore critical for the development of the epithelial transport phenotype. Adherens junctions are the more basally located of the two structures and are characterized by a high level of E-cadherin. The adherens junction is believed to be important in the initial development of cell­cell contacts through the formation of homotypic E-cadherin bonds between neighbouring cells [6]. The formation of cell­cell contacts initiates the development of tight junctions, which constitute the pores through which fluid and solutes must pass when following the paracellular route. At the ultrastructural level, freeze-fracture techniques reveal that tight junctions consist of a dense network of protein strands. In general, the number of strands constituting the tight junction is directly related to the permeability of the pore [7­10]. Tight junction permeability is not constant along the length of the intestinal tract and generally decreases aborally. Thus, the epithelium of the proximal small intestine is considered to be leaky, whereas that of the colon is considered to be tight.
Since the mid-1990s there have been great advances in our understanding of the molecular architecture of tight junctions (Fig. 14.2). Transmembrane components of the tight junctions include occludin, claudins, and junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs). Whereas the expression of occludin and JAMs is relatively constant throughout the intestinal tract, claudins are differentially expressed along both the jejunocolonic and crypt­villus axes [11]. It is generally accepted that the claudins constitute the barrier-forming components of tight junctions and are responsible for dictating the size and ionic permeability of the paracellular pores [12]. The claudin family comprises at least 24 proteins, each of which has four transmembrane domains and two extracellular loops. The extracellular loops differ in their charge-carrying amino acids and thus differentially restrict the passage of some ions over others. As several different claudins can be expressed within individual tight junctions, it is their combined permselectivity that ultimately determines the overall ionic permeability of the paracellular pathway [8]. Occludin is structurally similar to the claudins in that it has two extracellular loops that interact with partners on adjacent cells to form homotypic intercellular bonds. The precise function of occludin remains unclear; however, as gene deletion of the protein in mice does not alter tight junction structure or function, it likely plays a more important role in signaling than in tight junction biogenesis [13]. The JAM family is structurally unrelated to claudins and occludin. Three members of the JAM family have been identified and designated as JAM-A, JAM-B, and JAM-C [14­16]. The JAM proteins are single membrane-spanning proteins. Their extracellular N-terminal domains contain two immunoglobulin (Ig)-like repeats that can form homo- or heterotypic bonds with partner JAM proteins on other cells. Although JAMs are clearly important in regulating the

331

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

7H6

AF-6

Symplekin ASIP
Sec6/8 Myosin

MAGI-1/BAP-1 ZO-1
ZO-2 or ZO-3 ZAK
ZONAB Cingulin

VAP33

JAM

4.1 CX43

Claudins

rab13 rab3B
Ga1 PKC

Actin

Occludin
Paracellular space

Figure 14.2 Molecular architecture of epithelial tight junctions. The transmembrane proteins occludin, the claudins, and junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) are the pore-forming constituents of the tight junction. Each of these proteins form extracellular homotypic contacts with partners on neighboring cells. It is thought that the claudins, of which there are multiple isoforms, confer ionic selectivity on the tight junction. On the intracellular face of the tight junction, claudins and occludin associate directly with the zonula occludens (ZO) proteins, ZO-1, ZO-2, and ZO-3. Through several motifs that allow protein­protein interactions, the ZO proteins are, in turn, associated with the cellular actin cytoskeleton and a variety of intracellular signaling proteins that are involved in the modification of tight junction permeability. ASIP, atypical PKC isotypespecific interacting protein; BAP-1, brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor (BAI)-associated protein; PKC, protein kinase C; VAP, vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP)-associated protein; ZONAB, ZO-1-associated nucleic acid-binding protein. Reprinted from Mitic LC, Van Itallie CM, Anderson JM. Tight junction structure and function: lessons from mutant animals and proteins. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000;279:G250, with permission from the American Physiological Society.

sealing and permeability of tight junctions, the mechanisms remain unclear [17]. They may act by recruiting and tethering other regulatory proteins to the tight junction. Interestingly, JAM proteins are not only expressed in epithelial tight junctions but are also found on circulating leukocytes. Thus, JAM proteins are responsible for the cell­cell adhesion processes that are necessary for leukocyte migration through epithelial junctions in conditions of inflammation [18,19]. JAM proteins appear to be members of a larger subfamily of proteins within the Ig superfamily known as the CTX-like proteins [20]. Other members of this family have been identified in tight junctions, including the Coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) [18,21].
Tight junctions are dynamic structures that have the capability to open and close, thereby regulating the extent of

fluid flow through the paracellular route. The transduction of regulatory signals to and from tight junctions occurs through a complex network of signaling proteins that are associated with the tight junction structural proteins, namely occludin, claudins, and JAM proteins. Each of these structural proteins contains motifs that facilitate either direct or indirect interactions with cytosolic proteins. Perhaps the most studied of these are the zonula occludens (ZO) proteins, which belong to a class of proteins called the membraneassociated guanylate kinase homologues (MAGUKs). In addition to a guanylate kinase domain (which is inactive), these proteins contain several motifs involved in protein­ protein interactions and serve as important scaffolds that link the structural proteins of tight junctions with intracellular signaling molecules and the cytoskeleton [22]. Interestingly, ZO proteins also contain nuclear sorting signals and they colocalize with transcription factors both within tight junctions and the nucleus [23,24]. In cultured epithelial cells, the distribution of ZO1 and ZO2 changes from the nucleus in subconfluent cells to the tight junction in confluent cells, implying an important role for these proteins in coordinating epithelial barrier function with growth and differentiation.
Tight junction permeability is closely coordinated with ion and nutrient transport processes, allowing optimal synchronization of water and solute transport. Thus, increases in Na+/nutrient-coupled transport leads to an opening of tight junctions and a concomitant increase in fluid absorption [25­27]. Conversely, increases in Cl- secretion promote epithelial barrier function in a porcine model of intestinal ischemia [28]. This effect is specific for Cl- secretion through CLC-2 chloride channels, which are colocalized with the tight junctions in injured epithelial cells [29]. Other factors that can induce alterations in tight junction permeability include cytokines, growth factors, neurotransmitters, and hypoxia [30,31].
Bacteria and their toxins also have the capability to interact with and disrupt tight junction function. This can be achieved either through direct alterations in the expression and function of structural proteins within the junctions, through alterations in the cellular cytoskeleton, through the induction of signaling cascades, or through the production of inflammatory cytokines [32­37]. Whatever the mechanism involved, the opening of tight junctions in response to colonization of the epithelium by pathogenic bacteria leads to an increase in paracellular permeability with a concomitant increase in fluid loss and the onset of diarrhea. In addition to bacteria, many other microorganisms, including viruses and protozoans, can disrupt tight junctions leading to the onset of diarrhea [38­40]. Conversely, probiotics, which are commensal bacteria normally found in the intestine and which have therapeutic actions in intestinal disease, have been shown to promote epithelial barrier function and to restore normal transport function [41,42].

332

Electrolyte secretion and absorption: small intestine and colon CHAPTER 14

In summary, tight junctions are essential for maintaining both the intestinal epithelial barrier function and the osmotic gradients required for active transport processes. Consequently, the opening of tight junctions, whether in response to physiological or pathophysiological stimuli, can have significant consequences for intestinal physiology, as the increase in the permeability of the paracellular pathway compromises the barrier to toxigenic substances, nutrients, electrolytes, and water.
Functional polarity For epithelial cells to transport ions in a vectorial fashion, they must be able to differentially express specific transport proteins at the apical and basolateral poles of the cells. For example, for Cl- secretion to occur, an entry pathway for the ion must exist in the basolateral domain of the cell, with an exit pathway in the apical membrane. Conversely, Na+ absorption requires an entry pathway in the apical side of the cell, with an exit pathway in the basolateral membrane. Functional polarity is important not only for the appropriate distribution of transport proteins but also for the appropriate localization of receptors for hormones, neurotransmitters, and other mediators that regulate epithelial transport processes. Most receptors for such regulatory factors are expressed on the basolateral side of the intestinal epithelium, which is not surprising considering the close association of the basolateral domain with cells of the mucosal immune system and the enteric nervous system. Conversely, receptors for regulatory factors in the lumen (e.g., bacterial toxins, guanylin) are expressed on the apical pole of the cell. Some receptors are expressed bilaterally, such as those for kinins and adenosine. The apical expression of these receptors likely is important when leukocytes migrate through the tight junctions to form crypt abscesses.
Significant advances have been made in the understanding of the mechanisms that regulate the development of cell polarity. [43,44]. The process is initiated by cell­cell adhesion and is reinforced by the formation of homotypic E-cadherin bonds at the point of contact between two cells. It is around this "landmark" in the cell membrane that the structural proteins and machinery for the development of cell polarity are assembled [44]. The clustering of cadherin in the membrane leads to the recruitment of catenins, which in turn leads to changes in the actin cytoskeleton at the site of cell adhesion. The membrane cytoskeleton is formed into which is associated a scaffold of proteins, such as fodrin, ankyrin, and SNAREs (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors), which functions to direct proteins to the appropriate cellular domain. At the same time, the tight junction is assembled and acts as a physical fence, maintaining separation between the forming apical and basolateral domains [43,44].
The signals that direct the sorting of newly synthesized proteins to the apical or basolateral domain of the cell are

becoming increasingly well understood. Some proteins, such as the Na+,K+-ATPase, have a high affinity for docking proteins within the scaffold that develops at the site of cell­cell contact; thus scaffolds direct the proteins to the appropriate domain [45]. However, most proteins are sorted within the trans-Golgi network into vesicles that are destined for either the apical or the basolateral domains. Signals directing proteins to the basolateral side of the cell are typically located in the cell's cytoplasmic domains and often contain a critical tyrosine residue within highly conserved amino acid sequences. Such signals induce a certain conformation within the protein that targets it to vesicles bound for the basolateral side of the cell [46]. Signals directing proteins to the apical side of the cell are generally found within their transmembrane or extracellular domains. One such signal is the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor that serves to cluster proteins into microdomains or rafts enriched in glycolipids and cholesterol [47]. These rafts eventually fuse, partition from the Golgi network, and travel to the cell surface [48]. Nand O-linked glycans have also been identified as important apical sorting signals [49]. Posttranslational modification of proteins by the addition of glycan side chains is determined by the relative expression and specificities of the glycosyltransferases and glycosidases within each cell, which, in turn, is dependent on cell type and differentiation state. Thus, glycosylation offers great potential for the diversification of protein sorting signals in cells from different organs and at different stages of differentiation.
Once proteins have been sorted into vesicles, they are trafficked to the membrane cytoskeleton at the site of cell­cell adhesion. Specific targets, such as SNAREs, exist that direct the vesicles to either the apical or basolateral side of the structure [44]. Transport vesicles express v-SNAREs on their surface that recognize t-SNAREs at the target membrane. Different t-SNAREs, namely syntaxin 3 and syntaxin 4, direct vesicles to the apical and basolateral membranes respectively [50]. Another target involved in directing transport vesicles is the Sec6/8, or exocyst, complex [51]. This protein complex is recruited to sites of cell­cell adhesion during polarization and is involved in targeting vesicles to the basolateral cell domain. Once proteins are resident in the appropriate membrane, their movement between the apical and basolateral domains is restricted by the cytoskeletal anchoring mechanism and by the fence function of tight junctions.
Epithelial organization and diversity Although all epithelial cells display the common characteristics of functional polarity and the ability to generate tight junctions, cell type and function varies widely throughout the intestine. This diversity is apparent along the length of the intestine (the jejunocolonic axis) and also among the cells that constitute an individual crypt and villus unit (the crypt­villus axis).

333

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

Crypt­villus axis The mucosa of the small intestine is organized into villi, which are finger-like projections that extend into the lumen and which surround deep invaginations into the mucosa, termed the crypts of Lieberkühn. The transporting epithelial cells, or enterocytes, are the most common cells of the epithelium, and it is these cells that perform the absorptive and secretory functions of the intestine. Although the spatial segregation of transport functions is less strict than was previously thought, fluid secretion predominantly occurs in the crypt region, whereas absorption mainly occurs across the villus cells (or surface cells of the colon) [52,53]. Other epithelial cells located along the crypt­villus axis regulate enterocyte function. Goblet cells in the crypt region secrete mucus that lubricates and protects the epithelial surface [54]. Intestinal fluid and electrolyte transport is coordinated with mucus secretion, such that many of the neuroimmune mediators that promote electrolyte and fluid secretion across enterocytes also induce mucus secretion from goblet cells [55]. Paneth cells are located toward the base of the crypts. These cells play an important role in host defense by secreting antibacterial peptides, such as lysozyme and defensins [54,56,57]. Interestingly, cryptdins, which belong to the family of -defensins, can form anion channels in the apical membrane of enterocytes, thereby eliciting Cl- secretion. Thus, Paneth cells regulate epithelial fluid transport, and thereby crypt hydration, in a paracrine fashion [58]. Enteroendocrine cells are found rarely, interspersed between enterocytes. At least 14 different populations of enteroendocrine cells have been distinguished by their chemical content, with the 5-HT-containing enterochromaffin cells being the most prominent [59]. The primary function of enteroendocrine cells is to sense or "taste" the lumenal environment to detect changes in intralumenal nutrient content, pH, and distention, and to transduce these signals to the sensory afferents of the enteric nervous system and to the enterocytes, thereby eliciting appropriate changes in transport function [60].
All four epithelial cell types are derived from common stem cells anchored toward the base of the crypts in an area known as the stem cell niche [61]. Stem cells give rise to proliferating progenitor cells whose offspring migrate upward toward the villus, except for Paneth cells, which migrate toward the crypt base. As the cells migrate they proliferate and differentiate into the different epithelial cell populations. The factors that regulate epithelial cell growth, migration, and differentiation are complex and not fully understood. However, of the several partially described signaling mechanisms, the Wnt/-catenin and EphB signaling pathways appear to be particularly important [62­64]. As enterocytes migrate upward along the crypt to the villus tip they differentiate from a secretory to an absorptive phenotype. After 4­7 days they reach the villus tip and, as they detach and are sloughed off into the intestinal lumen, they undergo a specific form of apoptosis termed anoikis [65].

Jejunocolonic axis Along its entire length from the duodenum to the colon, the intestinal epithelium absorbs and secretes fluid and electrolytes. However, the contents of the lumenal environment change dramatically along the length of the gut and, as a result, epithelial cells from different regions display marked differences in their structure and function. For example, although anion secretion occurs along the entire intestinal tract, there is an aboral gradient of the ratio between HCO3- and Cl- secretion, with HCO3- secretion being highest in the proximal small intestine to neutralize gastric acid entering from the stomach. Similarly, mechanisms of Na+ absorption differ along the intestine [66]: in the proximal small intestine, Na+ absorption occurs predominantly through nutrientcoupled pathways; in the proximal colon, Na+ absorption is mediated by electroneutral transport; and, in the distal colon, electrogenic Na+ absorption through the epithelial Na+ channel predominates [67,68]. The epithelium not only displays regional heterogeneity in terms of electrolyte transport but also in the transport of nutrients, vitamins, minerals, bile acids, and drugs [69]. Accordingly, epithelial cells in different intestinal segments express distinct repertoires of transport proteins on their surfaces [70­73]. Regional differences in the expression of transmembrane structural components of the apical junction complex are also known to occur along the jejunocolonic axis and this likely underlies segmental differences in transepithelial permeability along the intestine [11,74].
Principles of epithelial transport
Transepithelial and housekeeping transport Substances may traverse the intestinal epithelium by multiple routes. Transcellular processes require entry of electrolytes across one membrane barrier, transit through the cell cytosol, and exit across the opposite membrane. The functional polarity of epithelial cells is the basis for this net (vectorial) movement of electrolytes through the asymmetrical distribution of different membrane transport proteins in the opposing apical and basolateral membranes of the cells. Paracellular transport is the passive flux of electrolytes and water across tight junctions. Paracellular flux occurs entirely extracellular to the epithelial cells, and can only produce vectorial transport as a dissipation of the transepithelial chemical and electrical gradients established by active transcellular transport.
Types of transmembrane transport Charged species such as ions cannot traverse the lipid core of the plasma membrane to any appreciable degree. This is vital to life, because the regulation of cellular biochemistry is dependent on the tight control of intracellular ionic composition. Therefore, specialized proteins are inserted into the plasma membrane to mediate and regulate ion movement.

334

Electrolyte secretion and absorption: small intestine and colon CHAPTER 14

Ions can cross the membrane by way of these proteins, with either the consumption of cellular energy (active transport) or by flowing down existing electrical and/or chemical gradients (passive transport). Overall, transepithelial transport involves a combination of both active and passive transport mechanisms. Ultimately, all of the net transepithelial transport mechanisms discussed in this chapter require at least one active transport step to drive vectorial transport. In these cases, net passive transport of a substance through the paracellular or transcellular route occurs only in response to transepithelial electrochemical gradients established by the active transport processes.
In addition to the distinction between active and passive transport across a membrane, all transport reactions can also be grouped into one of two classes: electrogenic or electroneutral. Electrogenic transport moves net charge across the membrane by the flux of either single ions (e.g., ion channels) or combinations of transport substrates whose charges are unequal (e.g., Na+/glucose cotransporter). Because no aqueous solution can have unequal amounts of cations and anions, electrogenic transport requires compensatory flux by another electrogenic transport process to maintain electrical neutrality. Very often, electrical neutrality is maintained by compensatory paracellular transport of an oppositely charged ion through the tight junctions. Electroneutral transporters also mediate a net flux of ions, but do so without moving net charge across the membrane during a transport cycle. Electroneutral transporters may mediate an exchange of equal charges across the membrane (e.g., Na+/H+ exchanger) or a cotransport of equal and opposite charges (e.g., Na+/K+/2Cl- cotransporter). Importantly, the electrical gradient across the membrane is not a driving force affecting electroneutral carriers, and so the rate and direction of transport by electroneutral carriers is determined solely by the transmembrane chemical gradients of the transported ions. As discussed later (see section on transepithelial electrolyte transport), combinations of different transport proteins can also result in overall transepithelial transport that is either electrogenic or electroneutral.
Fluid transport Physiology of water flux Water is crucial for physiological processes, and the amount of water in the intestinal lumen is closely regulated. A large amount of water is secreted by various gastrointestinal organs to facilitate digestive and other intestinal processes (see Fig. 14.1). The daily fluid load varies according to the amount and composition of meals but it approximates 9 L. In healthy humans, 65%­80% of the secreted or ingested water is absorbed in association with nutrient and electrolyte absorption in the small intestine and so the colon receives only 1500­2000 mL. The colon absorbs most of this remaining fluid with high efficiency so that normally only about 100 mL is excreted in the stool.

Molecular mechanisms of water transport Researchers are still developing an understanding of how water crosses the intestinal epithelium. One general principle, however, is that water always flows across membranes in response to electrolyte and/or osmolyte fluxes. The net movement of electrolytes causes local accumulation of osmolytes, which drives compensatory water diffusion to balance osmolarity. In most cases, water molecules are moved into and out of the lumen by passive processes requiring no further input of cellular energy beyond that required to cause electrolyte transport. There are multiple routes for passive water diffusion across epithelia. If the actively transported electrolytes accumulate in the small extracellular spaces between adjacent epithelial cells (during absorption) or in the gut lumen (during secretion), there is an osmotic driving force for water to equilibrate through the tight junctions. This is believed to be the mechanism for fluid absorption in the proximal small intestine. Conversely, if the electrolytes accumulate intracellularly, there is a driving force for water to equilibrate across the cell membrane, which provides a transcellular route for water transport. The transcellular route is predicted to be more important in tight epithelia (e.g., the distal colon), because ion flow through the tight junctions is restricted in this setting.
Similarly to ions, water has difficulty crossing lipid membranes; therefore, membrane proteins must enhance water transport across these barriers. Attention has been focused on two classes of proteins that increase water permeability across intestinal membranes: aquaporins (AQPs) and Na+dependent solute transporters. The AQPs are a family of water-selective channels in the plasma membrane. Since their initial discovery [75], six AQP isoforms have been reported in the intestine, although only three have been suggested to contribute to intestinal water transport [76]. AQP3 is abundant in the surface/villus cells of the colon, jejunum, and ileum, although whether AQP3 is apical [77] or basolateral [78] remains controversial. In contrast, AQP4 is a basolateral protein in the small intestine and colon, but its predominant location ­ crypt cells or surface/villus cells ­ is uncertain [78,79]. The AQP8 isoform has also been found in surface/villus cells of the jejunum and colon [78]. The only functional evidence that links any specific isoform to intestinal water transport comes from AQP4 knockout mice, which show a modest (30%­40%) decrease in water absorption by the proximal colon [79]. This highlights the existence of redundant pathways for intestinal water flux under normal circumstances. Nevertheless, evidence suggests that altered aquaporin activity or localization may contribute to some forms of infectious diarrhea [80].
Another potential route for transcellular water flux is through Na+-dependent solute transporters. Some authors have argued that the Na+/glucose cotransporter SGLT1 can move water molecules across the membrane each time it transports two Na+ ions and a single glucose molecule into

335

PART 1 Basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal gastrointestinal function

the cell, possibly in the form of molecules that hydrate the cotransporter glucose-binding site [81]. Results suggest that other cotransporters also enhance water fluxes [82]. Water may be a transport substrate of SGLT1 even under isotonic conditions [83], although evidence suggests that at least part of the SGLT1-stimulated water flow is due to microscopic osmotic gradients driving conventional passive water diffusion [84]. Independent of the precise model, it has been estimated that the absorption of up to 5 L of water per day may be mediated by SGLT1 alone [81].
In the intestine, water transport is also regulated indirectly by the regulation of electrolyte transport. When electrolytes and osmolytes remain in the intestinal lumen (e.g., lumenal lactose in lactase-deficient subjects, or during active electrolyte secretion), lumenal hyperosmolarity decreases water absorption. The opposite is also true: when molecules are absorbed and leave the lumen, they increase water absorption. Use of this osmotic driving force constitutes the basis for oral rehydration solutions, in which a low osmolarity substrate (e.g., starch) in the lumen is digested (e.g., to glucose) and the products are avidly absorbed (e.g., by SGLT1), thus stimulating water absorption.
Electrolyte transport proteins
This section describes the building blocks of epithelial transport ­ individual membrane transport proteins. Different combinations of these transport molecules are expressed in individual cells to perform specific electrolyte transport events. Many electrolyte transport proteins have been cloned, providing unprecedented information about their structures and function, including the identification of mutations that underlie inherited diseases of intestinal transport. The electrolyte transport proteins known to exist in gastrointestinal epithelia and their participation in transepithelial electrolyte transport are summarized in Table 14.1. The following sections emphasize cloned transport proteins that are expressed in the intestine. Because each transport protein is a member of a gene family of related protein isoforms, it is sometimes unknown which isoforms participate in particular transepithelial intestinal electrolyte transport mechanisms. Consequently, some proposed mechanisms of transepithelial transport remain more speculative than confirmed.
ATPase pumps A transport ATPase provides the necessary driving force for net transepithelial ion transport to occur in mammalian cells. Among the known transport ATPases, Na+,K+-ATPase and H+,K+-ATPase are the best understood and have wellestablished roles in intestinal electrolyte transport. These proteins have related sequences (60%­70% homology) and are members of the P-type ATPase multigene family, so

named because all members of this family become phosphorylated during part of the transport cycle.
Na+,K+-ATPase In the presence of Mg2+, the Na+,K+-ATPase catalyzes the efflux of three Na+ ions from the cell and the uptake of two K+ ions at the expense of hydrolyzing one ATP molecule per cycle [85]. Because more cation is pumped out than is replaced, the Na+ pump is electrogenic and generates a negative intracellular electrical potential. Na+,K+-ATPase is localized basolaterally and is expressed in all intestinal epithelial cells. It acts to maintain a low intracellular Na+ concentration and a high intracellular K+ concentration. The Na+ electrochemical gradient is then used as a driving force for Na+ influx through Na+ channels or through the many secondary active cotransporters and exchangers for which Na+ is required (see Figs 14.3, 14.4, and 14.5). Inactivation of Na+,K+-ATPase with cardiac glycosides (e.g., ouabain) inhibits all these active transport mechanisms in the intestine.
The Na+ pump exists in the membrane as a heterodimer of - and -subunits, and the 1/1 isoforms of these subunits predominate in the intestine [86]. The -subunit is an integral membrane protein with at least eight transmembrane segments, and it contains the ouabain binding site and all ion binding and catalytic sites. The -subunit has no known role in mediating ion transport but is an integral membrane protein essential for chaperoning the heterodimer through correct assembly and membrane targeting [87]. A newly described family of proteins known as FXYD proteins has been shown to interact with the Na+ pump in a tissue-specific manner, including in the intestine, significantly increasing its activity [88].
H+,K+-ATPase In several species the apical membranes of cells in the distal colon contain H+,K+-ATPase activity. Similar to the gastric H+,K+-ATPase to which it is related, the colonic form mediates cellular efflux of H+ into the gut lumen in exchange for K+ uptake, with hydrolysis of ATP providing energy [89]. The activity of this pump is variably inhibited by the Na+,K+ATPase inhibitor ouabain and the gastric H+,K+-ATPase inhibitor SCH28080, suggesting that the colonic enzyme shares common structural features with both of these pumps [90­92]. One reason for the variability in inhibitor responses is that a second, ouabain-insensitive K+-ATPase probably exists [90]. Moreover, because the only cloned isoform of the colonic H+,K+-ATPase is not inhibited by SCH28080, there is some controversy about whether it is the predominant apical isoform [92]. Antibodies detect H+,K+-ATPase in both the surface cells and crypt cells, although the cloned isoform may be predominantly expressed in the surface cells [92].
Unlike the Na+,K+-ATPase, the colonic H+,K+-ATPase does not play a dominant role in regulating intracellular levels of

336

