LATE JURASSIC AND EARLY CRETACEOUS
BIOSTRATIGRAPHY OF THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION,
ALEXANDER ISLAND
J. A. Crame and P. J. Howlett
British Antarctic Survey, Natural Environment Research Council. High Cross. Madingley Road. Cambridge CB30ET. LK
Abstrac t. A thick (3.6 3.8 km) succession of sedimentary rocks (the Fossil Bluff Formation) in the Ablation Valley-Callisto Cliffs-Planct Heights region of eastern Alexander Island passes through the Jurassic Cretaceous boundary. It comprises a more or less continuous sequence from a disturbed (slumped) zone, through a conglomerate-dominated interval to a siltstone-dominated one, and finally, into interbedded siltstones and sandstones. One interpretation of this succession is that it represents a progressive regional shallowing event (? from base of slope to inner shelf depths).
The succession spans at least the Kimmeridgian to Aptian stages. It commences with the Middle Kimmeridgian disturbed unil. which is characterized by a suite of belemnopscid belemnites and inoceramid bivalves belonging to the Retroceramus haasti species group. This is followed by a Lower Tithonian stage, based on a perisphinctid ammonite-buchiid bivalve fauna, and then an Upper Tithonian one. based on berriasellid ammonites. No precise level can yet be fixed for the Jurassic Cretaceous boundary, but it probably lies somewhere within the range of R. everesti at Callisto Cliffs.
A rich Bcrriasian fauna has been recognized at four separate localities. This includes ammonites referable to genera such as Raimondiceras, Spiticeras. Bochianites and Haplophylloceras, several species of the bclcmnite Hibolithes and a variety of both infaunal and epifaunal bivalves. The topmost levels of the Bcrriasian fauna are closely associated with two faunal elements that have been used to differentiate the base of the Valanginian stage: the ammonite Olcostephanus and the bclcmnite Belemnopsis gladiatoris. Unfortunately, the succeeding levels are poorly fossiliferous and it has not been possible to distinguish the Hautcrivian and Barrcmian stages with any degree of certainty. All that can be said at present is that they are most likely represented by a 7(K)-m interval of siltstones.
The base of the Aptian is defined by a basin-w ide spread of aconeceratid ammonites. Aucellina andina-radiatostriata species group and Inoceramus deltoides. Further aconeccratids, lytoceratids and dimitobclid belemnites ( Tetrahelus willeyi) charac terize the remainder of the Aptian and constitute the youngest fauna in the study region. The topmost beds (at Spartan Cwm) appear to correlate with the lowest levels at Succession Cliffs, immediately to the south. The 600-m section exposed here probably contains the Aptian Albian boundary.
The faunas examined in this study exhibit a remarkable transition in biogeographic affinities. Whereas the earliest (Kimmcridgian-Tithonian) ones contain many elements that were very widely distributed around the southern margins of the Gondwana supercontincnt, the latest (Aptian Albian) arc characterized by a number of groups that are apparently restricted to just the high latitude regions. Such a change can almost certainly be linked with the progressive fragmentation of Gondwana and southward drift of Antarctica and Australasia.

Br 4 n h i r i ! S u n H u ll No 'J*. NNK. pp I '>

1

2 CRAME AND HOWLETT
Introduction
The Fossil Bluff Formation (FBF) of Alexander Island was one of the first sedimentary units within the Antarctic Peninsula region to be investigated in detail. As a result of a series of field investigations over a twelve-year period (1961 73), the principal features of this major sedimentary formation were clearly established (for a comprehensive review of this early work see Taylor and others, 1979). With an outcrop length of some 240 km, an average width of 20 km and a thickness of ap proximately 4 km, it was shown to range from Upper Jurassic (Kimmeridgian Tithonian) to Lower Cretaceous (Aptian Albian). The clastic sediments com prising it have been taken to represent a sequence of submarine fan and deltaic deposits that built out on the fore-arc (Pacific) margin of the Antarctic Peninsula (e.g. Butterw'orth, 1985). These accumulated in some form of fault-bounded basin which developed at least partly on top of the metasedimentary rocks of the extensive LeMay Group (which crops out widely in central and western Alexander Island; Burn, 1984; see also Storey and Garrett, 1985).
Comprehensive as these initial studies on the FBF were, they still left a number significant problems to be solved. One of the most important of these lies in the field of biostratigraphy, where the early indications were that at least part of the Lower Cretaceous marine record may be missing (Taylor and others, 1979, p. 37 and table II; Thomson, 1983<;). Whereas the Kimmeridgian Berriasian stages are well represented in the Ablation Valley area (Fig. 1) and the Aptian Albian at a number of localities between Succession Cliffs and Keystone Cliffs, evidence for the intervening Valanginian Hauterivian stages was inconclusive. A Valanginian fauna has now been recognized in the former of these areas (Howlett, 1986) and it is important to put this and other new palaeontological collections into a stratigraphic perspective. The Early Cretaceous is now' known to have been a time of widespread extensional tectonics associated with the fracturing of central Gondwana (e g. Dalziel and others, in press) and it is pertinent to enquire whether this activity is reflected in the Antarctic Peninsula sedimentary record. The FBF may hold important evidence of Jurassic Cretaceous boundary events at high latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere.
During the initial phase of work on the FBF it was noticed that some of the sedimentary successions exposed in the cliffs bordering George VI Sound (Figs 1 3) seemed to extend for a considerable distance inland (i.e. west or south-west). In particular, it was felt that those exposed in the Ablation Valley and Callisto Cliffs regions (Figs 1 3) offered considerable potential for linking Kimmeridgian Tithonian strata directly to Aptian or Albian ones. Reconnaissance studies by C. M. Bell and[ A. Linn had shown that ammonites of probable Aptian age occurred at localities im the westernmost parts of these two regions and it has been our aim to incorporate these onto measured stratigraphic sections. In this study we describe the preliminary results of recent field work in the vicinity of both Ablation Valley (by P.J.H.) and Callisto Cliffs (by J. A.C.), and suggest a number of new correlations. To explain the precise lines of section that we followed, it is necessary to discuss briefly the structural geology of the region.
Strutturf
The regional dip of the FBF between Belemnite Point and Fossil Bluff (Fig. 1) is to the south-west. However, on a local scale this overall structure is complicated by a series of shallow, open folds and steep, westerly dipping thrust faults. The folds were originally thought to have had essentially north south axes (Horne, 1967; Elliott,

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

3

Fig. 1. Locality and sketch geological map of the Fossil BlutT Formation, eastern Alexander Island. Note that further details of locality numbers on Himalia and Leda Ridges are given on the stratigraphic sections presented in Fig. 4.

4 CRAME AND HOWLETT
Fig. 2. The northern side of Leda Ridge. The main section runs westward from the col (just right of centre of the photograph) up to the furthest summit. In the foreground are siltstones, sandstones and conglomerates equivalent to the upper half of the Himalia Ridge section (from beneath Conglomerate 2. to above Conglomerate 4). The photograph was taken from Himalia Ridge, looking to the south-west. The ridge is approximately 5 km long
1974) but it is now apparent that they are aligned more nearly north-west south-east, a trend parallel to that of the major thrusts (Fig. I). These two sets of structures are almost certainly genetically related (B. C. Storey, pers. comm. 1986).
In the Ablation Valley area the line of section commences in the core region of an anticline exposed in Himalia Ridge (Fig. I). Most of the eastern limb of this fold is missing, but a more or less continuous line of section can be traced westwards from locality K G .2903 (Figs l, 4). Initially, the beds dip gently (approx. 10°) to the west, but throughout the section the dip increases until near the top (K G .2934) the bedg are steep (60 65° SW). In Moutonee Valley (Fig. I), this anticline can be trace?! southwards into Ganymede Heights. The structure is similar to Himalia Ridge, with dips gradually steepening westwards from 15° to 40° south-west. On western Himalia Ridge (just above locality KG. 2942: Figs l, 4), the section is truncated by a prominent, west-dipping thrust. Approximately 500 m of gently south-dipping sedimentary rocks are exposed above this feature, and these suggest a displacement of 700 800 m. The situation on Leda Ridge (Figs l, 2) is rather more complicated. At the north-eastern end there is a series of easterly dipping normal faults, and at the south-western end some small westerly dipping reverse faults. Both these cause repetition of the succession, but there is no evidence of any large-scale thrusting, as on Himalia Ridge. The measured section on Leda Ridge starts in the most westerly of the normal-fault bounded blocks (KG. 3461: Figs l, 4) where the beds dip steeply to the south-west (50 60°). The succession there can be correlated with that on Himalia Ridge (K G .2934: Fig. 4). Throughout the Leda Ridge section, the dips decrease to approximately 20° south-west at the top (locality K G .3458).

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

Lig. 3. The south-western tlank of Spartan ("win. The photograph was taken from the western headwall of the cwm. looking in a south-westerly direction. The main chlT-line is approximately 5.5 kin in length and exposes some 1750 m of Berriasian Aptian strata beneath the thrust /one. Pale Tithonian sandstones and conglomerates forming Lunar Crag. Planet Heights can be seen on the extreme right of the photograph

6 CRAME AND HOWLETT
LEDA RIDGE
K G .34 M KG 3456-7
HIMALIA RIDGE
KG2942

.1
i
. IIs?
ifj i
1 S,<t> i5 ii

vi i
11

Fig. 4 The llimalia Ridge and Lcda Ridge sections. Key faunal elements marked: generalized lithologi^ range from siltstone to coarse conglomerate; vertical scale in metres (lo r disturbed zone faunas se Taylor and others. 1979.)
Strata exposed in the Callisto Cliffs Planet Heights area define a north-northwest south-south-east trending synform that plunges gently to the south-east; indeed, it is likely that this is the dominant structure between Jupiter Glacier and Fossil Bluff (Fig. 1). The lowest beds are exposed on the western limb of this fold and a section was measured through them at locality K G .3404 (Fig. 1). They dip gently (b 9°) north-east into the core region but are abruptly truncated by a steep, westerly dipping thrust zone which is almost coincident with the fold axis. This thrust can be traced southwards from the southern margin of Jupiter Glacier to Succession Cliffs (Fig. 1) and in places reveals a series of spectacular fault structures and ramp anticlines (Taylor and others, 1979; Crame, 1986). The highest beds on the western limb of the synform can be correlated with a low' level in the succession exposed in

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

1

Callisto Cliffs. Here the beds dip moderately steeply (approx. 40°) to the south-west and a very long section (KG. 2802- 3401, Fig. 1) can be measured up the cliffs and onto the ridge at the head of Spartan Glacier (Spartan Cwm). To facilitate ease of access, the highest levels of this section were measured through stratigraphically equivalent beds on the south-western side of Spartan Cwm (KG. 3402 and 3403, Figs 1, 3).

Stratigraphic T hrminolcx;y
Before describing the sections in detail, it is necessary to discuss briefly the stage terminology that has been employed in Antarctic Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary biostratigraphy. Much confusion still surrounds the use of stage names at this level and it is important to clarify our position.
The problems of precise definition of the latest Jurassic and earliest Cretaceous stages in their type areas have been dealt with extensively elsewhere (e.g. Casey and Rawson (eds.). 1973; Colloque sur la limite Jurassique-Cretace, 1975; Zeiss, B)83; Jeletzky, 1984; Working Group for the Jurassic/Cretaceous Boundary, 1986). in Antarctica, the scheme used for the Upper Jurassic is based on that employed in New- Zealand (e.g. Stevens, 1978; Stevens and Speden, 1978), which is in turn a derivative of the standard Tethyan system. The penultimate stage is the Kimmeridgian and this is divided into two substages, the Lower (which is equivalent to the New' Zealand Heterian stage) and Middle (equivalent to the Ohauan) (e.g. Crame, 1982a, b). So as to avoid possible confusion with the topmost part of the Kimmeridgian succession in England, which is now thought to be Lower Tithonian, no Upper Kimmeridgian is recognized in the Tethyan realm (see Wimbledon, 1980; Westermann, 1984). In both Antarctica and New Zealand the Tithonian follows directly on from the Middle Kimmeridgian and forms the topmost Jurassic stage. The basal Cretaceous stage is the Berriasian and we have tried, wherever possible, to define both it and the succeeding stages using the guidelines outlined by Rawson (1983) and Birkelund and others (1984). We do not use the term Neocomian.
One further point concerning the definition of the Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary should be mentioned here. It is by now fully apparent that it is not a natural stratigraphic division in the sense that it represents an appreciable turnover of taxa on a global scale. The present boundary is largely a matter of historical accident and can only be defined by consensus opinions between systematic and stratigraphic specialists. Perhaps magnetostratigraphy offers the only real prospect for establishing A universal correlation scheme (Ogg and Lowrie, 1986).

1. Himalia Ridge

D escription of the Sections

The lowest 100 m of the section measured on Himalia Ridge (KG. 2902, Figs 1, 4) contain lithologies typical of the `disturbed zone', which crops out extensively along the eastern margin of the Ablation Valley area (Elliott, 1974; Taylor and others, 1979). At least 440 m thick, this zone is characterized by spectacular intervals (up to 100 m thick) of contorted and disrupted strata that are the direct result of synsedimentary slumping. On Himalia Ridge the dominant lithologies above this `disturbed zone' are massively bedded mudstones, siltstones (facies 1 of Butterworth, 1985) and subordinate, thinly interbedded fine sandstones (facies 3a of Butterworth, 1985). Intense bioturbation is common, and includes trace fossils such as Chondrites, Zoophycos and Planolites.

8 CRAME A S D HOW LETT
Belemnites, which can probably be referred to the genus Produvalia Riegraf, were collected between 90 and 150 m (Figs 4, 5a, d). However, macrofossils are genuinely scarce in the lowest levels of the section and no other diagnostic molluscan species were found. Because of the chaotic nature of much of the bedding in the disturbed zone and the occurrence of a number of loose specimens, it has not been possible to subdivide it palaeontologically; traditionally, only a broad late Oxfordian Kimmcridgian age range has been inferred (Taylor and others, 1979; Thomson, 1979). This age determination is based upon ammonites such as Pcrisphinctcs (Orthosphinctes)cf. transatlanticus (Stcinmann), Pachysphinctcs( ?) sp., belemnites such as Belemnopsis cf. alfurica (Boehm), B. cf. gcrardi (Oppel), B. cf. keari Stevens and B. cf. tanganensis (Futterer), and bivalves referable to the Retraceramus haasti (Hochstctter) group (Howarth, 1958; Willey, 1973; Thomson, 1979; Crame, 1982h). Some evidence that the age may be closer to the upper end of this range is provided by the bivalve fauna. The presence of R. haasti suggests a Middle Kimmeridgian (Ohauan) age, as does a possible new species of the oxytomid genus Malayomaorica. The latter shows closer affinities to species such as *Buchia' misolica (Krumbeck) th;u| it does to the earlier (Lower Middle Kimmeridgian) M. malayomaorica (K rum beaJ (Crame, 1983^, 1985^).
Essentially similar lithologies continue over the next 522 m (localities K G .2901, 2903 5. 2907, 2910, 2912 and 2914, Figs 1, 4) but these are noticeably more fossiliferous. Some of the intercalated sandstones are up to 1 m thick, and at the 120-m level there is a 2.5-m pale arkose that contains some well-rounded pebbles and abraded fragments of belemnite rostra. Although exposure is poor in the top part of this interval, sandstone beds arc generally thicker and coarser grained. Perhaps the most striking faunal element in this interval is a perisphinctid ammonite zone which is present between 350 and 400 m (Figs 4, 5b). Species so far identified from this zone include: Tirgatosphinctes afT. dcnscplicatus (Waagen). T. sp. nov. alf. andcscnsis (Douville) and Aulacosphinctoidcs smithwoodwardi (Uhlig) (Thomson, 1979). These occur together with several lytoceratids, phylloceratids, and belernnopseid belemnites (e.g. Belemnopsis cf. aucklandica (Hochstctter) (Fig 5c, g) and Hiholithcs hclligcrundi Willey). Bivalves become relatively common in the low'er part of this interval too, and in addition to a background fauna of Mvophorclla, Grammatodon and Entoliunu there is a distinct Buchia horizon between approximately 340 and 400 m. This is composed of the elongate, narrow forms that may need to be accommodated within a new genus (or subgenus) (= Australohuchia of Zakharov. 1981); at present they are still contained in two species groups of the genus Buchia {B. hlanfordiana (Stoliczka) and B. spitiensis (Holdhaus) groups; see e.g. Crame, 1982a, I983<;) (Fig 5c. f). In the uppog levels of the 100 622 m interval there are further phylloceratid ammonites (such a* Phyllopachyccras) and belernnopseid belemnites, though the latter are as yet unidentified.
The \irgatosphinctcs Aulacosphinctoidcs ammonite assemblage is undoubtedly Tithonian in age. and there is considerable evidence to suggest that it may be best referred to the Lower Tithonian (Thomson, 1979, p. 31). This agrees well with the age of the Buchia fauna, which has been shown to be essentially Lower Middle Tithonian (Crame. 1982*/. 1983*;).
The first of four major conglomerate intervals in the Himalia Ridge section occurs between 622 and 720 m (Fig. 4). These channelized conglomeratic intervals typically thin to both the north and south along strike, and are composed of graded or massively bedded clast-supported conglomerates. Further descriptions of these distinctive lithological units have been given elsewhere (the conglomerate facies of Butterworth, 1985), and it is likely that they can be interpreted as the deposits of mass

Fig. 5. Characteristic Lower Tithonian fossils from Himalia Ridge (a) Produvalia sp. (KG.2902.55). Ventral outline, x 1. (h) \ irgaiosphmcies sp. (K G.2912 I7). Lateral view of a silicone rubber cast from a natural external mould, x I (c) Bvlcnmopsis cf. aucklandica (Hochstetter) (K G.2905.19). Ventral outline, x 1. (d) Produvalia sp. (K G .2902.55). Left profile, x 1 (e) Buchia blanforduma (Stolic/ka) group (K G .712.18a). Internal mould of a whole specimen viewed from the left, x 1. (f) The same specimen viewed from the right, x 1 (g) Bvlcnmopsis cf aucklandica (Hochstetter) (K G .2905.19) Left profile, x l.

10 CR AME AND HOWLE T T
flow processes within major channel systems (P. J. Butterworth, pers. comm. 1987). The only fossils found in the first one came from the topmost 3 m and were mostly abraded fragments. They include berriasellid ammonites, belemnites (//. beltigerundi) and indeterminate bivalves.
Sandstone-dominated lithologies between 720 and 735 m pass up into thick (274 m) fossiliferous siltstones with rare intercalated sandstones (localities KG. 2919, 2923 and 2940, Figs 1, 4). A berriasellid ammonite fauna is present in the 720 860 m interval and previously identified species from this horizon include: Blanfordiceras aff. wallichi (Fig. 6f). B. sp. juv. and `Berriaselfa' subprivasensis Krantz (Thomson, 1979). Representatives of Hibolithes argentinus Feruglio first occur at 813 m (Figs 4, 6d, e) and a number of incomplete valves of Retroeeramus sp. were obtained from 913 m. Other bivalves present include Pinna, Grammatodon, an indeterminate pectinid and possible buchiids (at 751 m). There are scattered occurrences of the serpulid Rotularia and local concentrations of both Chondrites and plant fragments. The late Tithonian age of the berriasellid ammonite assemblage is supported by the presence of H. argentinus (Feruglio, 1936; Leanza, 1967; Thomson, 1979).
Above the 1000-m level there is a distinct change to a complex association of facial and over the next 300 m thick-bedded, massive sandstones, thinly interbedded siltstone/sandstones and massive-bedded siltstones predominate (facies 3b, 2 and 1, respectively, of Butterworth, 1985). Also, there are several sporadic pebbly mudstone horizons (facies 4 of Butterworth, 1985). This change to a complex association of facies is paralleled by a marked decrease in fossils; only trace fossils are at all common (e.g. Chondrites, Planolites and Zoophycos). A poorly preserved ammonite was obtained from 1261 m and a possible specimen of H. argentinus from 1301 m.
The second major conglomeratic interval, which is present between 1310 and 1399 m (Fig. 4), is very similar in appearance to the first, except that in this instance there is a gradation into finer-grained lithologies towards the top of the unit. Apart from a minor conglomerate between 1482 and 1507 m, the succeeding 170 m is dominated by massive mudstones and thinly interbedded siltstone sandstone sequences (facies 1 and 2 of Butterworth, 1985). However, even these finer-grained beds proved to be unfossiliferous and only a single poorly preserved ammonite C.Uhligites) was recovered from them. The third, and thickest, of the major conglomerate intervals is present between 1572 1755 m (Fig. 4).
Mixed siltstone, sandstone and conglomerate lithologies (in beds generally < 2 m thick) above 1755 m again yielded a series of trace fossils (Planolites, Chondrites, Neonereites and Rhizocorallium) but no macrofossils. A prominent siltstone in terval between 2072 and 2100 m (Fig. 4) is followed by the fourth conglomera^j (2100-2179 m) which is overlain by fine-coarse grained sandstones with minor inter bedded siltstones. Body fossils reappear in these sandstones between approximately 2216 and 2255 m, where there are fragments of belemnopseid belemnites, bivalves and gastropods. Between 2255 and 2384 m there is much better preservation and a number of the finer silty sandstones provided an abundant fauna. This represents the first truly fossiliferous horizon above the 900 1000 m level (Fig. 4).
Bivalves, such as Pinna, Grammatodon, Myophorella and Pholadomya, arc particularly common in the lowest 30 m of this uppermost interval, where a single specimen of Inoceramus cf. ovatus Stanton was also obtained (Crame, 19856; Fig. 7d). They are frequently accompanied by serpulids, plant fragments (e.g. Ptilophyllunu Nilssonia) and numerous trace fossils. Ammonites from the 2268-m level include specimens of Raimondiceras and Haplophylloceras, whilst the first representatives of the heteromorph Bochianites were recorded from 2284 m (Figs 4, 7b, c). Although belemnopseid belemnites are present throughout the interval, the

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

11

7ig. 6. Characteristic l.'ppcr Tithoman fossils, (a) Anopava sp. n o v f r o m Planet Heights (KG. 3404.268) Internal mould of a right valve with traces of shell material, x 1.5. (b) Bclcmnopsis cf. aucklandica (Hochstetter), from Himalia Ridge (K G .2923.35). Ventral outline of distorted specimen, x 1. (c) Left profile of the same distorted specimen (hence the apparent compressed appearance), x 1. Id) Hiholithes urgentinus Ferguho. from Himalia Ridge (K G.2909.18). Ventral outline, x 1. (e) Right profile of the same specimen, (f) Blanjordiceras atT. walluhi (Gray), from Himalia Ridge (K G.2919.19). Lateral view of natural internal mould, x 1.
distinctive large forms. Bclcmnopsis alc.xandri Willey (Fig. 8c, d), and B. gladiatoris Willey (Fig. 8a, h), do not occur until 2292 and 2298 m, respectively. They then :ontinue to the top of the section and are frequently found in association with a Grammatodon Myophorclla Entolium bivalve assemblage. Bochianitcs is present to at least 2346 m, and at 2360 and 2377 m specimens of the ammonite Olcostcphanus were Dbtained (Howlett, 1986: Fig. 7a). Another stratigraphically important fossil previously collected from these levels is the ammonite Spiticcras afT. spitiensis (Blanford) from 2290 m (Elliott, 1974; Thomson, 1979).

12 CRAME AMD HOW LET T
l ig. 7. Tspical Bermsian Valanginian fossils from Himalia Ridge, (a) Olcostcphanus cf. %uebhardi (Kilian). (K (i.2l)43.1). l ateral view of internal mould, * * (b) Raimotulncras sp r u n .' (KCi.2l>34.2^) lateral view of part of an internal mould, x (c) Boihumitcs all. rcrstccghi (Boehm) (K G.2^34.67). Ventral view of a fragment of an internal mould. - * (d) Imm riim us el orutu\ Stanton (KG.7W.15i. Internal mould of a whole speeimen viewed from the left side. * 
The uppermost fauna of the Himalia Ridge section has traditionally been regarded as Berriasian in age (Taylor and others. 1979). This determination is largely based on the age affinities of the Haplophylloceras Boehianites Spiticeras Rainumdieeras ammonite assemblage (Thomson, 1979), together with supporting evidence from the associated belemnites (Willey, 1973) and inoceramid bivalves (Crame, 1985/?). Nevertheless, Howiett (1986) has recently suggested that the presence of Olcostephanus indicates that the very highest levels are in fact Valanginian in age. This iscorroborated by a reinterpretation of the age-range of Belemnopsis gladiatoris and its closest allies (Howiett, 1986. p. 75).
2. Planet Heights The lowest lithological unit exposed on Planet Heights (f igs 1. 9) is a 109-m thick
monotonous sequence of massive grey siltstones with minor fine sandstone inter calations (KG. 3404, Fig. 9). These siltstones thicken southwards to approximately twice this figure in the vicinity of Lunar Crag (KG. 3406, Fig. 1). Reconnaissance work in the latter area has established that, in their lowest levels, they contain a distinctive fauna of perisphinctid and possible berriasellid ammonites, belemnites, rhynchonellid brachiopods and large forms of the Buchia (,}.Australohuehia) hlanfordiana and spitiensis groups. This fauna has strong Tithonian affinities and correlates well with the 240 400 m level in the Himalia Ridge section (Figs 4. 9). Higher levels of the basal siltstone unit are characterized by a moderately diverse serpulid-belemnite-bivalve fauna in which the following elements arc prominent: small Rotularia%tiny to medium-sized belemnopseid belemnites, infaunal bivalves (nuculids, astartids, Pholadomya)* epifaunal bivalves (small oysters.

THE FOSSIL BLI FF FORMATION

13

J ig. X. Characteristic Berriasian Valangiman bclemnites. (a) Bclcmnopsis gUuliutoris Willey. from Himalia Ridge (KG.2l>42.33). Ventral outline, x 1( b) Left profile of the same specimen, x 1. (c) Bclcmnof>\i\ alexandri Willey, from Himalia Ridge (KCi 2942. IK). Ventral outline, x I. (d) Right profile of the same specimen, x 1. (e) Bvlenuiopsis cf. madu^ascaricnsis (Besairie). from Leda Ridge (K G .3455.S7). Ventral outline, x I. (f) Right profile of the same specimen, x 1.

14 CR AME AND H OWLE T T
SPARTAN CWM
SPARTAN C W M - 5 - CALLISTO CLIFFS 3
TOMBAUGH
PLANET HEIGHTS KG.3404 500 400 300 200 100
KG3406 -
Fig. 9. The Planet Heights, Callisto Cliffs and Spartan Cwm sections, together with that of Tombaugh Cliffs (for comparison). The layout is the same as for Fig. 4.
Grammatodon, Oxytoma), and occasional seams of fossil wood fragments. A small ammonite referable to Corongoceras was collected from 99 m at KG.3404 and two specimens of Blanfordiceras from an approximately equivalent level at KG. 3406 (Figs 1, 9). The latter agree well with specimens of B. aff. wallichi obtained from Himalia Ridge (Figs 4, 6).
At the 109-m level on section KG.3404 (Fig. 9) there is an abrupt coarsening of

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

15

lithologies and the first in a series of prominent conglomerates appears. These continue over the next 300 m and are directly comparable to the conglomeratedominated interval above 622 m on Himalia Ridge (Figs 4, 9). At the base there is a 19-m thick pebbly mudstone bed (facies 4 of Butterworth, 1985). Somewhat surprisingly, this was found to contain an abundant and diverse fauna, and it would appear that it may well have been derived. Bivalves are the most conspicuous component of this fauna and include some large and beautifully preserved specimens of Anopaea (A. sp. nov.? of Crame, 1981; Fig. 6a), Myophorella, Grammatodon,
Oxvtnma, Pinna, Entolium, Pleuromya, ThraciaH). astartids and small oysters. Other elements are small to medium-sized Hibolithes. berriasellid fragments, Rotularia and several types of small gastropod. The general Tithonian aspect of this fauna is enhanced by the new' material assignable to Anopaea sp. nov.? This seems to be particularly close to A. sphenoidea (Gerasimov) from the Volgian (= Tithonian) of the Russian Platform (Crame, 1981. p. 215).
Succeeding levels are dominated by interbedded massive, pale sandstones (13 20 m {lick) and thinner pebbly mudstone beds. Coarse-grained, clast-supported, jhannelized conglomerates first appear at approximately 181 m but are better exposed between 205 and 218 m (Fig. 9); they closely resemble those already described from Himalia Ridge. A small percentage (probably < 10%) of the clasts in these conglomerates are intraformational and in one tabular grey siltstone slab an internal mould of a Middle or Upper Jurassic Retroceramus was found.
A recessive-weathering interval between 310 and 332 m (Fig. 9) commences with a 6-m thick pebbly mudstone horizon overlain by a uniform dark grey siltstone bearing rusty-brown concretions. The latter is fossiliferous and contains the first occurrences of small phylloceratid ammonites (Haplophvlloeerasl), Retroceramus everesti and a new small species of Buchia (Figs 9, 10a c). It has also yielded Hibolithes, nuculids, limids, astartids? and a possible smooth inoceramid (Parainoceramusl). Massive conglomerates then continue to the 408-m level where there is an abrupt transition to
thinner-bedded and finer-grained lithologies (Fig. 9). Thick-bedded, fine- to medium-grained white sandstones (with sporadic seams of
belemnite fragments) predominate for approximately 30 m above the last massive conglomerate where they are interbedded with minor dark siltstones. At higher levels bedding is reduced to the 20 25 cm thick scale and between 438 and 470 m (Fig. 9) there is evidence of large-scale slump folds (7 8 m across). Besides medium large broken belemnites, the only other fossils recorded in the initial 70 m of this sandstone-siltstone unit were a number of small bivalves.
Above 470 m (Fig. 9) the bedding becomes much finer (generally < 10 cm and occasionally < 5 cm thick) and there is a very regular succession of dark siltstones and pale fine sandstones. These lithologies yielded more belemnites (at least some of which are referable to Hibolithes). R. everesti, the possible smooth inoceramid and the small new species of Buchia. Between 494 and 507 m (Fig. 9) there is a disturbed zone composed of many randomly oriented siltstone and sandstone blocks. Above this disturbed zone there is a repetition of thinly interbedded sandstone/siltstone facies. The fauna up to the 528-m level (Figs 9, 10a c) consists of Haplophylloeeras'\ R. everesti, Buchia sp. nov.. Pinna, Entolium and what appears to be a very large anomalodesmatid bivalve.

3. Callisto Cliffs
The basal 42 m of this exposure is composed of medium-coarse grained, rarely cross-bedded olive green sandstones interbedded with thin, irregular seams of small-

16 CRAME AND HOW LET T
f ig. 10. Jurassic Cretaceous boundary bivalves, (a) Rctroccramus cvcrcsti (Oppel). from Planet Heights (KCi.3404.401). Internal mould of a whole specimen viewed from the left side, x I. (b) tiuchm sp nov. (small form), from the Spartan C'wm region (KG.2N03.50). Internal mould of a left valve, x 1.5. (c) Buchia sp. nov. (small form), from the Spartan C'wm region (KG.3405.8). Internal mould of a right valve, x 15.
pebble conglomerate (section KG. 2802, Figs 1, 9). Thereafter, there is a regular alternation of dark siltstones and pale sandstones up to the 940-m level. Bedding is predominantly in the 10 30 cm range in this interval but there are several extensive sequences of the very thinly interbedded siltstone/sandstone facies, such as between 461 and 534 m (Fig. 9). These match well with the highest levels exposed on Planet Heights. More massive siltstones and sandstones (0.5 I m range) are only sporadically developed.
Berriasellid ammonites, which can probably be referred to the genus Blanfordiccras, occur between approximately 100 and 260 m at K G .2802 (Fig. 9). Various belemnopseid belemnites occur throughout the section, though many are still unidentified. However, Hiholithes bcl/igcrundi has been found at 100 m, Bclcmnopsis cf. aucklandica between 222 and 232 m, and H. argentinus further up the section of 305-380 m (Fig. 6b-e). Anopaea sp. nov.? is prolific between 91 and 99 m and other early inoceramids are probable precursors of the R. cvcrcsti group (91 255 m. Fig. 9; see Crame, 19826). The latter is a consistent feature of the upper half of the section* (503 1040 m), where it occurs in association with the new small species of Buchicf (338 935 m) and the ammonite Haplophylloccras (7481 921 m).
From the foregoing palaeontological data it is apparent that the uppermost levels of Planet Heights (K G .3404) and the main face of Callisto Cliffs (K G .2802) arc approximately equivalent to the 1200 2300 m interval on Himalia Ridge (Figs 4, 9). However, no precise correlations can be made between these two regions as they differ sharply in lithofacies and are sparsely fossiliferous. Some indication that the topmost levels of section KG. 2802 can be directly correlated with the top of the Himalia Ridge section is provided by the pronounced change in lithologies seen there. Between 937 and 1015 m (Fig. 9) there is a prominent pale zone comprising massive fine- to coarse grained sandstones bearing large, spherical, rusty brown concretions and thin seams of pebble cobble conglomerate. Reconnaissance observations indicate that this pale zone can be traced westwards onto the narrow- ridge connecting Callisto Cliffs and Planet Heights (KG.3405A, Fig. 1). Here, conglomerates are even more strongly

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

17

developed and there are two distinct channelled intervals (10 15 m thick) of cobble boulder, matrix-supported conglomerate. Moving in the other direction, the same zone can be traced into the lower levels of Tombaugh Cliffs (KG. 401. Figs 1, 3) where massive pale sandstones and minor conglomerates are well de veloped between 156 and 233 m (= units Z. Z, of Willey, 1972; Taylor and others. 1979).
On the very summit of Callisto ClifTs (1015 1037 m. KG. 2802; Fig. 9) there is a 22-m sequence of micaceous siltstones that yielded a prolific, bivalve-dominated fauna. Retroccramus everesti features prominently in this assemblage, together with types such as Grammatodon%Myophorella, Pinna, Entoliunu astartids and anomalodesmatids. A variety of belemnopseid belemnites from this unit includes the distinctive Belemnopsis alexandri and there are phylloceratid ammonites referable to Haplophylloceras. Altogether, a correlation with the 2255-m level (or above) on Flimalia Ridge is indicated on the one hand, and with interval ZH(233 271 m) at Tombaugh ClifTs on the other (Figs 4, 9). The latter unit, which consists of dark jiltstones with minor fine sandstones, has also yielded Phyllopachycerasl sp., fs/eoeosmoceras afT. sayni Simionescu, Hinudayites sp., an indeterminate berriasellid, Belemnopsis gladiatoris, Hiholithes antarcliea, H. suhfusiformis (Raspail). H. afT. manvieki mangaoraensis Stevens and Inoceramus sp. afT. ellioti Gabb (Willey. 1973; Crame, 19856). This fauna is consistent with a Berriasian Valanginian age.

4. Spartan Cum
Section KG. 3401, which extends around the north-western rim of Spartan Cw m (Fig. 1). is a direct vertical continuation of section KG. 2802. It commences with 81m of intermittently exposed massive siltstones with intercalated minor pale sandstone units. The latter are generally less than 30 m thick, but may locally reach up to 70 cm, and include small lenses of pebbles. At the 69-m level (Fig. 9) there is a prominent 1.2-m bed of medium coarse grained dark green sandstone that contains scattered pebbles and numerous large belemnites. These are the predominant faunal clement in this initial interval, with B. alexandri being especially common (Figs 8c. d. 9).
The following 320 m in KG. 3401 is composed of a remarkably uniform dark siltstone/mudstone and the lack of any resistant beds gives this interval a distinctive concave weathering profile which can be traced from the upper levels of Tombaugh ClifTs (93 294 m [= Z J, KG .402; Willey, 1972) through Spartan Cwm to the base of Leda Ridge (see below). Large, rusty-brown, tabular concretions (up to 0.75 m across) are present throughout this lithology but it has few other distinguishing features. It has yielded a sparse belemnite assemblage, Chondrites-Y\ke trace fossils and two specimens of Anopaea (366 390 m level) which are perhaps closest to A. trapezoidalis (Thomson and Willey) (Crame, 1981) (Fig. 11e).
Between 400 and 450 m (Fig. 9) a number of thin sandstone beds occur in succession and these are accompanied by a sparse belemnite-small bivalve assemblage. There is then a marked change to a stepped-scarp topography which reflects the presence of a 117-m thick pale-coloured unit. This lithology also forms a prominent marker horizon which can be traced from the top of Tombaugh ClifTs (just above the top of section KG. 402) through the north-western corner of Spartan Cwm to the western extension of Callisto ClifTs (KG. 3405A, Fig. 1). It is characterized by pale, finc-to-vcry-fine sandstones which arc intensely bioturbated with grey siltstones. This slight, but nonetheless significant, increase in grain size is accompanied by a much richer fauna in which infaunal bivalves are particularly common. These

18 CR AME AND H OWL E T T
:ig. 11. Possible Hautenvian Barremian bixalvcs from the Spartan Cum area, (a) Inoccramus ncoconucnsis d'Orbigny group (early form). (K G.3401.431). Incomplete internal mould of a right valve, x | (hi Inoccramus ncocomicnsis d'Orhigny group (early form). (K G .3401.360). Incomplete internal mould of a right valve, x 1.5. (c) Auccllina caucasica (Abich) apiicnsis d'Orhigny group, (K G.3405.68). Internal mould of a left valve, x 1.5 (d) Auccllina causica (Abich) apticnsis d'Orhigny group. (K G.3405.86). Rubber peel from the external mould of a right valve, x 1.5 (c) Anopaca trapczoiilalis (Thomson and Willey)(KG. 3401.78). Incomplete internal mould of a whole specimen viewed from the left side, x 1.5

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

19

include nuculids, astartids, Mvophorella and several types of anomalodesmatid; there are also epifaunal genera such as Grammatodotj, Entolium and a possible smooth inoceramid (Parainoceramusl). Small- to medium-sized belemnopseid belemnites are also present and between 543 and 555 m (Fig. 9) two lytoceratid ammonites were obtained. The same interval also yielded the first representatives of a very finely ribbed oxytomid/buchiid w-hich may be referable to Aucellina. Preliminary observations suggest that it may in fact be assignable to the A. caucasica (Abich) A. aptiensis d'Orbigny species group (G. A. Lee, pers. comm., 1986; Fig. 11c, d).
Above 567 m (Fig. 9) there is a return to more massive, darker siltstones and minor thinly interbedded sandstones which are much less strongly bioturbated. Notable faunal changes in this interlude include the introduction of members of the Inoceramus neocomiensis d'Orbigny group (591 603 m) and the disappearance of belemnopseid belemnites (663 m) (Figs 9, 11a, b). Increasing stratal disruption towards the 700-m level marks the presence of a major disturbed zone. This approximately 100-m thick zone consists of a mass of jumbled blocks (often 5-10 m
Kcross) and contorted strata which alternate with discontinuous seams of in situ eds. Most of the blocks are of intraformational lithologies but there are also a few' exotic sandstones that cannot be easily matched with any beds lower in the section. Both the possible Aucellina and the early representatives of the I. neocomiensis gp. continue into the disturbed zone and the latter is joined by a very irregularly ribbed inoceramid that shows some resemblance to /. annenkovensis Crame (19856) from Annenkov Island (Fig. 9). Other components of the fauna are: phylloceratid ammonites, Entolium and Rotularia.
Although there is no abrupt change in faunal composition across the disturbed zone, there is a marked decrease in abundance. The regularly bedded grey-green siltstones above the 800-m level (Fig. 9) contain a sparse fauna comprising the following types: Inoceramus (especially the form with very irregular ribbing), Aucellinal, Entolium, Rotularia and a small brachiopod. A few' soft, poorly lithified sandstone beds occur between 856 and 868 m, where there are also occasional discrete patches of pale, fine sands which have been bioturbated into the dark siltstones. Tw o larger phylloceratid ammonites were collected from this interval, and from 865-890 m the first specimens of Inoceramus deltoides Crame (/. neocomiensis gp.) were obtained (Figs 9, 12a). The latter occur together with specimens that can almost certainly be referred to the Aucellina andina Fergulio radiatostriata Bonarelli and Nagera species group (Fig. 12b. e). and a general correlation of this interval with the 100-120 m level in section K G .2800 at Fossil BlufT (Crame, 1978; = loc. R of Taylor ^*nd others, 1979) is indicated. Between 900 and 1040 m (Fig. 9) the section is largely scree-covered, but patches of in situ grey siltstone can be detected and there are many loose specimens of /. deltoides and Aucellina in the float. At 1040 m there is an abrupt change to a resistant 18-m cliff of massively bedded dark green sandstones.
The line of section was transferred to locality KG. 3402 on the southern flank of Spartan Cwm (Figs 1, 3, 9). This was easily accomplished by tracing the olive-green sandstone band, which forms a prominent topographic feature. At the new locality the beds directly beneath these sandstones are better exposed, and immediately to the south-east of KG. 3402 (Figs 1, 3) there is a disturbed zone equivalent to that seen at 700 800 m in section KG. 3401 (Fig. 9). It. too, passes up into regularly bedded grey siltstones and it is at the base of these that section KG. 3402 commences. These initial beds are also characterized by a sparse Inoceramus-Aucellina Rotularia fauna, together with a probable heteromorph ammonite and a few plant fragments. Between 42 and 48 m (Fig. 9) there is a fairly sharp change to a darker grey siltstone which is more massively bedded and resistant to erosion. This lithological change is

20 CR AME AND HOWLET T
Fig. 12. Characteristic Aptian fossils, (a) hwceramus deltaides Crame, from Spartan Cwm (K G.3401.604). Internal mould of an incomplete left valve, x I. (b) Aucellina andina Fcruglio-radiatostnata Bonarelli and Nagera group, from Spartan Cwm (K G .3403.il). Internal mould of a left valve, x 1.5. (c) Tetrabelus willed Doyle, from Spartan Cwm (K G.3403.229). Ventral outline, x I. (d) Left profile of the same specimen, x 1. (c) .Aucellina andina Feruglio-radiatostriaia Bonarelli and Nagera group, from Spartan Cwm (K G.3402.60). Internal mould of a right valve, x 1.5. (0 Sanmartinoceras (Sanmartituu eras) patagonicum (Bonarelli). from Spartan Cwm (KG.3403.107). Lateral view of natural internal mould, x |. (g) Sanmartinoceras ( lhcganei eras) sp . from Leda Ridge (KG.345X. 140). Lateral view of natural internal mould, x 2.

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

21

accompanied by the incoming of aconeceratid ammonites and the A. andinaradiatostriata gp. (Fig. 12b. e g), and is thought to be equivalent to approximately the 868 900 m interval in K G .3401 (Fig. 9). Over the succeeding 20 m the blocky siltstones contain thin seams of intensely bioturbated pale sandstones and a prolific ammonite Aucellina assemblage.
Exposure breaks down somewhat above 69 m (Fig. 9), but it is apparent that the principal lithology is a grey siltstone with minor intercalated soft recessive-weathering
sandstones. The fauna, which is much less abundant than before, seems to show a slight increase in the proportion of benthonic elements. Such a trend is confirmed between 105 and 162 m (Fig. 9) where ammonites are rare and the commonest elements arc aporrhaid gastropods, nuculid, arcid. mytilid and lucinid-type bivalves, tiny echinoids and brachiopods (Discinisca). A slight but significant increase in sediment grain si/e occurs together with these faunal changes and a general shallowing trend is inferred. Indeed, sandstones become much more prominent above the 162-m level and both sedimentary and faunal evidence suggests that they can be toiked to a regional shallowing event (P. J. Butterworth. pers. comm.. 1987). Being P o re resistant to erosion, they form a series of pyramidal peaks along the southern rim of Spartan Cwm which are directly comparable to similar features at Fossil Bluff (e.g. 320 426 m in section KG. 2800 Crame, 1978; beds R1H R20 of Taylor and others. 1979).
The dark olive-green sandstones at KG. 3402 occur between 162 and 176 m (Fig. 9). They are predominantly poorly sorted, fine coarse grained with rare pebbles, and occur in beds up to 5 m thick. They appear to be largely unfossiliferous, although one loose large heteromorph ammonite resembling Australiceras? sp. (cf. Thomson, 1974) probably comes from this interval
The succeeding 80 m of pale beds (Fig. 9) is dominated by a variety of thinnerbedded sandstones and minor siltstones. The initial 42 m is composed of fine medium grained thinly bedded (< 2 0 c m ) sandstones with off-white to deep rusty brown colourations. In places these have been intensely bioturbated to form a fine mottled texture. Between 219 and 241 m (Fig. 9) more massive sandstones with discontinuous pebble scams are present, and these have weathered into distinct flaggy sheets. Over the next 15 m in section K G .3402 (241 256 m, Fig. 9) there is a return to thinly interbedded siltstones and fine medium sandstones. These have a very distinctive blotchy appearance due to intense bioturbation). Above 256 m the siltstones become much more massive and are interbedded with a sequence of sharply defined pale sandstones. k At this point the line of section was transferred back into the south-west corner of "partan Cwm (section KG. 3403, Figs 1, 3. 9) where the siltstone pale sandstone sequence is more accessible. Here, it is composed initially of a massive grey-black siltstone containing only minor pale sandstones (generally < 10 cm thick). Apart from occasional white blotchy patches due to bioturbation of fine sands, these siltstones are extremely uniform and frequently weather into massive rounded bosses and pillars. They yield a moderately diverse fauna composed of aconeceratid ammonites (including Sanmartinoceras; Fig. 12f, g), lytoceratids (principally Eulytoceras), Aucellina (Fig. 12b, e). anomalodesmatids ( Thracia, Cuspidaria, etc.). Fntoliunu Pinna and Rotularia. Above 72 m (Fig. 9) a number of thick ( 2 m + ) coarse very coarse grained pale sandstones occur. Unfortunately. many of these higher sandstones are soft and recessive-weathering and it is not always possible to determine their true nature and extent. The general impression is that they become slightly more numerous up to the 200-m level (Fig. 9) and this may be the reason for the apparent replacement of the ammonite fauna by a small bivalve one.

22 CRAME AND HO WL E T T
The base of a prominent 68-m pale zone is located at the 215-m level (Fig. 9). This consists initially of fairly thinly (< 30 cm) interbedded dark siltstones and pale sandstones which are in places intensely planar laminated. At 232 m, much more massive white sandstones are present and over the next 35 m these alternate with thinner units of planar-laminated or intensely bioturbated siltstone-sandstone. A distinguishing feature of these units is the presence of very large (2m + ) sub- to wellrounded concretions. These are particularly prominent in the pale massive sandstones where they weather out to form giant `cannonballs' very similar to those seen in Succession Cliffs (e.g. unit B2of Taylor and others, 1979). These beds contain a sparse bivalve assemblage.
Above 267 m (Fig. 9), there is a return to thinner-bedded siltstones and sandstones and between 274 and 283 m there is a small scarp composed predominantly of planarbedded orange coloured sandstones (fine-medium grained). Resistant massive concretions are still present, however, and close to the top of the scarp there is a small conglomerate seam containing occasional plutonic clasts of boulder size. Between 283 and 285 m there is a recessive band of coarse white sandstone which grades up into a massive siltstone. The latter, which is very similar to the lower, blocky, grey greJ^ siltstones, is at least 12 m thick and moderately fossiliferous. A reasonably diverse bivalve assemblage includes nuculids, mytilids, Aucellina, Entolium and anomalodesmatids (e.g. Pleuromya, Thracia), but more characteristic is a series of small dimitobelid belemnites referable to Tetrabelus willeyi Doyle (1987) (Fig. 12c, d). These are the first belemnites to be encountered since the loss of the belemnopseids at 663 m in section KG. 3401 (Fig. 9).
Siltstones alternating with soft recessive-weathering sandstones can be traced up to 315 m (Fig. 9), but unfortunately exposure is very intermittent above this level. At least two massive pale cannonball sandstones occur between 315 and 326 m and there is then a return to moderately thinly bedded units up to approximately 345 m (Fig. 9). The topmost levels of the section consist of further heavily weathered massive cannonball sandstones interbedded with thinner siltstone-sandstone intervals.
If the dating of the composite section has hitherto been comparatively straightforward, it becomes much less so for these higher levels in Spartan Cwm (i.e. sections K G .3401 3403. Fig. 9). As the 1015 1037 m level in section K G .2802 correlates with 2255 m (or above) on Himalia Ridge, it is apparent that the base of KG. 3401 (and thus ZKat KG. 401, Tombaugh Cliffs) should now be regarded as Valanginian. However, no further age-diagnostic fossils are encountered until approximately 868-900 m in K G .3401 ( = 42 48 m, K G .3402: Fig. 9) where the initial representatives of the prolific aconeceratid ammonite /. deltoides A. andinaA radiatostriata fauna were encountered. These have usually been regarded as indicatinj an Aptian age, but a recent study of heteromorph ammonites from equivalent and higher levels at localities further south suggests that they may be somewhat older (Thomson, 1983</). In particular, an Acrioceras Crioeeratites fauna from 286 335 m at Fossil Bluff ( = R I;tl. of Taylor and others, 1979) strongly suggests a Hauterivian Barremian age (Thomson, 1983*;).
The above comments notwithstanding, it has also been argued that the age-ranges indicated by the bivalves are in reasonably close agreement with those of the regularly coiled ammonites (Crame, 1983/), 1985b). For example, both /. deltoides and the A. andina/radiatostriata gp. have strong Aptian affinities which accord well with those normally attributed to the aconeceratid genera Aconeceras, Theganeceras and Sanmartinoceras (there is a possibility that these genera could range down into the Upper Barremian; Thomson. 1974; Kennedy and Klinger. 1979). Higher levels still in the FBF are characterized by inoceramids such as Birostrina? cf. voncentrica

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

23

(Parkinson), I. cf. anglieus elongatus Pergament and Anopaea sp. nov. aff. mandibula (Mordvilko), and these, taken in conjunction with the presence of ammonites such as Eotetragonites sp. and Ptychoceras sp.. strongly suggest an Albian age. Tetrabelus willeyi from 285 297 m in KG. 3403 (Fig. 9) is Aptian, as are further dimitobelids (Peratobelus cf. oxys: Doyle, 1987) from Succession Clilfs (see below). It should also
be pointed out here that aconeceratids, ancyloceratid heteromorphs and certain problematical regularly coiled ammonites (c.g. Silesites aff. antarcticus Thomson and kPseudothurmannia' cf. mortilleti (Pictet and Loriol)) have a probable Albian age on James Ross Island (Thomson, 1984; Ineson and others, 1986).
There is a minor stratigraphic discontinuity across the disturbed zone (7CKF 800 m, KG. 3401, Fig. 9), and there is possibly another one at the base of the prolific aconeceratid Aucellina zone (42 48 m, KG. 3402, Fig. 9). Nevertheless, all the indicators are that this section is essentially complete and the interval between the well-defined Valanginian base and Aptian top must be regarded as undifferentiated Hauterivian Barremian. The base of the Aptian is provisionally set at 865 m in j^G.3401 (= 42-48 m in section KG. 3402; Fig. 9).

5. Leda Ridge
The basal 30m of the Leda Ridge section (Figs 1, 2. 4) consists of highly bioturbated brown silty sandstones interbedded with minor pale, fine-grained sandstones (> 50 cm thick). Towards the top of this unit there is a gradation into uniform siltstones and throughout there is an abundant molluscan fauna. This is bivalve-dominated and includes representatives of the following genera: Pinna. Pholadomya, Grammatodon. Entolium anti Myophorella. With ammonites referable to Raimondiceras, Bochianites and Haplophylloeeras, it is obvious that a general correlation can be made with the topmost (1015 1037 m) levels of Callisto Cliffs (KG. 2802) and Himalia Ridge (KG. 2934; 2250 2985 m), and lowermost (0 81m) levels of section KG. 3401 (Figs 4, 9).
The overlying 420 m comprises bioturbated massive dark grey siltstones with occasional thin, fine-grained sandstone interbeds (generally < 20 cm thick). This siltstone, which is intensely shattered in places and contains rusty-brown tabular concretions ( > 2 m in length), correlates well with the 81 400 m interval in KG. 3401 and unit Z9( = 93-294 m) at Tombaugh Cliffs (K G .402) (Figs 4, 9). It is slightly more fossiliferous here, with belemnopseid belemnites being particularly well represented. The latter include B. alexandri, B. gladiatoris, B. cf. nuuiagascariensis (Fig. 8a f ) and las yet unidentified specimens of Hibolithes and Belemnopsis, whilst in the lowest WOO m of this unit representatives of both Bochianites and Oleostephanus (Fig. 7b. c) were obtained. Occasional small bivalves (mostly Grammatodon) were the only benthonic elements found in these siltstones.
At the 450-m level (Fig. 4) there is a sharp, erosionally based 7-m thick, pebble-tomedium-grained, red-brown, massive sandstone. This sandstone forms a prominent topographical feature that can be traced along the flanks of Leda Ridge. The sandstone contains many belemnite rostra (mainly ?Belemnopsis), bivalves (mostly Grammatodon and Myophorella), some gastropods and plant material. The lop of this sandstone, displays a well-developed fining-upward cycle, over 4 m. back into siltstone. This change is accompanied by an increase in the number of bivalves (including the introduction of Pinna) and a decrease in belemnites. In the uppermost part of the sandstone there are also a few poorly preserved ammonites.
Between 457 and 657 m (Fig. 4) there is a return to uniform grey siltstone lithologies. However, these beds are characterized by a distinctive belemnite bivalve

24 CRAME AND HOW LET T

fauna and it is clear that they can be matched with approximately the 567 700 m

interval in section K G .3401 (Fig. 9). Belemnites, formerly attributed to Neohibolites

(Willey, 1973), but which may now have to be reassigned to another genus, occur up

to 555 m (Fig. 4), and at 525 m the first representatives of the Inoceramus

neocomiensis group (Fig. 11a, b) were recorded. The latter became the dominant

element in an assemblage which also includes Grammatodon, Pinna and occasional

phylloceratid ammonites.

Above 657 m (Fig. 4), there is a further prominent 10-m sandstone unit which, like

the one at 450--457 m, has a sharp, erosional base and a normally graded top.

However, fossils are lacking in this bed, apart from a few' serpulids (Rotularia) and

plant fragments. There is then a return to the uniform dark siltstone lithology which

continues to the top of the section (667 7S0 m). Up to the 700-m level. Inoceramus is

the commonest fossil, but thereafter Aucellina ( = A. andina-radiatostriata gp.) largely

replaces it (Figs 4, 12b, e). At the 740-m level, aconeceratid ammonites (mostly

Sanmartinoceras) enter the succession and they are accompanied by a few', large

phylloceratids, Entolium and small limids. The highest belemnites recorded weru|

probably belemnopseids from 555 m (Fig. 4).

^

Although the lithological match is not precise, it is apparent that the Leda Ridge

section is equivalent to approximately the lower 868 m of section KG. 3401 in Spartan

Cwm (Figs 4, 9). Its base is well dated by the Raimondiceras Bochianites bivalve

assemblage as Berriasian Valanginian and the top, by the incoming of aconeceratids,

as Aptian (see above). Both the massive sandstone units (at 450 457 m and

657 667 m) mark the sites of breaks in the sequence, but these are not thought to

mark excessive periods of time. For example, at least two belemnite species continue

uninterrupted across the lower sandstone.

STRATICiRAPHICAl. DISCUSSION
Although the precise nature and extent of the disturbed zone at the base of the succession is uncertain, it may now' be better to regard it as essentially Middle Kimmeridgian (Ohauan) in age. Such a decision is based partly on the age affinities of its fossil content and partly on the absence of the Oxfordian Lower Kimmeridgian faunas that are known to occur at a number of other Scotia arc Antarctic Peninsula localities. For example, a distinctive bivalve fauna, comprising elements such as Jeletzkiella falklandensis Jones and Plafker, Malayomaorica malayomaorica (Krumbeck) and Retroceramus galoi (Bohm), can be traced from the eastern Falkland Plateau to the Orville and Lassiter Coasts and eastern Ellsworth Land (Jones andi Plafker, 1977; Quilty, l977;Crame, 1983<;; Jeletzky, 1983); however, it is not present in the FBF. No precise level can be fixed for the Kimmeridgian Tithonian boundary, but a useful field guide may be the top of the disturbed zone (i.e. 100 m. Figs 4, 13).
Two distinct, ammonite-dominated faunal assemblages characterize the Tithonian strata and can, perhaps, be used as the basis of a twofold division of this stage (following Enay. 1972; Imlay, 1980; Jeletzky, 1984). The first of these is dominated by the perisphinctid genera Virgatosphinctes and Aucalosphinctoides (Figs 4, 5b, 9) and can be assigned to the Lower Middle Tithonian ( = Lower Tithonian of the above authors). Such a determination is compatible with the known age-ranges of associated Buchia (or Australobuchia) species. There is then a short but nonetheless distinct gap from the overlying berriasellid fauna (Figs 4, 9). This is provisionally taken to be late Tithonian, an age supported by the occurrence of both Hibolithes argentinus and Anopaea sp. nov.?
Some objections might be raised to the foregoing division on the grounds that

SUCCESSION CLIFFS
& rr
m4 000
3500
3000

SPARTAN CWM CALLISTO CLIFFS

rW>z>~
LEDA RIDGE

2500 2000

1500 1000

500
0 m52z oO>z
Pig. i. Stratigraphical correlations between the sections described in the text, together with Tombaugh Cliffs and Succession Cliffs. The scale along the left side of the diagram indicates the height in metres above the base of the Himalia Ridge sections. The stage boundaries along the right of the diagram arc only approximate. VAL. BARR, is an abbreviation for Valanginian Barremian and BERRIAS. for Bcrriasian. The symbols are the same as for Tigs 4 9.

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

NJ

26 CRAME AND HO WLET T

proven Berriasian occurs very much higher in the Himalia Ridge section (2250 m, Fig.

4); by implication, either the Upper Tithonian or the Berriasian could be represented

by disproportionately long stages. Nevertheless, it should be borne in mind that the

bulk of the sediments between 1300 and 2200 m (Fig. 4) are extremely coarse

grained and it is likely that they were deposited comparatively rapidly (within a

complex channel system, and perhaps at the base of the continental slope;

P. J. Butterworth, pers. comm., 1987). It may actually be better to define the

Jurassic Cretaceous (or J K) boundary within the finer-grained and more

fossiliferous succession at Callisto Cliffs (section KG. 2802, Fig. 9). It has previously

been argued (Crame, 1982/>) that, as Retroceramus everesti has a Tithonian-Berriasian

age-range, the most likely position for the boundary is within the upper 200 300 m

of KG. 2802 (Figs 9, 13). At present, this is the only macrofaunal basis for placing the

J K boundary and it is hoped that greater resolution will eventually be provided by

micropalaeontology.

The lower levels of the prolific siltstone-associated fauna which first appears at

2255 m on Himalia Ridge, 0 30 m on Leda Ridge, 1015 1037 m at Callisto Cliff|

(section KG .2802) and 233-271 m (Z6) at Tombaugh Cliffs (section K G .401) (Figs ^

9) are well dated (by ammonites, belemnitcs and bivalves) as Berriasian. However, it

has recently been shown that the uppermost levels of this fauna, containing

Olcostephanus and B. gladiatoris, are now better regarded as Valanginian (Howlett,

1986), and it would appear that the incoming of the latter species may serve as a useful

datum between the two stages. Thus the base of the Valanginian is set at 2298 m on

Himalia Ridge, 48 m on Leda Ridge and 260 m (Z6) on Tombaugh Cliffs (Figs 4, 9,

13).

Even though there are some breaks in the overlying succession (such as at 450 and

657 m on Leda Ridge, Fig. 4), it is unlikely that they are of any more than local

significance. Unfortunately, no diagnostic Flauterivian fossils have yet been found,

but it is hoped that further taxonomic studies on belemnopseid belemnitcs, inoceramid

bivalves (especially Anopaea trapezoidalis and its allies) and microbiota may reveal

their presence. There is probably greater scope for establishing the presence of the

succeeding stage, the Barremian. Representatives of the Auccllina caucasica-aptiensis

group (which first appear at 543 555 m in KG. 3401) would seem to be of this age,

as may be both early members of the /. neocomiensis gp. (first appearance at

591-603 m, section KG. 3401) and belemnitcs formerly referred to Neohibolites (up to

555 m on Leda Ridge) (Fig. 4). The latest representatives of the /. neocomiensis group

(/. deltoides\ 865 890 m, KG. 3401) and members of the Auccllina andina-

radiatostriata group (865 890 m, KG. 3401) could also be at least partly latd

Barremian in age (Figs 4, 9, 13).

"

The base of the Aptian is here taken to be the abrupt incoming of the aconeceratid

ammonites (42 48 m. section KG. 3402; 740 m on Leda Ridge; Figs 4. 9, 13), which

can be regarded as a basin-wide event. This level correlates with 215 m at Fossil Bluff

(R9 of Taylor and others, 1979, fig. 6) and the early aconeceratid-dominated fauna

with occasional heteromorphs (e.g. 42 176 m, KG. 3402; Fig. 9) is thought to be

equivalent to approximately 215-320 m (i.e. Rw,.). Higher faunas, such as the

aconeceratid-lytoceratid (Eulytoceras) Auccllina assemblage from 0 72 m in section

K G .3403 (Fig. 9), are equivalent to high in the Fossil Bluff succession (H.JT, i.e.

approximately 429 m) and low levels in Waitabit Cliffs (TH, i.e. approximately

160 180 m; Taylor and others, 1979, fig. 6). The specimens of Tetrahelus willevi

(dimitobelids) from 285 297 m in K G .3403 (Figs 9, 12c, d) also indicate a direct

correlation with the lower levels of Waitabit Cliffs (Trt).

The succession in section KG. 3403 (Figs 1,9) ends in the core of a shallow' syncline

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

27

associated with a major thrust /one (Crame. 1986). The axial trend (151°) and plunge (15 20°) of this fold strongly suggest that the topmost beds in this sequence are equivalent to those exposed in the lowest levels at Succession Cliffs. In fact, the lowest unit (Aj) at the latter locality comprises 16.5 m of orange micaceous sandstones (with
concretions and scattered pebbles; Taylor and others. 1979) which match well with the 274 283 m interval in K G .3403 (Fig. 9). It is succeeded by 131 m of interbedded grey black siltstones and cream buff sandstones (with concretions) ( = A.,) which are lithologically equivalent to the topmost (283 390 m) levels in section KG. 3403. Such a correlation is strengthened by the presence of dimitobelid belemnites (Peratobelus cf. ox vs (Tennison-Woods); Doyle, 1987) but absence of Birostrina? cf. concentrica (a common fossil in the upper levels of Succession Cliffs; Crame, 1978, 1985b). Unfortunately the Aptian-Albian boundary cannot yet be accurately located in the Succession Cliffs section (localities A-C of Taylor and others. 1979), and all that can be said at present is that it most likely lies above the 14X-m level (Fig. 13). The
presence of B Mcf. concentrica, further dimitobelid belemnites and tetragonitid,
Ksmoceratid and silesitid ammonites suggests that there may well be a substantial ickness of Albian strata here (Thomson, 1983a; Crame. 1985; Doyle. 1987). It is even possible that the uppermost levels of Succession Cliffs represent some of the youngest strata in the entire Fossil Bluff Formation (Taylor and others, 1979, pp. 31, 37).
As detailed correlations of the FBF with other Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous sedimentary sequences in the Antarctic Peninsula region have already been made (Taylor and others, 1979; Crame. 19826; Thomson, 19836), only a brief synopsis will be given here. The most extensive of these sequences is the Middle Upper Jurassic Latady Formation which crops out on the south-eastern flanks of the peninsula (e.g. Thomson, 19836, fig. 8). Ranging in age from Bajocian Kimmeridgian in the Lyon Nunataks-Behrendt Mountains region to Kimmeridgian early Tithonian on the Orville and Lassiter Coasts, it may well be at least as thick as the FBF. However, Upper Tithonian faunas are only known from its southern extremity (Thomson, 1983c) and it may be that there is no more than approximately 500 m of stratigraphic overlap between these two major units (Crame. 19826, p. 593). Similarly, marine horizons within the Antarctic Peninsula Volcanic Group at both Carse Point and Mount Bouvier, Adelaide Island (Fig. 1) correlate with a verv low (basal 500 m) level in the FBF (Crame. 19826; Thomson, 19836).
Considerably more potential exists for detailed correlations with Jurassic Cretaceous boundary sequences exposed at the northern end of the Antarctic fceninsula (Fig. 1). These are contained within the Nordenskjold Formation and Associated conglomeratic deposits on the north-eastern flank of the peninsula, and the Byers Formation of western Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands (Fig. 1). The Nordenskjold Formation, which is perhaps the best-known of these units, is at least 500 m thick and possibly considerably more (Farquharson, 1983a). It comprises a regular alternation of dark, organic-rich radiolarian mudstones and thin pale ash-fall tuffs (Farquharson, 1982. 1983a, 6), although more recent observations suggest that a number of other lithological types may also be present (Whitham, 1986). At the type locality of Longing Gap, perisphinctid ammonites and inoceramid bivalves referable to the R. haasti group indicate a Kimmeridgian early Tithonian age (Farquharson. 1983a). Further loose macrofossils from both Sobral Peninsula and James Ross Island include berriasellid and spiticeratid ammonites. R. crm'.vr/and an unusual large form of ?Buchia. These almost certainly signify that the Nordenskjold Formation extends into at least the Berriasian (Farquharson, 19836; Crame, 1984).
Although there is undoubtedly a major stratigraphical break between the

28 CRAME ASD HOW LETT
Nordenskjold Formation and the basal (Barremian Aptian) volcaniclastic con glomerates of James Ross Island (Farquharson and others. 1984), these two units may be much more closely linked (in a temporal sense) on the Sobral Peninsula Fig. 1). Here, Farquharson (1983a, p. 7) postulated the existence of an unconformity between a 55()-m sequence of Nordenskjold Formation beds and a thick (750- 1000 m) succession of volcaniclastic sandstones and conglomerates of probable Hauterivian Barremian age (see also Farquharson. 1982; Farquharson and others, 1984). Unfortunately, very few macrofossils have yet been collected from this locality.
The Byers Formation of Byers Peninsula, western Livingston Island represents a complex sequence of interbedded volcanic and sedimentary rocks which is at least 425 m thick. Although accurate mapping and correlation have been consistently hampered by poor exposure and intense local faulting, it is thought that the marine sedimentary rocks of the formation were deposited in approximately Kimmeridgian Valanginian times (Valenzuela and Herve. 1971; Covacevich, 1976; Pankhurst and others, 1979; Smellie and others, 1980; Askin, 1983; Crame. 198^U| The lowest lithostratigraphic unit, the Mudstone Member, comprises at least 105 m of dark mudstones with occasional thin pale tuff bands that matches well with Nordenskjold Formation from localities such as Longing Gap and Sobral Peninsula (Farquharson, 1983a). Such a correlation is strengthened by a Kimmeridgian Lower Tithonian molluscan assemblage which includes: perisphinctids (especially a finely ribbed form resembling Subphmites and Pectinatites), berriasellids such as Bcrriasclla behrendsi Burckhardt, oppeliids, belemnopseids (Bclcmnopsis and Hibolithes), inoceramids referable to the R. haasti group and Arctotis australis Crame (Tavera, 1970; Covacevich, 1976; Smellie and others, 1980; Crame, 1984, 1985a).
There is some evidence to suggest that the Mudstone Member grades directly into the overlying Mixed Marine Member (Crame and Farquharson. 1984). The latter, which is at least 320 m thick, appears to be characterized by an initial (116 m) coarse grained interval in which rusty-coloured volcaniclastic conglomerates ( > 3.5 m thick), sandstones and thin intercalated lavas predominate. These are succeeded by a siltstone-dominated interval and the sequence terminates in interbedded lavas and agglomerates (Crame, 1984, fig. 2B; Crame and Farquharson, 1984). A basal fauna from the section through the Mixed Marine Member has yielded Bochianitcs, berriasellid-type fragments, a small (juvenile?) Inoceramus and a new buchiid (previously identified as Otapiria sp. nov. 1; Crame, 19X4). Some 120 m above this level spiticeratid ammonites appear for the first time, together with probable berriasellids and an almost smooth mytilid or inoceramid (Parainoccramus of Crarrn^ 1984). The uppermost levels of the member are characterized by further specimens or Bochianitcs. oppeliids, a second distinctive buchiid/monotid and an Inoceramus belonging to the /. ovatus group. Overall, a Berriasian age is suggested for this unit, although it is possible that it both ranges down into the Tithonian and up into the Valanginian (Smellie and others, 1980; Crame, 1984). The stratigraphic position of a Valanginian fauna described by Covacevich (1976) from the south-eastern flank of Byers Peninsula has yet to be accurately established.
In summary, the probable Kimmeridgian Valanginian age range for the Byers Formation indicates that it is directly comparable with, for example, the entire Himalia Ridge section of the Fossil Bluff Formation (Fig. 4).

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

29

Some Biogeographic'al Considerations
Whenever regional comparisons of the FBF are attempted, it is readily apparent that it is much easier to correlate the lower (Kimmeridgian Tithonian) levels than the uppermost (Aptian Albian) ones (e.g. Taylor and others, 1979: Crame, 1982a, h: Thomson, 1983/)). The reason for this lies in the fact that, whereas the Upper Jurassic faunas can be related to a broad faunal province that covered much of the Southern Hemisphere mid- and high latitudes (the so-called Indo-Pacific province of many authors see below), their Aptian Albian counterparts have much less wide-ranging affinities. It has generally been assumed that, in the late Jurassic, comparatively warm waters would have been able to penetrate to high latitudes, and that the more or less continuous shelves around the southern Gondwana margins would have been populated by a homogeneous fauna (e.g. Gordon. 1974; Stevens. 1980). In marked contrast, by the Aptian-Albian new seaways were developing between the component Gondwana continents and both Antarctica and Australasia had shifted southwards wato higher latitudes (e.g. Smith and Briden, 1977. maps 33 35). Migration routes Pere now' disrupted and significant centres of endemism began to emerge (e.g. Fleming, 1967; Stevens, 1980). It has been postulated that one such centre lay over western Antarctica (Thomson, 1981; Crame. in press) and the Fossil Bluff Formation may hold a very valuable record of the transition from cosmopolitan to restricted faunas.
The earliest faunas of the FBF certainly seem to have had very widespread affinities. The perisphinctid ammonites can be linked with wade-ranging forms (Thomson, 1979) and the belemnites largely fall within the Belemnopsis uhligi group, wrhich has been recorded from the Himalayas, Indonesia, New' Zealand, western Antarctica, southern Argentina and the Falkland Plateau (Stevens, 1965, 1973a: Willey, 1973; Jeletzky, 1983). Typical associates of this group in the Lower-Middle Kimmeridgian are bivalves such as members of the R. galoi and R. haasti groups and Malayomaorica nuilayomaorica (Crame. 1982a, A, 1983a). However, it is apparent that these bivalve types are uncommon (and possibly absent) in both southern South America and the Himalayas, and a faunal province defined on essentially benthonic elements stretches around the Gondwana margins from only approximately Patagonia to the Indonesian region (Crame. in press, fig. 2). This is, in essence, the Maorian (or I. galoi') province of Freneix (1981), Quilty (1981) and Hayami (1984). Some evidence that it may be divisible into sub-provinces (or endemic centres) is provided by the occurrence of bivalves such as Jeletzkiella falklandensis, Arctotis hu4stralis%Malayaomaorica occidentalis and M. sp. nov.? in the western Antarctic region (Crame, in press).
Ammonites of the subfamily Virgatosphinctinae (i.e. species of Aulacosphinctoides and Virgatosphinctes), buchiids (B. hlanfordiana and B. spitiensis groups) and inoceramids such as Anopaca stoliezkai (from Belemnite Point) all suggest that very broad distribution patterns around the Gondwana margins continued into the Lower Middle Tithonian (e.g. Thomson, 1981, fig. lb ; Crame, in press, fig. 3). Indeed, it is even possible that a circular migration path around the India Australasia-Antarctica block was accomplished by means of an oceanic link between the latter continent and South Africa (e.g. Enay, 1973; Hallam. 1975; Thomson, 1981). Such a connection is certainly suggested by the occurrence of ammonites such as V. denscplicatus, V. contiguus and V. cf. frequens in both the Spiti Shales and FBF (Thomson, 1979, 1981).
That these very broad faunal connections persisted into the Upper Tithonian is evidenced by the distribution of both berriasellid ammonites and bivalves such as

30 CRAME AND HOW LET T

Retroceramus everesti (Thomson, 1979, 1981; Crame, 1982/?). Nevertheless, it should

he stressed here that there are again some indications of restricted ranges on the

western margins of circum-Gondwana (Indo-Pacific) province. Endemic belemnite

species within the Belemnopseidae are known from the Malagasy Republic, Patagonia

(Stevens, 1965, 1973cr; Riccardi, 1977), and the FBF (Hiholithes belligerundi; Willey,

1973) and it appears that the circum-Gondwana belemnite links established in the

Kimmeridgian may have been substantially reduced by the Late Tithonian (Stevens,

1965, 19736/). Anopaea sp. now? and the new small species of Buchia may also be

unique to the FBF.

In comparison with the Kimmeridgian Tithonian, the Berriasian Valanginian

palaeontological record of the Southern Hemisphere is much less well understood.

There arc far fewer fossiliferous localities of this age, especially in the higher latitudes,

and only very tentative biogeographic reconstructions can be attempted. Some

indications that the very broad `circum-Gondwana' distribution patterns persisted

across the J K boundary are provided by ammonite genera such as Spiticeras,

Himalayites, Raimondiceras, Olcostephanus, Haplophylloceras and Bochianitat

(Leanza, 1981; Rawson, 1981; Thomson, 1981), together with bivalves like R. everef^

(in the upper part of its range; Crame, 19826). Nevertheless, there are also signs that

the FBF faunas may have been becoming steadily more isolated. There are again

endemic belemnopseid belemnites, such as B. alexandri Willey, as well as species such

as B. gladiatoris which indicate links with southern South America and the Malagasy

Republic (Willey, 1973; Howlett, 1986). The occurrence of/, cf. ovatus and /. sp. aif.

ellioti can be matched with those of certain other inoceramids in the Antarctic

Peninsula Scotia arc Patagonia and it is becoming increasingly apparent that a

small-scale radiation of Inoeeramus- and Parainoceramus-like forms occurred in this

region at this time (Crame, 1984, 1985, in press). So far, this is the only significant

inoceramid centre-of-origin recognized in the Berriasian Valanginian of the Southern

Hemisphere.

Of the various faunal elements in the FBF that may be Hauterivian Barremian in

age, only the possible members of the Aucellina caucasica A. aptiensis group have

regional correlatives (in arctic Canada, Jeletzky, 1964). Neither the various

representatives of the /. neocomiensis group nor the Anopaea resembling A.

trapezoidalis have any close Southern Hemisphere counterparts and the same may

well be true of the belemnites formerly referred to Neohiholites. All that can be said

at present is that there is an apparent trend towards faunal isolation in the

Hauterivian Barremian interval of the FBF and this agrees with a general trend in the

western Antarctica Scotia arc Patagonia region (Crame, in press).

A

In the succeeding Aptian Albian stages there is a much more comprehensive fossW

record and detailed comparisons can be made between key Southern Hemisphere

high latitude localities. Perhaps the most striking feature to emerge from analyses to

date is that the cephalopod faunas now show signs of marked differentiation. In

particular, the belemnite family Dimitobelidae has been clearly demonstrated to be

restricted to high latitude regions (Stevens, 19736; Doyle, 1985, 1987, in press).

Strong connections between eastern Australia and western Antarctica are indicated

by such belemnites as Dimitobelus praelindsayi, D. diptychus, D. stimulus and

Peratobelus cf. oxys (Doyle, 1987, in press). Further links between Australia, New

Zealand, Antarctica and Patagonia are suggested by a distinctive group of

aconeceratid and heteromorph ammonites (Day, 1969; Thomson, 1974, 1981), and

inoceramid and oxytomid bivalves (Crame, 19856. in press). Prominent among the

latter are members of the Aucellina andina-radiatostriata group.

Although there are still many substantial gaps in the records and much taxonomic

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMA TION

31

work remains to be done, there is a distinct impression that the marine invertebrate faunas of the western Antarctic became progressively isolated during JurassicCretaceous boundary times. From a Kimmeridgian condition where many species and species groups can be traced considerable distances around the Gondwana margins, there appears to have been a marked retraction to much higher latitude affinities in the Aptian Albian. The changes in the various faunal groups do not appear to have been synchronous, for there is some evidence to suggest that bivalves became more restricted before belemnites, and both these groups in turn may have preceded the ammonites (whose acme of differentiation may well have been in the Campanian-Maastrichtian Kossmaticeratidae; Thomson, 1981). Fuller documenta tion of this faunal response to the fragmentation of Gondwana remains a major goal of Antarctic Late Mesozoic palaeontology.

Conclusions
«1. An extremely thick sequence of FBF sedimentary rocks is exposed in the Ration Valley-Callisto Cliffs-Planet Heights region of eastern Alexander Island, orrelations presented in this study suggest that the total thickness here lies between 3.6 and 3.8 km. A further 600 m of strata exposed at Succession Cliffs can be added to this figure. No major breaks have been recognized in this sequence and there is every prospect that it may reflect a substantial record of marine sedimentation across the Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary. As such, it is a potentially useful Antarctic reference section.
2. The earliest faunas, associated with the disturbed zone in the Ablation Valley region, are probably best regarded as Middle Kimmeridgian in age. The Kimmeridgian Tithonian boundary can be placed at the top of the disturbed zone and the latter stage is subdivided into two. The Lower Tithonian is characterized by a perisphinctid-buchiid assemblage (together with certain belemnopseid belemnites) and the Upper by a suite of berriasellid ammonites and belemnites such as Hibolithes argentinus. The boundary between them is placed at 720 m on Himalia Ridge (Figs 4, 13).
3. At present, there is no firm macrofaunal basis for defining the JurassicCretaceous boundary in the FBF. It is here placed within the upper 200-300 m of the Callisto Cliffs section (KG. 2802), within the range of Retroceramus everesti. Micropalaeontological analyses currently in hand may provide greater resolution.
4. The Berriasian fauna recognized at the base of the Leda Ridge section, top of
«malia Ridge and Callisto Cliffs sections and low in Tombaugh Cliffs (Figs 4, 9, 13) ty be best regarded as Late Berriasian. It is closely associated, in its uppermost levels, with certain Valanginian indicator species, and the boundary between these two stages has been set at 48 m on Leda Ridge, 2298 m on Himalia Ridge and 260 m on Tombaugh Cliffs (Figs 4, 9).
5. The Hauterivian Barremian interval is the least well-defined one in the entire sequence. There are, as yet, no diagnostic Hauterivian macrofossils and only a few tentative Barremian ones are known. However, this time interval is represented by as much as 700 m of strata in the Spartan Cwm area (section KG. 3401, Figs 9, 13) and it is hoped that further taxonomic studies of belemnopseid belemnites and inoceramid bivalves may reveal some age-diagnostic forms.
6. The base of the Aptian is well defined by the sudden influx of aconeceratid ammonites, Aucellina andina-radiatostriata and Inoceramus deltoides. This level is set at c. 740 m on Leda Ridge and 865-890 m in section KG. 3401, Spartan Cwm (Figs 4, 9, 13).
BAS

32 CRAME AND HOW LET T
The Aptian stage extends through the topmost levels of the Spartan Cwm section (where it is characterized by further aconeceratids, lytoceratids and dimitobelid belemnites) and into the lower levels of Succession Cliffs. The Aptian Albian boundary can probably be placed at the latter locality somewhere above the 148-m level (Fig. 13).
7. Whereas the sedimentary record across the J K boundary at the northern end of the peninsula is characterized by an abrupt lithological change (from a mudstonetuff sequence to volcaniclastic conglomerates), that in eastern Alexander Island is broadly gradational. There is some evidence to suggest that the passage from a disturbed zone (at the base of the sequence) to interbedded siltstones and sandstones (at the top) may have been the product of a single regional shallowing event.
8. Whereas many elements within the earliest (Kimmeridgian Tithonian) faunas had very widespread affinities within the Southern Hemisphere, the latest (Aptian Albian) faunas appear to have been much more restricted. Both nektonic and benthonic molluscan species suggest that, by the end of the Early Cretaceous, a distinct high-latitude faunal province can be traced from southern South Americ^ through western Antarctica to New Zealand and eastern Australia.
Such a change in biogeographic configurations can almost certainly be linked to the fragmentation of Gondwana and southward drift of Antarctica and Australasia (e.g. Stevens, 1980; Howarth, 1981, figs 13.9 and 13.12). It is hoped that fuller documentation of the faunas encountered in this study will enable this fundamental shift in faunal affinities to be scrutinized more closely.

Ac KNOWLFDGFMFNTS
We would like to acknowledge all the previous investigations of FBF palaeontology and stratigraphy made by both past and present members of British Antarctic Survey. Inevitably we will have used at least some of their ideas and information in this study, but we hope that they will not be too offended at the results. Our sincere thanks go to our field assistants, M. F. Chantrey. S. A. Grice, S. K. Long, M. S. Morley for their technical assistance in the field. The photographs were taken by C. J. Gilbert and A. C. Sylvester supervised drafting of the diagrams. Finally, we are grateful to P. J. Butterworth and Dr M. R. A. Thomson for reading through, and improving, earlier drafts of the manuscript.

Received 22 July I9S7; accepted 24 September 19R7 R fffrfncfs

i

Askin, R. A. 1983 Tilhonian (Upper Jurassic! Barrennan (Lower C retaceous) spores, pollen and nncroplankton from the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica, (in O liytr, R. L., J amls, P. R. and J ack), J. B eds. Antarctic earth science. Canberra. Australian Academy of Science. 295 7.)
Birk kl im ), T.. H an cock . J M . H art. M. B., R awson. P F\, Rimanl. J . Rohaszynski, F. S. and Scklyk. F. 1984. Cretaceous stage boundaries proposals Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark, 33, 3 20.
Bt rn , R. W\ 1984. The geology of the LeMay Group, Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Reports, No 109, 65 pp.
Bi 'TTERWorth. P. J 1985. Report on Antarctic field work. Sedimentology of Ablation Valley, Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin, No. 66, 73 82.
Casi Y, R. and R awson. P. F. eds. 1973 The boreal Lower Cretaceous. Geological Journal Special Issue, No. 5. Liverpool. Seel House Press, 448 pp.
CoLi.ogu si R la Limiti J i rassiou C rit a cl. L yon N r < hath (1973) 1975 Memoires du Bureau de Recherches Geologiques el Xfmieres, No. 86. 393 pp.

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

33

Covacevich, C. V. 1976. Fauna Valaginiana dc Peninsula Byers, Isla Livingston, Antartica. Revista Geoldgica de Chile. 3, 25 56.
C rame, J. A. 1978. Palaeontological studies in southeastern Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Report, R/77 78/97 [Unpublished].
C rame. J. A. 1981. The occurrence of Anopaea Bivalvia: fnoccramidac) in the Antarctic Peninsula. Journal o f Molluscan Studies, 47, 206 19.
C'rame, J. A. 1982a. Late Mesozoic bivalve biostratigraphy of the Antarctic Peninsula region. Journal of the Geological Society o f London. 139, 771 8.
C'rame, J. A. 19826. Late Jurassic inoceramid bivalves from the Antarctic Peninsula region and their stratigraphic use. Palaeontology. 25. 555 603.
C rame, J. A. 1983a. The occurrence of the Upper Jurassic bivalve Malayomaorica malayomaorica (Krumbeck) on the Orville Coast. Antarctica. Journal of Molluscan Studies. 49, 61 76.
C rame. J. A. 19836. Lower C retaceous bivalve biostratigraphy of Antarctica. Zitteliana. 10. 399-406. C rame. J. A. 1984. Primary bivalve zonation of the Jurassic Cretaceous boundary in Antarctica. (In
Perilliat. M. de C. ed. Memoria III Congreso Latinamericano de Paleontologia. Mexico, 19X4.
Mexico City. Universidad Nacional Autonomea de Mexico, Instituto de Geologia, 242-54.) C rame, J. A. 1985a. New Late Jurassic oxytomid bivalves from the Antarctic Peninsula region. British
Antarctic Survey Bulletin. No. 69. 35 55. C rame, J. A. 19856. Lower Cretaceous inoceramid bivalves from the Antarctic Peninsula region
Palaeontology, 25, 475 525. ^ H me, J. A. 1986. Stratigraphical studies in the Callisto C'lilfs Planet Heights area of eastern Alexander
Island. British Antarctic Suney Report, R /85 86/G12 [Unpublished]. C rame, J. A. In press. Late Mesozoic bivalve biogcography of Antarctica. (In Gondwana Six, Proceedings
of the Sixth Gondwana Symposium. Columbus. Ohio.) C rame, J. A. and F arquharson. G. W. 1984. Stratigraphical and sedimentological studies on Byers
Peninsula, western Livingston Island (South Shetland Islands) British Antarctic Survey Report. R/83 84/G9 [Unpublished]. D alziel, 1. W. D., Storey, B. C.. G arrett, S. W ,, G rlnow', A. M., H errod, L. D. B. and P ankhurst, R. J. In press. Extcnsional tectonics and the fragmentation of G ondw analand. (In C o w ard , M. P., D ewey. J. F. and H anc (X K, P. L. eds. Continental extcnsional tectonics. Geological Society of London Special Publications.) D ay. R. W. 1969. The Lower Cretaceous of the G reat Artesian Basin. (In C ampbell. K. S. W. ed. Stratigraphy and palaeontology. Essays in honour of Dorothy Hill. Canberra. Australian National
University Press. 140 73.) Doyle, P. 1985. ` Indian* belemnites from the Albian (Lower Cretaceous) of James Ross Island.
Antarctica. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin. No. 69. 23 34.
Doyle. P. 1987. The Cretaceous Dimitobclidae j Belemnitida) of the Antarctic Peninsula region Palaeontology. 30< 1). 147-77.
D o y l e , P. In press. The bclcmnite family Dimitobclidae in the Cretaceous of Gondw ana. International I'nion o f Geological Sciences. Series A.
Elliott, M. H. 1974. Stratigraphy and sedimentary petrology of the Ablation Point area. Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin, No. 39. 87 113.
Enay. R. 1972. Paleobiogeographie des ammonites du Jurassique terminal (Tithonique s.l./Volgien s i / Portlandien s.l.) et mobilite continentale. Geobios, 5, 355 407.
ay. R. 1973. U pper Jurassic (Tithonian) ammonites. (In H allam, A. ed. Atlas o f palaeobiogeography. M Amsterdam, Elsevier, 297 307.) F arquharson, G. W. 1982. Late Mesozoic sedimentation in the northern Antarctic Peninsula and its
relationship to the southern Andes. Journal of the Geological Society o f lamdon. 139. 721 8. F a r q u h a r s o n , G. W. 1983a. The Nordenskjdld Form ation of the northern Antarctic Peninsula: an Upper Jurassic radiolarian mudstone and tufT sequence. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin. No. 60, 1 22. F arquharson, G. W. 19836 Evolution of late Mesozoic sedimentary basins in the northern Antarctic Peninsula. (In O liver. R. L., J ames, P. R. and J ago, J. B. eds. Antarctic earth science. C anberra. Australian Academy of Science. 323 7.) F arquharson. G. W.. H amer, R. D. and Ineson, J. R. 1984. Proximal volcaniclastic sedimentation in a Cretaceous back-arc basin, northern Antarctic Peninsula. (In K okelaar. B. P. and H ow ells, M. F. eds. Marginal basin geology: volcanic and associated sedimentary and tectonic processes in modern and ancient marginal basins. Geological Society o f London Special Publications. No. 16. Oxford. Blackwell Scientific Publications. 219 29.) F eruglio, E. 1936. Palaeontographica patagonica. Pt 1. Memoire dell'Istituto Geologico della (R ) Vnicersitd di Padova. 11. 1 192.

34 CRAME AND HO WL E TT

F leming. C. A. 1967. Biogeographic change related to Mesozoic orogenic history in the south-west Pacific.

Tectonophysics, 3, 419 27.

Freneix, S. 1981. Faunes de bivalves du Scnonien dc Nouvelle-Caledonie. Analyses palcobiogcographique,

biostratigraphique, paleoecologiquc. Annales de Paleontologie {Invertebres), 67(1), 13 32.

G ordon. W. A. 1974. Physical controls on marine biotic distribution in the Jurassic period. (In Ross,

C. A. ed. Paleogeographic provinces and provinciality. Tulsa. Oklahoma, Society of Economic

Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Publication. No. 21. 136 47.)

H allam, A. 1975. Jurassic environments. Cambridge, C ambridge University Press, 269 pp.

H ayami. I. 1984. Jurassic marine bivalve faunas and biogeography in southeast Asia. {In Korayashi, T.,

T oriyami, R. and H ashimoto. W. eds. Geology and paleontology o f southeast Asia. Tokyo.

University of Tokyo Press. 229 37.)

H orne, R. R. 1967. Structural geology of part of south-eastern Alexander Island. British Antarctic Surtey

Bulletin, No. II. 1 22.

H ow arth, M. K. 1958. British Jurassic and Cretaceous ammonite faunas of Alexander Island and

G raham Land. Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey Scientific Reports, No. 21. 16 pp.

H ow arth, M. K. 1981. Palaeogeography of the Mesozoic. {In C<x ks, L. R. M. ed. The evolving earth.

London. British Museum (Natural History) and Cambridge University Press. 197 220.)

H ow lett. P. J. 1986. Olcostephanus (Ammonitina) from the Fossil Bluff Form ation. Alexander Island, and

its stratigraphical significance. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin, No. 70. 71 7.

Imlay, R. W. 1980. Jurassic palaeobiogeography of the conterminus United States in its c o n t i n e n t

setting. Professional Paper. United Stales Geological Survey, 1062. 134 pp.

Ineson, J. R.. C ramf. J. A. and T homson, M. R. A. 1986. Lithostratigraphy of the C retaceous strata of

west James Ross Island. Antarctica. Cretaceous Research, 7. 141 59.

J eletzky. J. A. 1964. Lower Cretaceous marine index fossils of the sedimentary basins of western and

arctic Canada. Geological Surtey Paper. Mines and Geology Branch. Canada. No. 64 11. 101 pp.

J eletzky, J. A. 1983. M acroinvertebrate paleontology, biochronology, and palcocnvironments of Lower

Cretaceous and Upper Jurassic rocks. Deep Sea Drilling Hole 511. eastern Falkland Plateau.

Initial Reports o f the Deep Sea Drilling Project, 71. 951 75.

J eletzky. J. A. 1984. Jurassic Cretaceous boundary beds of western and arctic Canada and the problem

of the Tithonian Berriasian stages in the Boreal realm. {In W estermasn, G. E. G. ed.

Jurassic Cretaceous biochronology and paleogeography o f North America. Special Paper of the

Geological Association o f Canada, No. 27, 175 255.)

Jones, D. L. and Plaeker, G. 1977. Mesozoic megafossils from DSDP Hole 327A and Site 330 on the

eastern Falkland Plateau. Initial Reports o f the Deep Sea Drilling Project, 36. 845 55.

K ennedy, W. J. and K linger. H. C. 1979. Cretaceous faunas from Zululand and Natal. South Africa. The

ammonite superfamily Haplocerataceae Zittel. 1884. Annals o f the South African Museum,

77(6), 85 121.

Leanza, A. F. 1967. Anotaciones sobre los fosiles Jurasico Cretacicos de Patagonia austral (colcccion

Feruglio) conscrvados en la Universidad dc Bologna. Acta Geolbgica Lilloana, 9. 121 88.

Leanza, H. A. 1981. Faunas de ammonites del Jurasico superior y Crctacico inferior de America del Sur

con especial consideration de la Argentina. {In Volkheimer, W. and M lsacchio, E. eds.

Cuencas sedimentarias del Jurasico y Cretdcico de America del Sur. 2. Buenos Aires, 559 97.)

Og g , J. G. and Low rie, W. 1986. M agnetostratigraphy of the Jurassic/C rctaceous boundary. Geology, 14.

547 50.

tycA||

Peninsula. Livingston Island. South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Surt ey Bulletin, No.

277 82.

^

Q lilty , P. G. 1977. Late Jurassic bivalves from Ellsworth Land, Antarctica: their systematic^ and

paleogeographic implications. New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics, 20. 1033 80.

Q uilty, P. G . 1981. Tectonic and other implications of Middle Upper Jurassic rocks and marine faunas

from Ellsworth Land. Antarctica. {In C raddock, C. ed. Antarctic geoscience. Madison,

University of Wisconsin Press, 669 78.)

R awson, P. F. 1981. Early Cretaceous ammonite biostratigraphy and biogeography. {In House, M. R. and

Senior, J. R. eds. The Ammonoidea. London, Academic Press, 499-529.)

R aw son, P. F. 1983. The Valanginian to Aptian stages current definitions and outstanding problems.

Zitteliana. 10. 493 500.

Rice a r d i. A. C. 1977. Berriasian invertebrate fauna from the Springhill Form ation of Southern Patagonia.

Neues Jahrbuch fur Mineralogie. Geologie und Palaontologie. Abhandlungen, 155(2), 216 52.

Smellie, J. L., D avies, R. E. S. and T homson, M. R. A. 1980. Geology of a Mesozoic intra-arc sequence

on Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Surt ey Bulletin,

No. 50, 55 76.

Smith. A. G. and Br id e s. J. C. 1977. Mesozoic and Cenozoic paleocontinental maps. Cambridge,

Cambridge University Press. 63 pp.

THE FOSSIL BLUFF FORMATION

35

Stevens, G. R. 1965. The Jurassic and Cretaceous belcmnites of New Zealand and a review o f the Jurassic and Cretaceous belemnitcs of the Indo-Pacific region. Palaeontological Bulletin. Wellington, No.
36, 283 pp. Stevens, G. R. 1973a. Jurassic belemnites. (In Hallam, A. ed. Atlas o f palaeobiogeography. Amsterdam,
Elsevier, 259 74.) Stevens. G. R. 19736. Cretaceous belemnites. (In H allam. A. ed. Atlas of palaeobiogeography. Amsterdam,
Elsevier, 385 401.) Stevens, G. R. 1978. Cretaceous paleontology. (In Si ggatl. R. P., Stevens, G. R. and T i: Punga, M. T.
eds. The geology o f Mew Zealand 1of II. Wellington. E. C. Keating. Government Printer, 351 66.) ' Stevens, G. R. 1980. Southwest Pacific faunal palaeobiogeography in Mesozoic and Cenozoic times: a review. P a la c o g e o g r a p h y , P a la e o c lim a to lo g y . P a la e o e c o lo g y , 31, 153 96. Stevens, G. R. and S pf.den, 1. G. 1978. New Zealand. (In M oulladf., M . and N airn, A. E. M . eds. The Phanerozoic geology o f the world, II. The Mesozoic, A. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 251 328.) Storey, B. C. and G arrett, S. W. 1985. Crustal growth of the Antarctic Peninsula by accretion, magmatism and extension. Geological Magazine, 122. 5 14. T aylor, B. J.. T homson, M. R. A. and W illf.y, L. E. 1979. The geology of the Ablation Point-K eystone Cliffs area. Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Reports, No. 82, 65 pp. T avera. J. J. 1970. Fauna Tithoniana Neocom iana de la Isla Livingston, Isles Shetland del Sur, Antartica. Serie Cientifica Instituto Antdrtico Chileno. 1, 175 86. ^ B mson. M. R. A. 1974. Ammonite faunas of the Lower Cretaceous of south-eastern Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Reports. No. 80, 44 pp. T homson, M. R. A. 1979. Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous ammonite faunas of the Ablation Point area, Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Reports, No. 97, 37 pp. T homson. M. R. A. 1981. Mesozoic ammonite faunas of Antarctica and the break-up of G ondw ana. (In C resswell, M. M. and Vf.lla, P. eds. Gondwana five. R otterdam , A. A. Balkema, 269-75.) T homson, M. R. A. 1983a. ` E uropean' ammonites in the Lower Cretaceous of Antarctica. Zitteliana. 10, 407 12. T homson, M. R. A. 19836. Antarctica. (In M oullade, M. and N a irn, A. E. M. eds. The Phanerozoic geology o f the world, II. The Mesozoic, B. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 391-422.) T homson. M . R. A. 1983c. Late Jurassic ammonites from the Orville Coast, Antarctica. (In O l p 'ER, R. L., J ames. P. R. and J ago. J. B. eds. Antarctic earth science. Canberra, Australian Academy of Science 315 9.) T homson, M. R A. 1984. Cretaceous ammonite biostratigraphy of western James Ross Island, Antarctica. (In Ferilliat, M. de C. ed. Memoria III Congreso Latinamericano de Paleontologia, Mexico, 1984. Mexico Citv. Universidad, Nacional Autonom a de Mexico, Instituto de Geologia, 308 14.) Valenzuela, A. and H ervf., F. 1971. Geology of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. (In A die, R. J. ed. Antarctic geology and geophysics. Oslo, Universitetsforlaget, 83-9.) W estermann, G. E. G. 1984. Gauging the duration of stages: a new approach for the Jurassic. Episodes. 7, 26 8. W hitham, A. G. 1986. The sedimentology of the Nordenskjold Form ation on Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. British Antarctic Survey Report, R /85 86/G13 [Unpublished]. W illf.y, L. E. 1972. Stratigraphy and palaeontology o f the Fossil Bluff area, Alexander Island, Antarctica. B k Ph.D. thesis University of Birmingham, 158 pp. [Unpublished]. ^ P r.ley, L. E. 1973. Belemnites from south-eastern Alexander Island. II. The occurrence of the family Belemnopseidae in the Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin, No. 36. 33 59. W imbledon, W. A. 1980. Portlandian correlation chart. (In C ope, J. C. W. ed. A correlation o f Jurassic rocks in the British Isles. Part 2: Middle and Upper Jurassic. Geological Society o f London. Special reports, No. 15, 85 108.) W orkin g G roup eor the J urassic/ C retaceous Boundary 1986. W orking group for the Jurassic/ Cretaceous boundary. Meeting held at Siimeg, 18-21 September 1984, Hungary. Acta Geologica Hungarica. 29(1 2), 5-168. Z akharov, V. A. 1981. Buchiidi i biostratigrafiya boreal'noy verchney Yuri i Neokoma. (Buchiids and biostratigraphy of the Upper Jurassic and Neocomian.) Moscow. Acadcmiya Nauk SSR, 270 pp. (In Russian.) Z eiss, A. 1983. Zur Erage der Aquivalenz der Stufen T ithon/B errias/W olga/P ortland in Eurasien und Amerika. Ein Beitrag zur Klarung der weltweiten Korrelation der Jura-Kreide-Grenzschichten im marinen Bereich. Zitteliana. 10. 427 38.

