Realization of All 16 Switching Functions of Two Variables Requires 18 Contacts*
Claude E. Shannon
Abstract Eighteen contacts are necessary and sufficient to simultaneously realize all 16 switching functions of two variables.
In 1949 the writer gave a switching circuit realizing the 16 Boolean functions of two variables using 20 contacts. Recently a student in the M.I.T. Switching Course found a circuit (Fig. 1) requiring only 18 contacts. We will prove that this is minimal - it is not possible to realize these 16 functions with 17 or fewer contacts.
Suppose there were such a circuit K using 17 or fewer contacts. The circuit K would have
16 tenninals on the right corresponding to the 16 functions of two variables and a common terminal A on the left. The open circuit tenninal (hindrance 1) need not be connected in any way to tenninaI A. All the other 15 terminals must have paths (in general through contacts) to A, since each of the remaining switching functions are closed for certain states of the relays x and y. Thus the 15 terminals are nodes of a connected network. Each of these tenninals is a diffe;-ent node since otherwise two of the tenninals would correspond to the same switching function. Hence the network K has at least 15 distinct nodes. By assumption it has not more than 17 branches. Now in a connected network the branches B, nullity N, and number of nodes
V are related by Euler's formula N = B - V + I. Since B ~ 17, V ;;:: 15 we obtain N~3.
We will show by another argument that the nullity N ;;:: 4, thus giving a contradiction and proving that the assumption that the network K contains 17 or fewer elements is impossible.
The nullity of K is the number of independent closed circuits or meshes in K (or more precisely in the linear graph associated with K, obtained by replacing each contact in K by a branch). The nullity of a network may be obtained by determining how many branches must be cut (each cutting operation being made so as to open at least one closed circuit) in order to
leave no closed circuits in the network. In Figure 1 the nullity is 4 corresponding to the closed circuits C I> C 2, C 3, C 4. By cutting, for example, the four branches B I , B 2, B 3, B4 all closed
circuits are eliminated. We will show that there exist at least four independent meshes in our assumed network K,
and in fact in any network realizing the four particular functions:
* Bell Laboratories Memorandum, Nov. 17, 1953.
711

712 C. E. Shannon

y
1x+y l x'+Y
-F,
x ------0 0--
y'
1x'+Y'

Figure 1

Realization of All 16 Switching Functions of Two Variables Requires 18 Contacts

713

II = (x + y)(x' + y' ) ,
h (x + y')(x' + y) , h == xy,
14 = x'y'

Let us suppose that in K these four functions are realized at nodes N I' N 2, N 3, N 4, respectively.
Consider the node N I of K giving the function (x + y)(x' + y'). The branches coming into this node may be divided into two classes: branches labeled x or y and branches labeled x' or y'. There is at least one member of the first class since otherwise there would be no connection from this node to the common terminal A when both x and yare closed. Thus it is possible to go from the node in question via a branch of the first class to A along elements of
the network. Similarly the second class is not empty (otherwise the node would not be closed
to A when both x and yare not operated) and there is a path from the node to A starting through
a branch of the second class.

x
I
X
I
Y-
y
x

x y'
x

Figure 2

Now separate this node into two nodes, according to the two classes of branches, as typified
in Figure 2. This will open a closed circuit of K (because of the two distinct paths from N I to A whose existence we have established) and hence reduce the nullity of K by I. A similar process will be appl ied to the three other nodes N 2, N 3 and N 4' Each of these separations will reduce
the nullity by I. This will show that the original nullity was at least 4, proving the desired result.
We must first show that the separating process we have applied to node N, has not affected
the switching functions at the other three nodes. In the first place, functions I, and hare
disjunctive, so no operating path for/2 can pass through N I (otherwise there would be states of the relays with both/, andh closed). Hence this separation does not alter the realization of/2 at node N 2·
Also the separation does not alter the realization of ..ty at node N 3' For this would mean that a previous operating path through N I to N 3 no longer exists. Such a path must have passed through an x and a y' or through an x' and a y. But, if this were so node N I would be closed to A either in the .xy' state or else in the x' y state of the relays, This is impossible sinc~i,then N I would not have represented the function (x + y)(x ' + y').
Exactly the same argument shows that we have not changed the realization of x' y' at terminal N 4 by the separation process.
Consequently we have, after the separation, a network realizing the functions

714 C. E. Shannon
h == (x + y')(x' + y) ,
i3 ::: xy ,
14 ::: x'y' ,
at nodd;' N 2, N 3, N 4, respectively and with a nullity one less than that of the original network
K.
We now perform a similar operation at N 2, separating the node into two nodes
corresponding to branches x or y' and x' or y. By an identical argument this reduces the nullity
by one, and does not affect the realization at nodes N 3 and N 4 of xy and x' y '.
Now proceed to node N 3 which represents xy. Here again we divide the branches into two classes: x or y' and x' or y. The node is then separated into two nodes. By essentially the same argument this reduces the nullity by one. Also this separation will not affect the realization at N 4 of x' y'. For if there were an operating path to N 4 through N 3 which has been broken by this separation it must have passed through either x and y in series or x' and y' in series. In the
first case 14 should not be closed, and in the second case h should not be closed, and hence
neither of these assumed paths is possible.
Finally going on to N 4, we divide the branches into the classes x or y and x' or y'. Separating the node into two nodes again reduces the nullity by one. In total we have reduced
the nullity by four and since the nullity cannot be negative, the original nullity must have been at least four. This contradicts the original calculation of at most three for the nullity and proves the theorem.

