Recent Researches in Manufacturing Engineering
Modeling and Visualization Objects from Point Cloud Data Surveyed With Terrestrial Laser Scanner

Lecturer Dr. Eng. DIDULESCU CAIUS Faculty of Geodesy
Technical University of Civil Engineering 122-124, Lacul Tei Blvd., District 2, Bucharest
ROMANIA caiusdidulescu@yahoo.com http://www.geodezie.utcb.ro/
Lecturer Dr. Eng. SAVU ADRIAN Faculty of Geodesy
Technical University of Civil Engineering 122-124, Lacul Tei Blvd., District 2, Bucharest
ROMANIA adisavu2002@yahoo.com http://www.geodezie.utcb.ro/
Lecturer Dr. Eng. BADEA ANA CORNELIA Faculty of Geodesy
Technical University of Civil Engineering 122-124, Lacul Tei Blvd., District 2, Bucharest
ROMANIA badeacadastru@xnet.ro http://www.geodezie.utcb.ro/
Conf. Dr. Eng. BADEA GHEORGHE Faculty of Geodesy
Technical University of Civil Engineering 122-124, Lacul Tei Blvd., District 2, Bucharest
ROMANIA gbadea@geodezie.utcb.ro http://www.geodezie.utcb.ro/
Lecturer Ph.D. Eng. BDESCU GABRIEL Faculty of Mineral Resources and Environment,
62A V.Babes Street, Baia Mare ROMANIA
gabrielbadescu@yahoo.com

Abstract: - In this paper we present the problems of converting a measured point cloud surveyed with a terrestrial laser scanner into a realistic 3D polygonal model that can satisfy high modeling and visualization demands. Today 3D scanners are becoming a standard source for input data in many application areas, like architecture, archaeology and surveying. We convert a usually unstructured point cloud into a consistent polygonal model. We analyze the principal problems concerning the surface interpolation and the visualization modes of 3D objects. Finally we present the most popular software packages, languages and libraries used for visualization of point cloud data.
Keywords: modeling, reconstruction, triangulation, mesh simplification, 3D scanning, point cloud, visualization

1. Introduction
Traditionally laser scanning has been used in construction to measure distances with high accuracy. With the decreasing capture time and the improvement in mobility of laser scanners lately they are now used to scan sites for architectural objects or the preservation of cultural heritage, to record complex buildings, linking the interior measurements to the

exterior measurements. High modeling and visualization demands is also required in different applications, like video-games, movies, virtual reality applications and other graphics applications. The reconstruction of precise surfaces from unorganized point clouds derived from laser scanner data measurements is a hard problem and problematic in case of incomplete, noisy and sparse data.

978-960-474-294-3

193

Recent Researches in Manufacturing Engineering

2. 3D model reconstruction using
terrestrial laser scanner
Nowadays, the recovery of the 3D shapes and models and the measurement phase are mainly separated from the modeling and visualization part.

defined on an orthogonal coordinate system representing 3-D space.
Point cloud data files are often simple text files, with each row containing a point. There are many variations; a set of header rows that

Laser Scanning is a new geodetic

describes the data, various characters separating

technique, whereas the geometry of a structure or

the values (delimiters), other information (e.g.

an object is measured completely automated and

colour, surface orientation), binary encoding of

reflectorless with high precision and velocity.

the coordinates, etc.

The origin result is a so-called point cloud.

Sometimes these points are referred to as

Most of the laser scanners are based on the

vertices if they are to be used as corners of a

time of flight principle. This technique allows

polygonal mesh, but a mesh constructed from a

measurements of distances up to several hundred

point cloud does not necessarily include these

of meters. Even ranges beyond one kilometre are

points as vertices.

achievable. The advantage of long ranges implies

Beside the determination of 3D-

a less accuracy in the distance measurement

coordinates (geometrical information) the

(approx. one centimetre).

recording of the intensity (radio metrical

Beside the time of flight principle, the

information) is given by the point cloud.

phase measurement principle represents the other

Additionally a photographic picture can be made

common technique for medium ranges. The range

with the camera in cooperated.

is restricted to one hundred meters. In opposite to

The accuracy of the points in space is at

the time of flight principle, accuracies of the

the order of a few mm. Geo-referencing is

measured distances within some millimetres are

possible due to known points in the scan-area

possible.

with their given 3D-coordinates.

The laser scanner records the points three-

dimensionally by measuring the horizontal and

vertical angle, as well as the spatial distance for

each point. The distance is measured electro-

optical using the impulse procedure or phase

comparison, depending of the instrument type.

The coordinates of the points are obtained in a

specific Cartesian system of the scanner using

simple trigonometric functions. The horizontal

and vertical angles are modified automatically in

pre-established intervals.

Fig. 2 Point cloud with intensity information

Mostly, an object has to be scanned from

different viewpoints. Afterwards, the aim is to

register single point clouds to one common point

cloud. This operation is called registration.

For registration, homologous points (tie

points) or objects (e.g. spheres, cylinders) are

required. Thereby, in each scan at minimum three

tie points or spheres must be visible. The spheres

can be changed by reflectors or special targets.

Fig. 1 Data acquisition with laser scanner A point cloud is a description of a set of points, usually specified by a 3-tuple, [x, y, z]

The default coordinate system of the laser scanner, named Scanner Coordinate System (SCS) is based on the scanner center, which corresponds to (0, 0, 0) in a local (X, Y, Z)

coordinate system. All raw measurements taken

978-960-474-294-3

194

Recent Researches in Manufacturing Engineering

by the scanner are with respect to this arbitrary

3. Generation of the polygonal surface:

system. As previously mentioned, there is no

triangular meshes are created satisfying certain

requirement to know the X, Y, Z of the scanner

quality requirements, e.g. limit on the meshes

center, or to level the scanner, as the registration

element size, no intersection of breaklines, etc.

process will transform the SCS to the local

coordinate system. Since the targets have known

coordinates from surveying in control, the system

performs a mathematical transformation from one

system (scanner) to the other (local control). To

make a simple analogy, this transformation is

similar to the common translation from GPS

(WGS-84) to state plane coordinates. Assuming a

redundant set of known coordinates (more than 3)

was used to complete the registration, the system

will provide details how well the transformation

"fit" on a point-by point basis. The surveyor then

can eliminate or weight points based on these

results or other local planar projections. Once a

registration is complete, all points from the

scan(s) are viewed, stored, and exported in the

global coordinate system. Thus, it is possible to integrate the local scanner frame to existing

Fig.3 Generating a polygonal surface

reference frames, obtaining a registered point cloud.

4. Post-processing: when the model is created, editing operations are commonly applied to refine

the polygonal surface.

3. The surface interpolation problem
The surface reconstruction is a difficult problem because firstly the measured points are usually unorganized and often noisy; moreover the surface can be arbitrary, with unknown topological type and with sharp features. Therefore the reconstruction method must infer the correct geometry, topology and features just from a finite set of sample points. The data can have quite different properties that must be considered in the solution of the surface interpolation problem. Many methods have been developed triangular mesh representation from a point cloud. Then given the polygonal surface, various techniques can be used for postprocessing operations (smoothing, texturing) and

In the first step the principal operation are: data sampling, based on the curvature of the points, noise reduction and outliers rejection and holes filling. In this step wrong correspondences can be removed automatically or manually with visual inspection. The core part of all reconstruction programs is the triangulation. This converts the given set of points into a consistent polygonal model (mesh). One of the most used is the Delaunay Triangulation. The Delaunay triangulation is closely related geometrically to the Voronoi diagram, see Figure 4. The Voronoi diagram split the plane into a number of polygonal regions called tiles. Each tile has one sample point in its interior called a generating point.

for the visualization of the 3D model.

The conversion of the measured data into a

consistent polygonal surface is generally based on

four steps: 1. Pre-processing: in this phase erroneous data

Delaunay Voronoi triangulation diagram

Delaunay and Voronoi

are eliminated. 2 determination of the topology of the object's

Fig. 4: Delaunay/Voronoi relationship

surface: the relations between adjacent parts of the surface have to be derived. This operation needs to take into consideration possible 'constraints' (e.g. breaklines), mainly to preserve special features (like edges);

All other points inside the polygonal tile are closer to the generating point than to any other. The Delaunay triangulation is created by connecting all generating points which share a common tile edge.

978-960-474-294-3

195

Recent Researches in Manufacturing Engineering

The most desirable feature of the Delaunay

users and cannot justify the high cost of producing the

triangulation is that it can be shown that the

photogrammetric 3D model.

triangles are as equilateral as possible, thin triangles are avoided. There are many problems regarding this method though: the complexity of implementing it is one, and the memory required to triangulate large amounts of data is another. This operation generates vertices, edges and faces (representing the analysed surface) that meet only at shared edges. Finite element methods are used to discretize the measured domain by dividing it

After the creation of a triangular mesh, the results are usually visualized, according to the used package and the requirements, in the following manners:
1. Wireframe mode: it is the easiest way of representing a 3D object. It consists of points, lines and curves and describes only the edges in a transparent drawing, without texture or shading information. This technique is mainly used in computer-aided design (CAD)

into many small 'elements', typically triangles or

packages. This 3D model visualization is:

quadrilaterals in two dimensions and tetrahedra in

- an easy way representation (points, lines,

three dimensions. An optimal triangulation is defined measuring angles, edge lengths, height or area of the elements while the error of the finite element approximations is usually related to the

edges) - a transparent drawing (no hidden surface
removal) - used for complex objects sometimes unclear

minimum angle of the elements.

Fig. 5 Applying corrections to the polygonal surface

The last step consists in editing operations in order to perfect the polygonal surface, like edge corrections, triangles insertion or surface corrections by polygons editing. The polygonal model can also be improved adding new vertices and adjusting the coordinates of existing vertices. Moreover spikes can be removed with smooth functions.

4. The visualization of 3D models
The visualization of a 3D model is often the only product of interest for the external world and remains the only possible contact with the model. Therefore a realistic and accurate visualization is often required. Nowadays, with the increasing of the computer memories, shade and texture are added to all the models, but in order to accurate visualize big data sets, much information contained in is often reduced. The consequences are that the accuracy of the data is lost as well as the geo-referencing (most of the software has their own coordinate systems) and that high resolution textures are unusable (because of the control on the Level of Detail). On the other end, low accuracy in the visualization does not attract the end-
978-960-474-294-3

196

Fig. 6. Visualization of the model using the wireframe mode
2. Shaded mode: it is based on the assignment of surface properties to the object (colour, normal information, reflectance, transparency) There are many different shading algorithms, the most well know are flat shading and smooth shading. The key difference between flat and smooth shading is in the way that the normals are used. Flat shading is valid for small object and if the source light and the viewer are at infinity; for high detail levels, a great number of flat shaded polygons are required, therefore it is of little value for realism. Shaded mode: 1. Flat shading (normal vector and lighting for each face/triangle) 2. Smooth shading (Gouraud, Phong)
(normal for each vertex - average of surrounding faces)

Recent Researches in Manufacturing Engineering

Fig 8. Visualization of the model using the textured

mode

Fig 7. Visualization of the model using the flat shading

mode

The characteristics of the texture mode:

- combination of geometry and texture

Smooth (or interpolated) shading can be applied with

information;

many algorithms, but the two "classic" approaches are

- photorealistic visualization;

Gouraud and Phong. Gouraud shading specifies a

- single / multi texture;

colour for each vertex and polygon and then

- images / orthophotos / maps;

intermediate colours are generated along each edge by

- memory and processing power required

interpolation between the vertices. Phong shading

A lot of memory is required for rendering

requires a normal interpolation for each pixel and so is

realistic 3D texturized model: therefore a new

quite prohibitive and time consuming for real-time

graphic interface, called AGP (Accelerated

use. Graphics Port), has been developed. AGP

The characteristics of flat shading are:

allows the texture to be stored in a main

- fast and simple;

memory more powerful than video memory

- shading of a polygon independent of shade of

and can speed up the transfer of large textures

adjacent polygons;

between memory, CPU and video adapter.

- gives object a faceted appearance.

In case of 3D terrain model (DTM) other common

The characteristics of smooth shading are:

methods of representation are the contour maps, the

- approximate the normal to the surface at a vertex

colour shaded models (hypsometric shading) or the

by averaging all normals of abutting polygons

slope maps. In a contour map, contour lines are

- calculate the intensity at each vertex using

generated and displayed from the terrain models by

illumination equations;

intersecting horizontal planes with the network. In a

- use linear interpolation along a polygon edge to

colour shaded model, the height information of the

compute the intensity at each edge pixel;

model are displayed with colours.

- use linear interpolation along a scan line to

In general, creating realistic 3D models (shaded or

compute the intensity at each interior pixel of a

texturized) helps to visualize the final result much

polygon

better than a wireframe representation. With a

wireframe, because no hidden surface removal is

3. Textured mode: it is used for photorealistic

performed, it is not always clear to distinguish. from

visualization of the 3D models (image-based

which viewpoint we are looking at the model. Instead

rendering). Texture mapping in its simplest

shading and rendering can greatly enhance the realism

form involves a single texture (image,

of the model. To decide which type of model to

orthophoto) being mapped onto the surface

produce, we have to consider different factors, like

composed of one or more polygons.

time, hardware and needs. If the time is limited or the

When mapping an image onto an object, the

hardware cannot stand big files, detailed shaded

colour of the object at each pixel is modified by

models might not be necessary.

the corresponding colour derived from the

texture. Compared to flat shading, texture

mapping can reduce the number of used polygons, but increase the 'weight' of the model (in terms of visualization).

5. Softwares, languages and libraries
Visualization of data can be done using various software packages, like:

AutoCAD, Microstation

Geomagic, PolyWorks, Rapidform

978-960-474-294-3

197

Recent Researches in Manufacturing Engineering

Maya, Blender

models has a long tradition and has found efficient

TerrainView, Skyline, ArcGIS, ArcInfo, Erdas

solutions, the correct modeling of closed surfaces or

The most popular languages used for 3D model

free-form objects is of recent nature, a not completely

visualization are:

solved problem and still an important issue

VRML (VRML1 and VRML2)

investigated in many research activities.

X3D 3D scanning using High Density Surveying (HDS) is a

The libraries used for 3D model visualization are:

rapidly growing domain with applications spanning

OPEN GL

across many industries such as aerospace, architecture,

DirectX /Direct 3D

film and television, archaeology and surveying. The

The characteristic of OPEN GL (Open Graphics

ability to capture millions and even billions of 3D

Library) are:

points means that a vast amount of information can be

· open standard

known about a particular object or landscape.

· available for the most modern operating systems

However, all this data comes at a price. There are

· for writing applications that produce 2D and 3D

relatively few software solutions that can easily handle

computer graphics

and process billions points on a PC.

· to draw complex three-dimensional scenes from

A big difficulty at the moment is the translation and

simple primitives

interchange of 3D data between modeling/

· a single, uniform API to avoid problems for the

visualization packages. Each modeling software has

programmer with different 3D accelerators

always its own (binary) format. Even if they allow

· good programming skills are required

exporting files in other formats, the generated 3D file

The characteristic of DirectX / Direct3D are:

often cannot be imported in other packages. Usually

· developed by Microsoft

the only workable export format from a CAD package

· available only for Windows

is the DXF, which has no texture, requires large

· collection of application programming interfaces

storage and often produces considerable errors.

(APIs)

· handling of multimedia, game programming and

References:

video tasks

[1] Coarc, C., Neuner, J., Didulescu, C. (2005),

· good programming skills are required File formats for 3D model visualization are:
DXF OBJ (Object File) COLLADA - DXF: · very popular (AutoCAD) · only wireframe model (lines, edges, points) · big file size · no texture information

Scanarea Laser Terestr ­ O nou tehnic în Topografia Inginereasc, Buletinul tiinific al Universitii Tehnice de Construcii Bucureti [2] Coarc, C., Neuner, J., Didulescu, C. (2005), Tehnici de msurare i înregistrarea datelor spaiale la situri istorice, A VII ­ a Conferin Naional a specialitilor din Domeniul protejrii patrimoniului cultural naional, Bucureti, 01-02 aprilie 2005, Ministerul

- OBJ:

Culturii i Cultelor, Muzeul Naional de Art al

· easy to implement

României

· open standard · geometry and texture supported · accepted from most of the software systems (Maya, Blender, MeshLab, 3D Studio Max) - COLLADA (COLLAborative Design Activity): · data exchange format for 3D data (is designed to transport your content between applications) · XML based · using XML to represent structured data enables 3D tools to use the full arsenal of modern database tools

[3] Jocea A.F., Didulescu C. (2009), Aspecte teoretice i aplicative privind msurtorile 3D utilizând scanarea laser terestr, The National Technical-Scientific Conference,,Modern Technologies for the 3RD Millenium" ­ Oradea, 2009 [4] Remondino F., From Point Cloud To Surface: The Modeling And Visualization Problem, International Archives of Photogrammetry,

· it can include geometry, material and texture

Remote Sensing and Spatial Information

· developed by Sony for the Play Station 3 and

Sciences, Vol. XXXIV-5/W10, International

Portable, now an open standard

Workshop on Visualization and Animation of

Reality-based 3D Models, 24-28 February 2003,

6. Conclusion
In this article we try to find a way to create a computer model of an object which best fit the reality. Polygons

Tarasp-Vulpera, Switzerland [5] 3D Studio Max: http://www.3dmax.com or http://www. discreet. com/products/3dsmax/

are usually the ideal way to accurately represent the

results of measurements, providing an optimal surface

description. While the generation of digital terrain

978-960-474-294-3

198

