From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.
1994 84: 4195-4202
Identification of a novel thrombin receptor sequence required for activation-dependent responses
WF Bahou, JL Kutok, A Wong, CL Potter and BS Coller
Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at: http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#repub_requests Information about ordering reprints may be found online at: http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#reprints Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at: http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml
Blood (print ISSN 0006-4971, online ISSN 1528-0020), is published weekly by the American Society of Hematology, 2021 L St, NW, Suite 900, Washington DC 20036. Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology; all rights reserved.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

Identification of a Novel Thrombin Receptor Sequence Required for Activation-Dependent Responses

By Wadie F. Bahou, Jeffery L. Kutok, Andrea Wong, Cheri L. Potter, and Barry S. Coller

Thrombin receptor (TR) activation by a-thrombin requires proteolytic cleavage, although synthetic peptides modeled after the new N-terminus directly effect receptor activation without cleavage, presumably by interacting with an unidentified region of the receptor. To further define critical residues responsiblefor receptor activation, we performed epitope mapping of anti-TR"lBO, a previously describedpolyclonal antibody that inhibits peptide ligand-inducedreceptor activation in various cell types expressing afunctional TR. An enzyme-linkedimmunosorbentassay (ELISA)using overlapping decapeptides derived from the TR extracellular domains identified four immunodominant peaks within the long N-terminal extension centered between aminoacids 34-U,&-67,65-79, and 87-94. Solublepeptidesderivedfrom regions83-94, but not those from other regionsof the receptor, neutralized the ability of anti-TR1-lWto inhibit peptide

ligand-induced platelet aggregation, suggesting that antibodies directed against this region of the TR are important in ligand-mediated activation. Thrombin receptor mutants lacking discrete regions of the TR were subsequently evaluated using microinjected Xenopus oocytes. Whereas a TR mutant lacking amino acid residuesThF-Lys= (TRA67-82) showed normalt o exaggerated responsetso either a-thrombin or synthetic peptide ligands, only TR mutants with limited deletions spanning the residues GlnsJ-Sersaexhibited dysfunctional responses to either agonist (200 nmol/L athrombin or 200 pmol/L TRU"'). These data provide a model for receptor activation that implicates a discrete and previously uncharacterizedsequence within the TR N-terminal extension that is necessary for initiationof signal transduction events independentof the initiatingagonist. 0 1994 by The American Society of Hematology.

AG PROTEIN-LINKEDthrombin receptor (TR) structurally related to other members of the seven-transmem-

brane receptor family has been identified inendothelialcells,'

vascular smooth muscle cells,2 and platelets3-cells acti-

vatedby thrombin and intimately involved in hemostasis,

thrombosis, and atherogenesis. This receptor recapitulates

many of the previously identified cellular sequelae of throm-

bin activation, including phosphoinositide hydrolysis (with

accumulation of 3,4-bisphosphate and 3,4,5-trisphosphate),

elevation of cytosolic calcium transients ([Ca+2]i),inhibition

of adenylyl cyclase, and tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple

platelet

While its role in platelaecttivatiowisnell

characterized, its precise role in a-thrombin-induced mito-

genesis remains inconclusive. Infibroblasts'and vascular

smooth muscle cells,8a-thrombin-induced mitogenic path-

way(s) appear to be distinct from those associated with ele-

vations of [Ca+2]tiransients. Indeed, responses to a-thrombin

in diverse cellular types suggest the presence of multiple

activation pathways andor coupling mechani~ms.~"~

This receptor requires proteolytic cleavage by a-thrombin

or other proteases for downstream effector-response cou-

pling events3 Accordingly, a model for TR activation has

been postulated that incorporates thrombin binding toan

acidic hirudin-like domain, proteolytic cleavage of the recep-

tor at Arg4'-Ser42,and subsequent activation by a newly

created "tethered ligand."3*" Indeed, synthetic peptides

modeled after the new N-terminus directly activate the recep-

tor, irrespective of receptor proteoly~isT.~he molecular inter-

actions between the TR and both the tethered and synthetic

peptide ligands have not been defined, however. Previous

studies from our laboratory have suggested that the long N-

terminal extension of the thrombin receptor (upstream from

the first transmembrane domain) may be important in activa-

tion-dependent responses to both a-thrombin and synthetic

peptide ligands in both platelets and endothelial cells.' This

was based on the ability of an antibody (anti-TR"'60)directed

against a bacterially expressed segment of the receptor to

inhibit peptide ligand-induced cytosolic calcium transients

in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing a

functional TR, endothelial cells, and platelets. We have now

used complementary techniques incorporating epitope scanning of anti-TR1-l6'p, eptide inhibition, and deletional and in vitro mutagenesis studies to further study molecular determinants of TR activation. We have identified a peptide sequence within the N-terminal extension encompassing amino acid residues Glns3-Ser93that is required for the initiation of signal transduction events. This region of the receptor is necessary for activation irrespective of the initiating agonist, and identifies a previously uncharacterized regulatory mechanism ultimately specifying activation-dependent responses.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Reagents. Purifiedhuman a-thrombin (-3,500 U/mg, 1 nmoY

L -0.1 U/mL) was supplied by J. Jesty (State University ofNew

York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY). Two peptide ligands repre-

senting the new TR N-terminus after thrombin cleavage were used,

one of 14 amino acids (TR4'"', SFLLRNPNDKYEPF) and theother

of six amino acids

SFLLRN), and have been previously

described." Preliminary studies demonstrated that both peptides ag-
gregate platelets in a similar manner, with the 6-mer TR"-" being

somewhat more potent on a molar basis. Peroxidase-conjugated and

fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITQconjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG

(heavy- and light chain-specific) were purchased from Jackson Im-

munolabs (West Grove, PA), and 45Caz+was purchased from Amers-

ham (Arlington Heights, IL). Oligonucleotide primers used for muta-

From the Departments of Medicine and of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook: Stony Brook, NY.
Submitted April 28, 1994; accepted August 4, 1994. Supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grants No. HLO2431, HL.49141 (W.F.B.);and HL19278 (B.S.C.);the American Heart Association, New York StateAfiliate (W.F.B.)a, nd the Center for Biotechnology, State University of New York. Address reprint requests to W. Bahou, MD, Division of Hematology, HSC T-15/040, State Universiry of New York, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8151. The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C.section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. 0 1994 by The American Society of Hematology. 0006-4971/94/8412-0014$3.00/0

Blood, Vol 84, NO 12 (December 15). 1994: pp 4195-4202

4195

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

4196

BAHOU ET AL

genesis were synthesized on a single-channel synthesizer (Mode]

381A, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The production, puri-

fication, and cleavage of anti-TR1-Iminto F(&'), fragments has been

previously described.'

Epifope-mappingstudies. TR peptides encompassing the N-ter-

mina1 extension after cleavage of the proposed signal peptide and

including all three extracellular loops (amino acids 26-99, 161-176,

231-265, and 336-346) were synthesized by t-Boc chemistry onto a

solid-phase support covalently coupled to a polypropylene pin

(Multi-Pin System, Chiron Mimotopes Pyt. Ltd. Clayton, Australia).

A total of 49 overlapping decapeptides, each offset by two amino

acids, was synthesized onto pins specifically designed to fit loosely

into the wells of a microtiter plate. Polypropylene pins with the

covalently coupled peptides were placed in 200 pL of precoat buffer

[2% wt/vol bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.1% Tween 20, phos-

phate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.21 for 60 minutes at 22"C,and
washed by gentle agitation in PBS. Anti-TR'"60IgG diluted to 67

pg/mL was incubated with pins for 70 minutes at 22°C and washed

three times with PBS. Pins were then incubated with the peroxidase-

conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG diluted 1:5,000 in STP buffer ( I %

sheep serum, 0.1% Tween 20 in 10 mmoVL PBS, pH 7.2) for 60

minutes at 22°C and reacted with a substrate solution containing 0.5

mg/mL ABTS [diammonium 2,2' azino-bis-3-ethylbenzthiazoline6-

sulfonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)] and 0.01% wt/vol hydrogen per-

oxide. Optical densities (OD) of individual wells were read after 5

minutes in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) plate

reader (Molecular Devices, Menlo Park, CA), and the 490 nm values

were subtracted from the 405 nm values to correct for background.

To assay for nonspecific antibody binding to the peptides, the assay

was repeated using normal rabbit IgG, andtheOD values for the

normal rabbit IgG were subtracted from those of anti-TR'"".

Plateletaggregationstudies. Platelet rich plasma (PRP) from

normal humanvolunteers was prepared by differential centrifugation

as previously described'' and adjusted to 3.2 X 10%to 3.9 X IO*

platelets per milliliter. For antibody neutralization studies, soluble

TpRepI-tIWideJFs (waber,e)2

synthesized, and equal or control F(ab'), IgG

volumes of peptides and antiwere incubated for 10 minutes

at22°Cand then added to 450 pL PRP for 15 minutes at22°C.

Throughout the experiments, the molar concentrations of the pep-

tides were minimally at a 60-fold molar excess compared with the

molar concentration of the antibody.

Immunoaffinity columns containing approximately 38 mgof TR

peptide 83-94 (QLPAFISEDASG with an added N-terminal cys-

teine) or control peptide (QQTNSWPYT-NH,) were prepared with

Affigel 15 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA) at 8.0 mg/mL in

0.1 mom MOPS (3-[N-Morpholino] propanesulfonic acid), pH 7.5

for 2.5 hours at4°Cwith coupling efficiencies of approximately

93%. Unreacted groups were blocked with 100rnmol/L glycine ethyl

ester HCI, pH 7.8, for 60 minutes at 4"C, followed by washes in

PBSand 0.05 mol/L diethylamine (DEA), pH 11.5. Purified antiTR1.160 F(ab'), (-5 mg) was applied to the columns and the flow-

through material was collected. After washing the column in PBS, the bound material was eluted with 0.05 molL DEA, pH 11.5. Both the flow-through and bound material were evaluated for functional activity by platelet aggregometry.
Plasmid constructs and in vitro mutagenesis. The TR cDNA encompassing the open reading frame' was cloned into the BamHI site of M13mp18 for loop-out mutagenesis, using methylation of the mutant strand as the selective process.I3 Oligonucleotide (ON) primers initially designed to loop-out amino acid residues Thrh7Lys*' (Primer 773) or Glng3-SerQ(9Primer 774) are as follows: ON 773, S'-AAT GAA AGT GGG TTA CAA C'IT CCT GCA TTC (bp 408-22; bp 471-85, underlined) and ON 774, S'-AGT CCT CTT
CAA AAA TGG CTG ACA CTC m G (bp 455-70; bp 522-37,
underlined). Primers were annealed to the single-stranded template

DNA and second-strand synthesis was completed using T7 DNA polymerase and deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs), but substituting 5-methyl-dCTPfor deoxycytodine triphosphate (dCTP). After ligation, the unmethylated parental strand wasnickedwith either Msp I or Hae 111, and fully removed with exonuclease 111. The mutated, methylated single-stranded DNA was transformed into the nonrestrictive Escherichia coli host strain SDM, and mutants were identified by direct dideoxy sequence analysis. Once identified, the BamHI insert was isolated from M13 replicative form DNA for ligation into pGEM (Promega, Madison, WI). After plasmid linearization with EcoRI, in vitro transcription was completed using SP6 RNA polymerase (Ambion, Austin, TX), essentially as previously de~cribed.'~RNwAas resuspended in diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated water as the injection vehicle.
Oocyte injections, "Ca2+ measurements, and immunojluorescence. Functional analyses were completed using microinjected Xenopus laevis oocytes and in vitro-transcribed TR cRNA.I4"' 00cytes were isolated from female frogs anesthesized with 0.2% 3aminobenzoic acid ethyl ester (tricaine) in dechlorinated tap water, following strict animal handling procedures in compliance with federal and state regulations of the Division of Laboratory and Animal Resources, State University of New York at Stony Brook. Sections of the ovaries were surgically removed, and Dumont stage V N I oocytes were defolliculated by incubation for 2 hours at 25°C with 2 mg/mL type I1 collagenase (Sigma) in modified Barth's solution (MBSH: 82.5 mmol/L NaCl, 2.5 mmoW KCI, 1 mmoVL CaCI,, 1 mmoVL MgCI,, 5 mmoVL HEPES, pH 7.8) without Ca". Oocytes were then washed andincubated overnight at 18°C in thesame buffer supplemented with penicillin 100 UlmL and streptomycin 100 @g/
mL. The following day, oocytes were microinjected with individual
cRNAs, and subsequently incubated at 18°C in MBSH for 48 hours. For functional evaluation, oocytes were washedin Ca'+-free
MBSH, and pools of 30 oocytes were loaded in the same buffer for 4 hours at 1 8 T with 50 pCi/mL 45Ca'+.Healthy oocytes (seven per well) were transferred to 24-well clusters in 0.5 mL Ca2'-freeMBSH and extensively washed in Ca2'-free MBSH to obtain steady-state calcium efflux measurements. After activation by individual agonists, 0.5 mL of solution was removed (and replaced with the same volume) at IO-minute intervals for scintillation counting. The 4sCa2+ release ratio was defined as the counts per minute released during the 10-minute incubation with individual agonists divided by the counts per minute released during the initial steady-state IO-minute interval.
For immunofluorescentstaining, microinjected oocytes were fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde in PBS, pH 7.4, for 60 minutes at 4°C and then cryoprotected in graded concentrations of 25% to 75%glycerol. Oocytes were mixedwith equal amounts of Aquamount (Lerner, Stamford, CT) and frozen in liquid nitrogen, and 10-pm sections were placed onto slides precoated with 2% gelatin. Sections were blocked for 60 minutes with 5% goat serum at 25T, washed three times with Solution I (154 mmoVLNaCI, 10 mmol/L Tris-HC1, 0.1% BSA, 0.13% sodium azide, pH 8.2), and then incubated with preimmune IgG or anti-TR34-5I2diluted 1:200 in Solution VO.I % goat serum for 16 hours at4°C. After washingwith Solution I, sections were incubated with the FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody diluted 1:lOO in Solution VO.1% goat serum. Extensively washed oocytes were mounted in Aquamount, and epifluorescent images were obtained using a Nikon Diaphot inverted microscope equipped with fluorescent optics (Nikon, Garden City, NY). Images were frame-averagedto 256 frames with Image I software (Universal Imaging, Media, PA), using laser light excited at 488 nm and a blocking filter of 500 nm.
RESULTS
Antibodies to the receptor's thrombin cleavage site region or the hirudin-like domain inhibit thrombin-mediatedactiva-

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

DETERMINANTS OF THROMBIN RECEPTOR ACTIVATION

+ t -THROMBIN

26

CLEAVAGE

HIRUDIN-LIKE

DOMAIN

Ntt-k~PPE_S$ATNATLDP$FLLyPN~l$~!JFW""E-+ DEEK-NESG-LTEyLVISNt$jSPLQtQLPAF

100
c
" ISEDASGYLTSSW

4197

AMINOACID NUMBER
Fig 1. Epitope mapping of anti-TR"'" using a pin peptide ELISA. A total of 49 overlapping decapeptides (eachoffset by two amino acids) corresponding to predicted TR extracellular sequences (amino acid reridues 2699, 161-176,231-265, and 336-346) was synthesized by t-Boc chemistry onto a solid-phase support covalently coupledto polypropylene pins. Anti-TR"'" IgG diluted to 67 pg/mL was incubated with pins in 96-well microtiter platesfor 70 minutes at 22°C. followed by three washes in PBS. Pins werethen incubated with the peroxidaseconjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG diluted 1:5,000 for 60 minutes, and reacted with a substrate solution containing 0.5 mg/mL ABTS and 0.01% hydrogen peroxide. OD values of individual wells were readafter 5 minutes in an EUSAplate reader. To assess for nonspecific antibody binding to the
peptides, the assay was repeatedusing normal rabbit IgG, and the OD values for the normal rabbit IgG were subtractedfrom those of anti-
TR'"". Individual decapeptides are depicted as horizontal bars, and their specific immunoreactivity (anti-TR"" OD - normal rabbit OD) as the OD, - ODm The epitope profile of anti-TR"" shows four major regions centeredbetween amino acid residues34-41,48-63,68-75, and 83-90.

tion, but display no inhibitory effects on peptide ligandmediated activation.16."In contrast, we previously showed that a polyclonal antibody (anti-TR"I6O) developed against the N-terminal 160 amino acids of the TR completely eliminated elevations in [Ca+*Iito either a-thrombin or peptide ligands in C H 0 cells stably expressing the thrombin receptor. This antibody also inhibited increases in [Ca+*Iin platelets and endothelial cells activated by synthetic peptide ligands, although persistent but qualitatively delayed responses were evident with thrombin activation.' The ability ofanti-TR"L60 to inhibit peptide ligand- and a-thrombinmediated receptor activation suggested that a sequence critical for activation-dependent phenomena is contained within the TR N-terminal extension upstream from the first transmembrane domain.
To determine if immunodominant epitopes of anti-TR1-lm existed, and whether they correlated with the functional characteristics of theantibody, epitope mapping of anti-TR"160 was performed using overlapping peptides corresponding to the TR extracellular sequences. Four major peaks of immunoreactivity centered between amino acid residues 34-41, 48-63,68-75, and 83-90 were identified (Fig 1). As expected,

no significant immunoreactivity was identified to any of the peptides representing the extracellular loops, since these regions of the receptor were not contained in the immunizing antigen. Peak 34-41 overlaps the putative thrombin cleavage site3and peak 48-63 the negatively charged hirudin-like domain."It is unlikely that antibodies to these regions are responsible for the inhibition of peptide ligand-induced receptor activation, however, as previous mutagenesis studies in which these regions were altered or deleted did not demonstrate any effect on peptide ligand-mediated activation
event^.^."
To more specifically delineate those residues involved in the antibody's inhibition of peptide ligand-mediatedTR activation, soluble peptides were synthesized and tested for their ability to neutralize the inhibitory effect of anti-TR"'60 on peptide ligand-induced platelet aggregation. Whereas peptides encompassing residues 34-52,44-55,65-79, and 87-94 showed no neutralizing activity, peptides spanning residues 83-89, 83-91, 83-94, and 85-99 all neutralized the ability of anti-TR"@' ' to abolish peptide ligand-mediated platelet aggregation (Fig 2A). Peptides encompassing residues 4455, 65-79, 83-94, and 87-94 hadno inhibitory effect on

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

4198

BAHOU ET AL

79 0 -
80 -
I\
\\ ANTI-TR"")+ TRe3-94

c 0 50-
40 -
"

65 - 79
83 - 94
85 - 99 87 - 94 I

- W '27
8 70 9 f Min 53
67 53 In J

BUFFER

Fig2. Antibody neutralizationstudies evaluatedby platelet aggregometry. Soluble peptides derivefrdom various regions otfhe TR extracellular domains were synthesized,and equal volumesof peptides and anti-TR"" F(ab'I2 orcontrol F(ab'1, IgG were incubatedfor 10 minutes at 22°C and then added to 450 pL of PRP for 15 minutes at 22°C. Platelet aggregation studies wereperformedon thePRP samples using the synthetic peptide ligand TRU"5 (SFLLRNPNDKYEPF).' Throughout the experiment, the molar concentrations of the peptides were minimally at a 60-fold molar excess comparewd ith the molar concentrationof the antibody. (A)A representativeplatelet aggregometry tracing demonstrates the inhibitory effect of anti-TR'"" (2.7 pmol/L, 290 pg/mL) on activation by 11 pmol/L TRU.", and functional neutralization after incubation with peptide TRm" (356 pmol/L, 440 pg/mL). The inset summarizes the maximal extent of aggregation (expressed as percentage of the maximal slope in the absence of anti-TR"'"1 using the various peptides evaluated. Peptides spanning residu8e3s-89, 83-91, 83-94, and 85-99 all significantly neutralizedthe ability of anti-TR"'" to abolish peptide ligand-mediated platelet aggregation, whereas no effects were
demonstrable using preimmunecontrol lgG (datanot shown). (B,C) The TR peptide83-94 (QLPAFISEDASGwith an addedN-terminalcysteine)
or control peptide (QQTNSWPYT-NH,) was coupled to Affigel 15; approximately 5.0 mg of anti-TR"'" F(ab'1, was passed over the individual columns, and the flow-through was collected. TRU'"-induced platelet aggregation studies were completed with the starting material, antiTR"" F(ab'),, and the unbound column flow-through material. Experiments were performed with 0.4 mL of PRP and 0.1 mL of the flowthrough, individually adjusted to antibody concentrations of 300 pg/mL. The anti-TR'"" column flow-through from the peptide 83-94 affinity
column showed loss of inhibitory activity comparable to that seen with the peptide neutralization demonstrated in A. The flow-through fraction of the control peptidecolumn (C) displayed noloss of inhibition of peptide-induced platelet aggregation. In C, the now-through from
peptide affinity column 83-94 retained its ability to abrogate thrombin-mediatedplatelet aggregation (final thrombin concentration, 1 nmoll L), confirming that the loss of peptide ligand-mediated inhibtion was unrelatedto the affinity chromatography.

peptide-induced platelet aggregation in the absence of antiTRl-160 (data not shown). None of the peptides displayed
any inhibitory or activating responses in the absence of the antibody. Passage of anti-TR1-I6'F(ab'), over anaffinity column of peptide 83-94 resulted in the selective loss of immunoreactivity with peptides from this region as judged by the ELISA (data not shown). This depleted anti-TR'"60 F(ab'), partially lost its ability to inhibit peptide ligandinduced platelet aggregation (Fig 2B), essentially similar to the results demonstrable with soluble neutralization studies. To exclude the possibility that the elution conditions altered the functional characteristics of anti-TR'"", the antibody was incubated with DEA, pH l 1S , and neutralized; this did not reduce the antibody's inhibitory activity against peptideinduced platelet aggregation (data not shown). Additionally, this depleted anti-TR'"60 F(ab'), maintained its ability to inhibit thrombin-induced platelet aggregation (Fig 2C), as expected, because of the retention of antibodies to the thrombin cleavage site and hirudin-like domains.'.'' In contrast, passing anti-TR'"" F(ab'), over anaffinity column of a control peptide (QQTNSWPYT)did not leadto loss of inhibitory activity (Fig 2B).
These results suggested that (1) distinct immunoreactive epitopes were present within the anti-TR"Im antibody, and (2) a small region within the distal portion of the N-terminal

extension may be important in the receptor activation mecha-

nism, most likely in cooperative interactions with other re-

gions. Confirmation of these observations was subsequently

pursued by functional evaluation of thrombin receptor mu-

tants in microinjected X luevis oocytes. As demonstrated in

Fig 3A, thrombin-treated microinjected oocytes showed a

rapid elevation of CaZ+release when injected with 5 ng of

TR cRNA, but not with water alone. Injection of a greater

quantity (25 ng) of cRNA resulted in a higher peak Ca2+

release. Similar results were evident when oocytes were acti-

vated by the synthetic peptide ligand (Fig 3B), and again no

release was seen with water-injected controls. Based on the

functional studies with anti-TR"I6', two TR deletional mu-

tants immediately contiguous to each other were generated:

one lacked amino acid residues Thr67-Lysx2(TRA67-82),

and the other lacked residues

(TRA83-99). AS

showninFig 4, oocytes microinjected with TRA67-82

cRNA responded normally to both a-thrombin and TR42-55.

In sharp contrast, however, oocytes microinjected with

TRA83-99 cRNA displayed no responses to either agonist.

Dose-response curves were then completed using progres-

sively higher concentrations of both agonists (Fig 5). Again,

no responses were evident with oocytes microinjected with

TRA83-99 cRNA, even when activated by much higher con-

centrations of either a-thrombin or TR42-47O.ocytes microin-

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

DETERMINANTS OF THROMBIN RECEPTOR ACTIVATION

611.
T;-N..l.,

13.0 11.5 1o.o

B[ j 25 T

75

42-11

50

4199

25

Time (mmulc.)

L
0 10 20 30
TIms (minulsm)

0.0 10

Fig 3. '%af2 release of Xenopus oocytes microinjectedwith TR
TR"".cRNA and activated by either a-thrombin or peptide ligand
Microinjection of Dumont stage VlVl oocytes was completed using DEW-water alone (5 ngl or 25 ng of TR cRNA, and pools of oocytes were loaded at 48 hours in Ca2+-freemodified Barth's solution with 50 pCi/mL '%a+' for 4 hours at 18°C. Healthy oocytes (seven per well) were transferredto 24-well clusters in 0.5 mL Ca2*-free MBSH and extensively washed in Ca2'-freeMBSH to obtain steady-state calcium efflux measurements. At the indicatedtime point, 10 nmoll L a-thrombin ti& panel) or 40 pmollL T W n ISFLLRN, right panel) was added, and 0.5 mL of the solution bathing the oocytes was removed(and replacedwith the same volume of Ca'+-free MBSHa)t 10-minute intervals for scintillation counting. Basal '%a2' release was approximately 500-800 cpm per 10 minutes per well in most experiments. All points represent the mean k the SEM of at least four wells from a single representative experiment.

jected with TRA67-82 cRNA, however, displayed rapid activation-dependent responses to both agonists, and these responses were more pronounced than those of oocytes mi-
croinjected with wild-type TR cRNA ( P < .05 for activation
by 100 nmolL a-thrombin only). It is improbable that the unresponsiveness evident with TRA83-99 is related simply to a shortening of the N-terminal extension, as a deletional mutant immediately contiguous to this region (TRA67-82) remained completely functional; furthermore, others have shown that TR mutants lacking 13 amino acids of the hiru-
A"r Bt5r

Time (minure.)

Tlmo (minut..)

Fig 4. Functionalanalysis of mutant TRs. TRA67-82or TRA83-99
(25 ng) was microinjected into Xenopus oocytes, and the *Ca'+ release wasquantitated after activation by 10 nmollL thrombin (A) or
40 *mol/L W-"(B). Microinjection of oocytes, %a2+ loading, and
functional evaluations were completed as outlined in Materials and Methods and the Fig 3 legend.Rapid,activation-dependentresponses to both agonists were identified with TRA67-82, whereas no responseswere seen with TRA83-99.The data shown are means 2 SEM from four determinationsfrom three identical experiments.

PR""' (200 *U)
Fig 5. Concentration-dependent responsesfor wild-type TR ID), or mutants TRA67-82(0)and TRA83-99(D),activatedby 100 nmoll L a-thrombin (A), 200 nmollL a-thrombin (B), or 200 pmollL TRu4' (C). Individual cRNAs (25 ng) were microinjectedinto Xenopus oocytes for functional measurements, essentially as outlined in Fig 3 legend, and maximal -a2' release wos quant-Hated at 10 minutes. No rerponws to either agonist are evident wlth oocytes microinjectedwith TRAM-99cRNA. Exaggeratedrmponws are demonstrablewith oocytes microinjectedwith TRA67-82cRNA when compared
with wild-type TR ( Pc .05, A alone).Data shown representthe mean
2 SEM of five wells from duplicate experiments.
din-like domain also display normal responses to synthetic peptide ligands."
To ensure that both TR mutants were expressed on the cell-surface membrane, we performed immunofluorescence staining of microinjected oocytes using anantibody directed against a synthetic peptide encompassing the thrombin cleavage site (a~~ti-TR'~-'~A)s.l shown in Fig 6, epifluorescent images identified similar patterns of staining with oocytes expressing either mutant. In both cases cell-surface expression was similar in intensity to that seen with oocytes microinjected with wild-type TR(datanot shown), andwas limited in its distribution to the oocyte animal pole, consistent with previous observations.'* No staining was evident using preimmune control IgG or with uninjected oocytes stained with anti-TR"4-5*.
The region encompassing TR residues Gln83-Ser99was subsequently evaluated more extensively by deletional and in vitro mutagenesis studies. The TR mutant lacking six amino acids immediately contiguous to the predicted membrane insertion site showed essentially normal responses when compared with wild-type microinjected TR (Fig 7). In sharp contrast, however, neither of two small deletional mutants (GlnS3-Ilesa8nd SeP9-Ser9')spanningTR amino acid residues Glns3-Ser93responded to either agonist. Previous reports had demonstrated the importance of the positively charged N-terminus in activation by synthetic peptide ligands,'* suggesting that receptor activation may be affected by interaction with a negatively charged residue. Accordingly, mutagenesis studies were completed on Glum and Asp". Single alanine substitutions at either of these sites did not reproduce the previously identified effects, however, excluding the possibility that the functional properties within this region of the TR are solely mediated by the charge characteristics of these amino acid residues.
DISCUSSION
The TR is unusual among G protein-coupled receptors in that thrombin-mediated proteolysis appears to be a sine qua

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

4200

BAHOU ET AL

Fig 6. Immunofluorescent staining of microinjectedXenopus oocytes. Oocytes were microinjected with 25 ng of individual cRNAs and fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde, and 10-pm cryosections were placed onto slides precoated with 2% gelatin for immunofluorescent staining. Sections were incubated with preimmune IgG or anti-TR3'-52 diluted 1:200 in Solution 1/0.1% goat serum for 16 hours at4°C (Solution I is 154 mmol/L NaCI, 10 mmol/L Tris-HCI,0.1%BSA,0.13% sodium azide, pH 8.2). After washing with SolutionI, sections were incubatedwith theFITC-conjugatedgoat anti-rabbit antibody diluted 1:200 in the same solution supplemented with 0.1% goat serum. Extensively washed oocytes weremounted in Aquamount, and epifluorescent images were obtained usinga Nikon Diaphot inverted microscope equipped with fluorescent optics and Imaging I software. (A) Uninjected oocytes. (B) Oocytes microinjected with TRA67-82. (C) Oocytesmicroinjected with TRA83-99 (all stained with anti-TR34'52. (D) Oocytes microinjected with TRA83-99 and stained with preimmune controlIgG. The arrows highlight thezone of immunofluorescence (whiteband) corresponding to the oocyte ceslul rface. The final magnification in allimages is 1,500 =.

were initially studied. Anti-TR"'" antibodies consistently abrogated ligand-induced platelet aggregation, while peptide neutralization or selective removal of a subset of antibodies directed at the regionencompassing-and inclusive ofresidues Proxs-SerXnpeutralized this inhibitory effect. This suggested that the subset of antibodies to this defined region were important in the antibody's inhibitory effects. Such studies cannot, however, differentiate between direct steric effects of such antibodies and/or allosteric effects operating at a distance.
To further study this region of the receptor, mutagenesis studies were subsequently studied usingmicroinjectedXenopus oocytes. Only TR mutants encompassing the region previouslydefined by antibody neutralization studies did not respondto either agonist. To exclude the possibility that molecular perturbations contiguous to the membrane insertion site nonspecifically affected the functional integrity of the receptor, we generated a TR mutant lacking thehexapeptide sequence immediately adjacent to thefirst transmembrane domain. This mutant(Gly"J-Sei'J)showednormal function, lending additional support for the specificity of the observations collectively madewith previous mutagenesis studies. Whereas steric effects may have explained the initial inhibitory effects of the antibody, this is not consistent with the mutagenesis data, which establish that this region plays a functional role in the initiation of signal transduction effects.
Surprisingly, the TR mutant TRA67-82 showed enhanced responses when compared with wild-type TR. These responses were evident upon activation with either a-thrombin or synthetic peptide ligand and suggest that this portion of the receptor may have modulating effects on activation phenomena. Potential mechanisms for this observation could include steric effects regulating the availability of the tethered ligand for its recognition sequence or direct modulation of ligand affinity for its interactive domain. These observations raise the possibility, therefore, that an additional mechanism regulating receptor activation is operational within this region of the receptor.
Mutant

non for activation. The subsequent self-activation process involving the generation of a neoligand isalso unique. Structural determinants of synthetic TR peptideanalogs have been extensively studied(',''.'"."' and consistently demonstrate (1) the importance of the N-terminus in receptor activation and (2) theneed for a minimalpenta- or hexapeptide "core" sequence for inducing activation. What remains unknown, however, is the region(s) on the body of the receptor with which the peptide ligand interacts (binding site) andthe mechanism of ligand-mediated receptor activation. Previous work in this laboratory using anti-TR'"'" had suggested that theN-terminal extension maybe structurally involved in peptide ligand-associated receptor activation phenomenon.' The molecular mechanism(s) of this effect remained incompletely characterized, however.
Using epitope scanning and functional antibody neutralization studies, regulatory determinants of TR activation

Wild-type Q L P A F I S E D A S G Y L T S S l00 100

- - - - - -TRA83-88

SEDASGYLTSS 0 0

- - - - -TRA89-93 Q L P A F I

GYLTSS 0 0

TFd94-99 Q L P A F I S E D A S - - - - - -

86 92

E9OALA Q L P A F I S A D A S G Y L T S S 100

82

D91ALA Q L P A F I S E A A S G Y L T S S 100 l05

Fig 7. Mutagenesis studies within the TR region Glnm-SerB. TR deletionalmutantslacking residues Gln''-lle" (TRA83-88), S e p Ser" (TRA89-931, Gly9'-Ser9 (TRA94-991, or single alanine substitutions atGlumand Asp" were generated by site-directedmutagenesis as outlined in Materials and Methods. Individual cRNAs (25ng) were microinjected into Xenopus oocytes for functional measurements, essentially as outlined inthe Fig 3 legend, and maxima"lCa*' release was quantitated a1t0 minutes after activation 1b0ynmol/L a-thrombin or 50 pmol/L TR'*"'. Data are expressed as the percent maximal response relative t o oocytes microinjected with 25 ng wild-typeTR cRNA, and represent the mean of six individual wells from three distinct series of experiments.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

DETERMINANTS OF THROMBIN RECEPTOR ACTIVATION

4201

By analogy to the prototypic seven-transmembrane proteins rhodopsin and the &adrenergic receptor, the ligandbinding site frequently involves residues within the transmembrane helices." However, the TR lacks the crucial aspartic acid residue in the third transmembrane domain that has been implicated in bridging the positively charged amine moiety of catecholamines to the &adrenergic receptor." Recently, molecular genetic studies of the recently cloned seven-transmembrane calcium-sensing receptor identified mutations in the N-terminal extension as contributing to the decrease in calcium binding.23This affords a precedent for considering the N-terminus as a potential ligand-binding site. Alanine mutagenesis substitutions of both acidic residues within the TR region Gln83-Ser93did not demonstrate any effect on receptor activation. Thus, this argues against a simple model in which the positively charged N-terminus of the peptide ligand interacts with one of these negatively charged amino acid residues.
Complementary techniques using functional platelet neutralization and mutagenesis studies implicate the region Glns3-Ser9'near the first transmembrane domain as being necessary for activation-dependent responses independent of the initiating agonist. Whereas our data support the role of this discrete region within the TR N-terminal extension as being necessary for receptor activation, the molecular mechanisms of this effect remain poorly characterized. This region may represent the binding site for the peptide ligand or indirectly affect peptide-ligand binding. Alternatively, this peptide sequence may interact with other transmembrane regions, or effect receptor phosphorylation, signaling mechanisms, etc, via critical conformational adjustments. Despite these unresolved issues, these data provide additional evidence for the complexity of thrombin receptor activation by defining a previously uncharacterized regulatory mechanism ultimately specifying receptor activation phenomena. The role of this sequence in receptor-coupling mechanisms, and in the regulation of TR activatioddesensitization phenomenon is currently being addressed, and may further elucidate regulatory mechanisms controlling TR cell signaling events to either a-thrombin or peptide ligand analogs.
NOTEADDED IN PROOF
Since the submission of this report, another group studying mechanisms of thrombin receptor activation has reported results consistent with those in this report," and in agreement with our original observations on the importance of the Nterminal extension in ligand-mediatedactivation. By creating a series of Xenopuskuman TR chimeras and studying ligandmediated receptor activation, Gerstzen et aIz4concluded that the N-terminal extension and the second extracellular loop defined regions important for receptor activation. Indeed, TR residues encompassing amino acids 76-93 alone appeared especially important for receptor activation. Our results are entirely consistent withand further extend these observations, defining the critical domains to amino acid residues 83-93. Despite both these reports, however, direct interaction of the ligand with this region of the receptor has not been demonstrated, and the molecular mechanism(s) whereby

synthetic peptide ligands interact with the receptor to effect cell-signaling events remain incompletely characterized.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Dr J. Jesty (State University of New York at Stony Brook) for providing purified human a-thrombin and to Drs R. Mathias and S. Rice for providing the equipment and expertise for completion of the oocyte microinjection experiments. We also thank Lesley E. Scudder andKaren Springer for assistance with some of the platelet aggregation and antibody neutralization experiments and David Colfleshfor assistance with theoocyte cryosectioning and immunofluorescent imaging.
REFERENCES
1. Bahou W, Coller B, Potter C, Norton K, Kutok J, Goligorsky M: The thrombin receptor extracellular domain contains sites crucial for peptide ligand-induced activation. J Clin Invest 91:1405, 1993
2. Zhong C, Hayzer D, Corson M, Runge M: Molecular cloning of the rat vascular smooth muscle thrombin receptor. Evidence for in vivo regulation by basic fibroblast growth factor. J Biol Chem 267:16975, 1992
3. Vu T-K, Hung D, Wheaton V, Coughlin S: Molecular cloning of a functional thrombin receptor reveals a novel proteolytic mechanism of receptor activation. Cell 64:1057, 1991
4. Huang R-S, Sorisky A, Church W, Simms E, Rittenhouse S: "Thrombin" receptor-directed ligand accounts for activation by thrombin of platelet phospholipase C and accumulation of 3-phosphorylated phosphoinositides. J Biol Chem 266:18435, 1991
5. Seiler SM, Goldenberg HJ, Michel IM, Hunt JT, Zavoico GB: Multiple pathways of thrombin-inducedplatelet activation differentiated by desensitization and a thrombin exosite inhibitor. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 181:636, 1991
6. Vassallo RR Jr, Kieber-Emmons T, Cichowski K, Brass LF: Structure-functionrelationships in the activation of platelet thrombin receptors by receptor-derived peptides. J Biol Chem 267:6081, 1992
7. Vouret-Craviari V, Van Obberghen-SchillingE, Rasmussen V, Pavirani A, Lecocq J-P, Pouyssegur J: Synthetic alpha-thrombin receptor peptides activate G protein-coupled signaling pathways but are unable to induce mitogenesis. Mol Cell Biol 3:95, 1991
8. Weiss R, Nuccitelli R: Inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation prevents thrombin-induced mitogenesis, butnot intracellular free calcium release. J Biol Chem 2675608, 1992
9. McGowan E, Detwiller T: Modified platelet responses to thrombin. Evidence for two types of receptors or coupling mechanisms. J Biol Chem 261:739, 1987
10. Chambard J, Paris S, L'Allemain G, Pouyssegur J: Two growth factor signalling pathways in fibroblasts distinguished by pertussis toxin. Nature 326:800, 1987
1 1. Vu T-K, Wheaton V, Hung D, Charo I, Coughlin S: Domains specifying thrombin-receptor interaction. Nature 353:674, 1991
12. Coller BS, Ward P, Ceruso M, ScudderLE, Springer K, Kutok J, Prestwich GD: Thrombin receptor activating peptides: Importance of the N-terminal serine and its ionization state as judged by pHdependence, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and cleavage by aminopeptidase M. Biochemistry 31:11713, 1992
13. Vandeyar MA, Weiner MP, Hutton CJ, Bart CA: A simple and rapid method for the selection of oligodeoxynucleotide-directed mutants. Gene 65:129, 1988
14. Melton DA, Krieg PA, Rebagliati MR, Maniatis T, ZinnK, Green M: Efficient in vitro synthesis of biologically active RNA and RNA hybridization probes from plasmids containing a bacteriophage SP6 promoter. Nucleic Acids Res 12:7035, 1984
15. Amaya E, Musci T, Kirschner M: Expression of a dominant

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org by guest on July 14, 2011. For personal use only.

4202

BAHOU ET AL

negative mutant of the FGF receptor disrupts mesoderm formation

in Xenupus embryos. Cell 66:257, 199l

16. Brass L, VassalloR,Belmonte E. Ahuja M , Cichowski K,

Hoxie J : Structureandfunction of thehuman platelet thrombin

receptor.Studies using monoclonalantibodiesdirectedagainsta

defined domainwithinthereceptoNrterminus.

J Biol Chem

267:13795,1992

17.HungDT, Vu T-K,WheatonVI, Ishii K, CoughlinSR:

Cloned platelet thrombin receptor is necessary for thrombin-induced

platelet activation. J CIin Invest 89:1350, 1992

18. Kume S, Muto A, ArugaJ, Nakagawa T, Michikawa T, Furu-

chi S, Nakade H, Okaro H, Mikoshiba K: The Xenopus IP, receptor:

Structuref,unctiona, ndlocalization

in oocytesandeggsC. ell

73555, 1993

19. Chao B, Kalkunte S, Maraganore J, Stone S: Essential groups

in synthetic agonist peptides for activation of the platelet thrombin

receptor. Biochemistry 3 1:6175, I992

20. Scarborough R, Naughton M, Teng W, Hung D, Rose J , Vu

T-K,WheatonV,TurckC,Coughlin

S: Tetheredligandagonist

peptides:Structuralrequirementsforthrombinreceptoractivation

reveal mechanism of proteolyticunmasking of agonistfunction. J

Biol Chem 267:13146, 1992

2 1. Savarese TM, Fraser CM: In vitro mutagenesis and the search

for structure-function relationships amongG protein-coupled recep-

tors. Biochem J I :1, I992

22.StraderCD,Gaffney T, Sugg EE,CandeloreMR, Keys R.

Patchett AA, DixonRA: Allele-specific activation of genetically

engineered receptors. J Biol Chem 2665, 1991

23.PollakM,Brown

E, Chou Y.-H. W., Hebert S. Marx S.

SteinmannB, Levi T, Seidman C. Seidman J: Mutations in the

human Ca'+-sensing receptor gene cause familial hypocalciuric hy-

percalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. Cell75:1297.

I993

24.GerstzenRE,Chen J1, Ishii M, Ishii K, Wang L, Nanevicz

T, Turck CW, Vu T-KH. Coughlin SR: Specificity of the thrombin

receptor for agonist peptide is defined by its extracellular surface.

Nature 368548, 1994

