A  Survey of Augmented Reality

Ronald T. Azuma 
Hughes Research  Laboratories
301  1 Malibu  Canyon  Road, MS  RL96
Malibu,  CA  90265
azuma@isl.hrl.hac.com
http://www.cs.unc.edu/-azuma

Abstract

This paper surveys  the field of augmented  reality (AR), in which 3D  virtual objects are
integrated  into a 3D  real environment  in real time.  It describes the medical, manufac-
turing, visualization,  path planning, entertainment,  and military  applications that have
been  explored. This paper describes the characteristics of augmented  reality systems,
including a detailed discussion of the tradeoffs between  optical and video blending
approaches. Registration  and  sensing errors are two of the biggest problems  in build-
ing effective  augmented  reality systems,  so this paper summarizes  current efforts to
overcome these problems. Future  directions and  areas  requiring further research  are
discussed. This  survey provides  a starting point for anyone interested  in researching or
using augmented  reality.

I 

Introduction

I.I  Goals

This paper  surveys  the current state-of-the-art in augmented  reality. It
describes work performed at many  different  sites and explains  the issues and
problems  encountered when building augmented reality  systems.  It summa-
rizes the tradeoffs  and approaches  taken  so far  to overcome  these problems and
speculates on future directions  that deserve  exploration.

A survey paper does  not present new research  results. The contribution

comes from consolidating  existing  information  from many sources  and publish-
ing  an extensive  bibliography  of papers  in this field. While  several other intro-
ductory papers have  been  written on this subject (Barfield  et al.,  1995; Bowskill
and Downie,  1995; Caudell,  1994; Drascic,  1993; Feiner,  1994a, b; Milgram
et al.,  1994b; Rolland  et al.,  1994), this survey is more  comprehensive  and up-
to-date.  This survey provides  a good beginning  point for anyone interested in
starting  research  in this area.

Section  1 describes augmented  reality  and the  motivations  for developing

this technology. Six classes of potential applications  that have  been explored  are
described in Section  2.  Then Section  3  discusses the issues involved in building
an augmented  reality system.  Currently, two  of the biggest problems are  in reg-
istration and sensing:  the subjects  of Sections 4 and  5. Finally, Section  6 de-
scribes some  areas that require  further work and research.

1.2  Definition

Presence, Vol. 6, No. 4, August  /997,  355-385 
@  1997  by the Mossachusetts  Institute  of Technology 

Augmented reality (AR)  is  a variation  of virtual environments (VE),  or
virtual reality as it is  more  commonly called.  VE technologies  completely  im-
merse  a user inside  a synthetic  environment.  While  immersed, the user cannot

Azuma  355

356  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

This definition allows  other technologies  besides

HMDs while retaining  the essential  components  of AR.
For example, it does not include film or 2D  overlays.
Films like  "Jurassic  Park"  feature photorealistic  virtual
objects seamlessly blended with  a real environment  in
3D, but they are not interactive  media. Two-dimen-
sional  virtual overlays  on top of live video  can be done at
interactive  rates,  but the overlays  are  not combined with
the real world in 3D. However, this definition does al-
low monitor-based  interfaces,  monocular systems,  see-
through HMDs,  and various  other combining technolo-
gies.  Potential system  configurations  are  discussed
further in Section  3.

Figure  |.  Real desk with virtual lamp and two virtual chairs. (Courtesy
ECRC)

1.3  Motivation

see the real world  around him. In contrast, AR allows
the user to see the real world, with virtual objects super-
imposed upon or composited with the real world.
Therefore,  AR supplements  reality, rather than com-
pletely  replacing it. Ideally, it would appear  to the user
that the virtual and real  objects coexisted  in the same
space, similar to the effects  achieved in the film "Who
Framed Roger Rabbit?"  Figure  1 shows an example of
what this coexistence  might look like. It shows a real
desk with a real phone. Inside this room are  also a virtual
lamp and two virtual chairs. Note  that the objects are
combined in three  dimensions, so that the virtual lamp
covers  the real table,  and the real table covers  parts of
the two virtual chairs. AR can be thought of as the
"middle  ground"  between VE  (completely  synthetic)
and telepresence  (completely real)  (Milgram and
Kishino,  1994a; Milgram  et al.,  1994b).

Some researchers  define AR in a way that requires the
use of head-mounted  displays  (HMDs).  To avoid limit-
ing AR to specific  technologies, this survey  defines AR as
any system  that has the following  three characteristics:

Why is augmented  reality an interesting  topic?

Why is combining real and virtual objects in 3D  useful?
Augmented  reality enhances  a user's perception  of and
interaction with the real world. The virtual objects dis-
play information  that the user cannot directly detect
with his own senses. The information  conveyed by the
virtual objects helps a user perform real-world  tasks. AR
is a specific example  of what Fred Brooks calls  intelli-
gence amplification (IA):  using the  computer as a tool to
make a task easier  for a human to perform  (Brooks,
1996).

At least six  classes  of potential AR applications  have
been explored:  medical  visualization,  maintenance  and
repair, annotation, robot path planning,  entertainment,
and military aircraft navigation  and targeting. The  next
section describes work that has been done  in each  area.
While  these do not cover every potential application area
of this technology, they do cover the areas explored  so
far.

2  Applications

2.1  Medical

1.  Combines real and virtual
2.  Is interactive  in real time
3.  Is  registered in three  dimensions

Doctors  could use augmented  reality as a visualiza-

tion and training aid for surgery. It may be possible to
collect 3D  datasets of a patient in real time, using  nonin-

Azuma  357

Figure 2.  Virtual fetus  inside womb  of pregnant patient  (Courtesy 
UNC Chapel  Hill Dept. of Computer  Science.) 

Figure 3. Mockup  of breast tumor biopsy. 3D graphics guide needle
insertion. (Courtesy Andrei State, UNC  Chapel Hill Dept  of Computer
Science)

vasive  sensors like magnetic  resonance imaging (MRI),
computed tomography  scans (CT),  or ultrasound imag-
ing. These datasets  could then be  rendered and com-
bined in real time with a view of the real patient.  In ef-
fect, this would give  a doctor "X-ray  vision"  inside a
patient. This ability would be  very useful during mini-
mally invasive  surgery, which reduces the trauma  of an
operation by using  small incisions  or no incisions  at all.
A problem with minimally invasive  techniques  is that
they reduce  the doctor's ability to see inside the patient,
making surgery more  difficult. AR technology  could
provide  an internal view without the need for larger  inci-
sions.

AR might also  be helpful  for general medical  visualiza-

tion tasks in the surgical room.  Surgeons can  detect
some  features with the naked eye that they cannot see in
MRI or CT scans, and vice versa. AR would give sur-
geons  access to both  types of data simultaneously. This
information  might also guide precision  tasks, such as
displaying  where to drill  a hole into the skull for brain
surgery or where  to perform a needle biopsy of a tiny
tumor. The information  from the noninvasive  sensors
would be  directly displayed  on the patient, showing ex-
actly where  to perform the operation.

AR might also  be useful for training purposes

(Kancherla  et al.,  1995).  Virtual  instructions could re-

mind a novice  surgeon of the required steps,  without the
need to look away from a patient to consult a manual.
Virtual  objects could also identify organs and specify
locations to avoid disturbing  the patient (Durlach and
Mayor,  1995).

Several  projects  are  exploring this application  area. At
UNC  Chapel Hill, a research  group has conducted  trial
runs of scanning  the womb  of a pregnant woman with
an  ultrasound sensor,  generating a  3D representation  of
the fetus inside the womb  and displaying  that in a see-
through HMD  (Figure 2).  The goal is to endow the
doctor with the ability to see  the moving, kicking fetus
lying inside the womb, with the hope  that this one  day
may become a "3D  stethoscope"  (Bajura  et al.,  1992;
State et al.,  1994).  More recent efforts have  focused on
a needle biopsy of a breast tumor. Figure  3 shows a
mockup of a breast biopsy operation, where  the virtual
objects identify the location  of the tumor and guide the
needle  to its target (State et al.,  1996b).  Other groups at
the MIT AI  Lab (Grimson  et al.,  1994; Grimson et al.,
1995; Mellor,  1995a,  b),  General  Electric (Lorensen  et
al.,  1993),  and elsewhere  (Betting et al.,  1995; Edwards
et al.,  1995; Taubes,  1994)  are investigating displaying
MRI or CT data, directly registered  onto the patient.

358  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

Figure 4.  External view of Columbia printer maintenance  application.
Note that all objects must be tracked. (Courtesy Steve Feiner, Blair
MacIntyre, and  Dor6e Seligmann, Columbia University)

Figure 5.  Prototype  laser printer maintenance  application, displaying
how to remove  the paper tray. (Courtesy Steve Feiner, Blair Macintyre,
and Dor6e  Seligmann, Columbia  University.)

2.2  Manufacturing  and Repair

Another category of augmented  reality applica-
tions is the assembly, maintenance,  and repair of com-
plex machinery. Instructions  might be easier  to under-
stand if they were  available,  not as  manuals with  text and
pictures,  but rather as  3D  drawings superimposed  upon
the actual equipment,  showing step-by-step  the tasks
that need to be done  and how to do them. These  super-
imposed  3D drawings can be animated,  making the di-
rections  even more  explicit.

Several research  projects  have demonstrated  proto-

types in this area.  Steve Feiner's group  at Columbia built
a laser printer maintenance application  (Feiner et al.,
1993a),  shown in Figures 4 and 5.  Figure 4  shows an
external  view, and Figure 5  shows the user's view, where
the computer-generated  wireframe is telling the user to
remove  the paper tray. A group at Boeing is developing
AR technology  to guide a technician  in building a wiring
harness  that forms  part of an airplane's  electrical  system.
Storing these  instructions in electronic  form will save
space  and reduce  costs.  Currently, technicians use large
physical layout boards  to construct such harnesses,  and
Boeing requires  several warehouses  to store  all these
boards. Such  space might be emptied for other use if this
application proves  successfil  (Caudell  and Mizell,  1992;

Figure 6.  Adam Janin demonstrates  Boeing's  prototype wire  bundle
assembly  application. (Courtesy  David Mizell, Boeing.)

Janin  et al.,  1993; Sims,  1994). Boeing is using a Tech-
nology Reinvestment  Program (TRP) grant to investi-
gate putting this technology  onto the factory  floor (Boe-
ing TRP, 1994).  Figure 6 shows an external  view of
Adam  Janin  using a prototype AR system to build a wire
bundle. Eventually, AR might be  used for any compli-
cated  machinery, such  as automobile  engines (Tuceryan
et al.,  1995).

Azuma  359

Figure 7.  Engine  model part labels appear as user points at them.
(Courtesy  ECRC.)

2.3  Annotation and Visualization

AR could  be used to annotate  objects and environ-

ments with public  or private information. Applications
using public information  assume the availability  of public
databases  to draw upon. For example,  a hand-held  dis-
play could provide  information  about the contents of
library shelves  as the user walks  around the library
(Fitzmaurice,  1993; Rekimoto,  1995; Rekimoto and
Nagao,  1995). At the European  Computer-Industry
Research  Centre  (ECRC),  a user can point at parts  of an
engine  model and the AR system  displays the name  of
the part that is being pointed  at (Rose  et al.,  1995).  Fig-
ure  7 shows this, where  the user points at the exhaust
manifold on an engine  model and the label  "exhaust
manifold"  appears.

Alternately,  these annotations  might be private notes

attached to specific objects.  Researchers  at Columbia
demonstrated  this with the notion of attaching windows
from a standard  user interface  onto specific locations  in
the world, or attached to specific  objects as reminders
(Feiner et al.,  1993b).  Figure  8 shows a window super-
imposed as  a label  upon a student. He wears  a tracking
device,  so the computer knows  his location. As the stu-
dent moves  around, the label follows  his location, pro-
viding the AR user with a reminder  of what  he needs  to
talk to the student about.

Figure 8.  Windows  displayed on top of specific real-world objects.
(Courtesy Steve Feiner, Blair Macntyre, Marcus Haupt, and Eliot
Solomon, Columbia  University.)

AR might aid general visualization  tasks as well. An
architect with a see-through HMD might be  able to
look out a window and see how a proposed new  sky-
scraper would  change her view. If a database containing
information  about a building's structure was available,
AR might give  architects "X-ray  vision"  inside  a build-
ing, showing where  the pipes, electric  lines, and struc-
tural supports  are inside the walls (Feiner et al.,  1995).
Researchers  at the University of Toronto have  built a
system called  Augmented Reality  through Graphic  Over-
lays on Stereovideo  (ARGOS)  (Milgram et al.,  1995),
which  among other things is used to make  images easier
to understand  during difficult viewing conditions (Dras-
cic  et al.,  1993). Figure 9  shows wireframe  lines drawn
on top of a space  shuttle bay interior, while in orbit. The
lines make  it easier to see  the geometry  of the shuttle
bay. Similarly, virtual lines  and objects  could aid naviga-
tion and scene  understanding during poor visibility con-
ditions, such as  underwater  or in fog.

2.4  Robot Path  Planning

Teleoperation  of a robot is often a difficult prob-
lem, especially when the robot is far away, with long de-
lays in the communication  link. Under this circum-
stance, instead of controlling the robot directly, it may
be preferable  to instead control  a virtual version of the
robot. The  user plans and specifies  the robot's actions  by

360  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

I-

Figure 9.  Virtual lines help  display geometry  of shuttle bay, as seen  in
orbit. (Courtesy  David Drascic and Paul Milgram,  U. Toronto) 

manipulating  the local virtual version,  in real  time.  The
results  are directly displayed on the real world.  Once the
plan is tested and determined,  then user tells the real
robot to execute the specified  plan. This  avoids pilot-
induced  oscillations  caused by the lengthy delays.  The
virtual versions  can  also predict the effects  of manipulat-
ing the environment,  thus serving as  a planning  and pre-
viewing tool to aid the user in performing  the desired
task. The ARGOS  system has demonstrated  that stereo-
scopic AR is an easier  and more accurate  way of doing
robot path planning than  traditional monoscopic inter-
faces  (Drascic,  1993; Milgram  et al.,  1993).  Others have
also  used registered overlays with  telepresence  systems
(Kim,  1993; Kim,  1996;  Oyama et al.,  1993; Yoo and
Olano,  1993; Tharp  et al.,  1994). Figure  10 shows how
a virtual outline  can represent  a future location  of a ro-
bot arm.

2.5  Entertainment

At SIGGRAPH  '95,  several  exhibitors showed

"Virtual  Sets"  that merge  real  actors with virtual back-
grounds, in real time  and in 3D. The  actors stand in
front of a large  blue screen, while  a computer-controlled
motion camera records  the scene.  Since the camera's
location is tracked and the actor's motions  are scripted,
it is possible to digitally composite the actor into a 3D
virtual background.  For example,  the actor might appear
to stand inside a large virtual spinning ring, where the
front part of the ring covers  the actor while the rear part

Figure  10.  Virtual lines show a planned motion  of a robot arm
(Courtesy David Drascic  and Paul Milgram, U. Toronto.)

of the ring is covered by the actor. The  entertainment
industry sees this as a way to reduce  production costs
because  creating  and storing sets virtually is potentially
cheaper than  constantly building new physical  sets from
scratch.  The ALIVE  project from the MIT Media Lab
goes  one step further by populating the environment
with intelligent virtual creatures that respond  to user
actions  (Maes,  1995).

2.6  Military Aircraft

For many years,  military  aircraft and helicopters

have used head-up  displays  (HUDs) and helmet-
mounted sights  (HMS)  to superimpose vector graphics
upon the pilot's view of the real  world. Besides provid-
ing basic  navigation and flight information, these  graph-
ics are  sometimes  registered with targets in the environ-
ment, providing a way to aim the aircraft's weapons. For
example,  the chin turret in a helicopter  gunship  can be
slaved to the pilot's HMS,  so the pilot can aim the chin
turret simply by looking at the target. Future genera-
tions of combat aircraft will be  developed with an HMD
built into the pilot's helmet (Wanstall,  1989).

3  Characteristics

This section discusses  the characteristics  of AR sys-

tems  and design issues encountered when building an

AR system. Section  3.1  describes the basic  characteristics
of augmentation.  There  are two ways  to accomplish this
augmentation:  optical  or video technologies. Section  3.2
discusses their characteristics and relative  strengths  and
weaknesses.  Blending the real and virtual poses problems
with focus  and contrast (Section  3.3),  and some  applica-
tions require  portable AR systems to be truly effective
(Section  3.4). Finally, Section 3.5  summarizes  the char-
acteristics  by comparing  the requirements of AR against
those for virtual environments.

3.1  Augmentation

Besides  adding objects to a real environment,  aug-

mented reality  also has the potential to remove them.
Current work has focused on adding virtual objects to a
real environment.  However, graphic overlays might also
be used to remove  or hide parts  of the real environment
from a user. For example,  to remove  a desk in the real
environment,  draw a representation  of the real walls  and
floors behind the desk and "paint"  that over the real
desk,  effectively removing  it from the user's  sight. This
has  been done in feature films.  Doing this interactively
in an AR system will be much  harder, but this removal
may not need to be photorealistic  to be  effective.

Augmented  reality might apply to all senses,  not just
sight. So far, researchers  have focused on blending real
and virtual images and graphics.  However, AR could  be
extended to include sound. The  user would wear head-
phones equipped with microphones  on the outside. The
headphones  would add synthetic,  directional  3D  sound,
while the external microphones  would detect  incoming
sounds from the environment.  This would  give the sys-
tem a chance to mask or cover up  selected real  sounds
from the environment  by  generating a masking signal
that exactly  canceled the incoming real sound  (Durlach
and Mayor,  1995).  While this would not be easy to do, it
might be possible.  Another example  involves haptics.
Gloves  with devices  that provide tactile feedback  might
augment  real forces  in the environment.  For example,  a
user might run his hand over the surface  of a real desk.
Simulating  such a hard surface  virtually is fairly  difficult,
but it is easy  to do in reality. Then  the tactile effectors  in
the glove can augment  the feel of the desk, perhaps mak-
ing it feel rough in certain spots. This  capability might

Azuma  361

Graphic
images

Real
world

Optical
combiners

Figure  1 l.  Optical see-through  HMD conceptual diagram.

be useful in some  applications,  such as  providing an  ad-
ditional  cue that a virtual object is at a particular location
on a real  desk (Wellner, 1993).

3.2  Optical Versus Video

A basic design decision in building an AR system  is

how to accomplish the combining of real  and virtual.
Two basic  choices  are  available:  optical  and video tech-
nologies.  Each has particular advantages  and disadvan-
tages.  This section compares  the two  and notes the
tradeoffs.  For additional  discussion, see  Rolland  et al.
(1994).

A see-through  HMD is one device used to combine

real and virtual.  Standard  closed-view HMDs do not allow
any direct view of the real world. In contrast, a see-
through HMD lets the user see the real  world, with vir-
tual  objects superimposed  by optical  or video  technolo-
gies.

Optical  see-through HMDs work  by placing optical
combiners in front of the user's eyes.  These combiners
are partially transmissive,  so that the user can look di-
rectly through them to see the real world. The  combin-
ers are also  partially reflective,  so that the user sees vir-
tual images  bounced off the  combiners from head-
mounted monitors. This  approach is similar in nature  to
head-up displays (HUDs) commonly used in military
aircraft,  except that the combiners  are attached to the
head. Thus,  optical  see-through HMDs  have sometimes
been  described as  a "HUD on a head"  (Wanstall,  1989).
Figure  11  shows a conceptual  diagram of an optical  see-

362  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

Figure  12.  Two  optical see-through  HMDs, made by Hughes  Electronics.

through HMD. Figure  12 shows two optical  see-
through HMDs made  by Hughes Electronics.

The  optical  combiners usually reduce  the amount of

light that the user sees from the real world. Since  the
combiners act like half-silvered  mirrors, they let in only
some  of the light from the real world,  so that they can
reflect  some  of the light from the monitors into the us-
er's eyes.  For example, the HMD  described in (Hol-
mgren,  1992)  transmits about 30% of the incoming light
from the real world. Choosing the level  of blending is a
design problem.  More sophisticated  combiners might
vary the level  of contributions based upon the wave-
length  of light. For example,  such  a combiner  might be
set to reflect all light of a certain wavelength  and none at
any other wavelengths.  This approach would be ideal
with a monochrome  monitor. Virtually all  the light from
the monitor would be reflected  into the user's eyes,
while  almost all the light from the real  world (except  at
the particular wavelength)  would reach  the user's  eyes.
However, most existing optical  see-through HMDs  do
reduce  the amount of light from the real  world, so they
act like  a pair of sunglasses when the power is cut off.

In contrast, video see-through  HMDs work by com-

bining a closed-view  HMD with one  or two head-
mounted video  cameras. The video cameras  provide the
user's view of the real world. Video  from these cameras
is  combined with  the graphic images  created by the
scene  generator, blending the real  and virtual.  The result
is sent to the monitors in front of the user's eyes  in the
closed-view  HMD. Figure  13  shows a conceptual  dia-
gram  of a video see-through HMD.  Figure  14 shows an
actual  video see-through HMD,  with two video cameras
mounted on top of a flight helmet.

Video composition can be done  in more than  one

way. A simple way is to use chroma-keying,  a technique
used in many video  special effects.  The  background  of
the computer graphic  images is set to a specific  color, say
green,  which none of the virtual objects  use. Then the
combining step replaces  all green areas with the corre-
sponding parts  from the video  of the real world. This
step has the effect  of superimposing  the virtual objects
over the real world. A more  sophisticated  composition
would  use depth information. If the system had depth
information at  each pixel for the real-world  images, it

-l

Video 
ofN 
real
world 

locations 

-

Video cameras

1-1 

Real
World

Scene
gene 

rator

Graphic 
images

Monitors

Video cmpositor

Azuma  363

Monitor

Stereo  glasses
(optional)

Tracker

Combined  video

images

Figure  13.  Video see-through  HMD  conceptual diagram.

Figure  IS.  Monitor-based AR conceptual diagram

Figure  16.  Extemal view of the ARGOS system, an  example of
monitor-based AR. (Courtesy David Drascic and Paul Milgram,  U.
Toronto.)

Figure  14.  An  actual video see-through  HMD.  (Courtesyjannick
Rolland, Frank Biocca, and  UNC Chapel Hill Dept  of Computer Science.
Photo by Alex Treml.)

could combine the real and virtual images  by a pixel-by-
pixel  depth comparison.  This would allow real objects  to
cover virtual  objects and vice versa.

AR systems can  also be  built using monitor-based

configurations,  instead of see-through  HMDs. Figure
15  shows how a monitor-based  system might be  built. In

this case,  one  or two video cameras  view the environ-
ment. The  cameras  may be static  or mobile.  In the mo-
bile case,  the  cameras might move  around by being  at-
tached  to a robot, with their  locations tracked.  The
video  of the real world  and the graphic images  generated
by a scene generator are combined, just as in the video
see-through  HMD case,  and displayed in a monitor in
front of the user. The user does not wear the display  de-
vice.  Optionally, the images  may be displayed in stereo
on the monitor, which then requires the user to wear a
pair of stereo glasses. Figure  16 shows an  external view

364  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

W4

of the ARGOS  system,  which uses a  monitor-based  con-
figuration.

Finally, a monitor-based  optical  configuration is also

possible.  This is similar to Figure  11  except  that the user
does  not wear the monitors  or combiners on her head.
Instead,  the monitors and combiners  are  fixed in space,
and the user positions her head  to look through the
combiners.  This configuration  is typical of head-up  dis-
plays on military aircraft,  and at least one such  configu-
ration has  been proposed for a medical  application  (Peu-
chot et al.,  1995).

The rest of this section compares the relative  advan-

tages  and disadvantages  of optical  and video approaches,
starting with optical. An optical  approach has the follow-
ing advantages  over a video approach:

tion of the display devices.  With current displays,  this
resolution is far  less than the resolving power of the fo-
vea.  Optical see-through also  shows the  graphic images
at  the resolution of the display device,  but the user's
view  of the real world is not degraded. Thus,  video re-
duces the resolution  of the real world, while optical  see-
through does not.

Safety.  Video see-through  HMDs are  essentially

modified closed-view  HMDs. If the power is cut off, the
user is effectively  blind. This is a  safety  concern in some
applications.  In contrast, when power is  removed from
an optical  see-through  HMD, the user still has a direct
view of the real  world. The HMD then  becomes  a pair  of
heavy sunglasses,  but the user can still see.

Simplicity.  Optical blending is simpler and cheaper
than video  blending. Optical  approaches  have  only one
"stream"  of video to worry about:  the graphic  images.
The  real world is seen  directly through the combiners,
and that  time delay is generally a  few nanoseconds.
Video blending,  on the  other hand, must  deal with sepa-
rate video streams  for the real and virtual images.  Both
streams  have  inherent delays  in the tens  of milliseconds.
Digitizing video  images usually  adds  at least  one frame
time of delay to  the video  stream,  where  a frame  time is
the length  of time it takes  to completely  update an  im-
age. A  monitor that completely  refreshes  the screen  at
60  Hz has a frame  time of 16.67  ms. The  two streams  of
real  and virtual images  must be properly synchronized  or
temporal distortion results. Also,  optical see-through
HMDs with narrow field-of-view  combiners offer views
of the real world  that have little  distortion. Video  cam-
eras almost  always  have some  amount of distortion that
must be  compensated for,  along with  any distortion
from the optics in front of the  display devices.  Since
video  requires cameras  and combiners that  optical ap-
proaches  do not need, video will probably be  more ex-
pensive  and complicated to  build than  optically  based
systems.

Resolution.  Video blending limits  the resolution of

No Eye Offset.  With video see-through,  the user's
view  of the real world  is provided  by the video cameras.
In essence,  this puts his "eyes"  where  the video cameras
are. In most configurations,  the cameras  are not located
exactly where  the user's eyes  are,  creating an offset  be-
tween  the cameras  and the real eyes. The  distance sepa-
rating  the cameras may also  not be exactly  the same as
the user's interpupillary  distance  (IPD). This difference
between  camera  locations  and eye locations introduces
displacements  from what the user sees  compared to what
he  expects  to see.  For example, if the cameras are  above
the user's eyes,  he will see the world from a  vantage
point slightly  higher than  he is used to. Video see-
through can avoid the eye offset problem through  the
use of mirrors  to create  another  set of optical paths that
mimic  the paths directly into the user's eyes.  Using those
paths, the cameras  will see what  the user's eyes  would
normally see without  the HMD. However,  this adds
complexity to the HMD design.  Offset is generally not a
difficult design problem for  optical see-through  displays.
While  the user's eye can rotate with  respect  to the posi-
tion of the HMD,  the resulting errors  are tiny. Using the
eye's  center  of rotation  as the viewpoint in the computer
graphics  model should eliminate  any need for eye track-
ing in an optical  see-through  HMD  (Holloway,  1995).
Video blending  offers the following  advantages  over

what the user sees,  both real  and virtual, to the resolu-

optical  blending:

Azuma 

365

Flexibility in Composition Strategies. A basic prob-

lem with optical  see-through is that the virtual  objects
do  not completely obscure  the real world objects,  be-
cause  the optical  combiners  allow  light from both virtual
and real  sources.  Building an optical  see-through  HMD
that can  selectively  shut out the light from the real world
is difficult.  In a  normal optical  system,  the objects  are
designed  to be  in focus  at only one point in  the optical
path:  the user's eye.  Any filter  that would selectively
block out light  must be placed in the optical  path at  a
point where  the image  is in focus,  which obviously  can-
not be the user's  eye.  Therefore,  the optical  system must
have  two places where the image  is in focus:  at the user's
eye and the point of the hypothetical filter. This require-
ment makes the optical  design much more  difficult and
complex. No  existing  optical see-through  HMD  blocks
incoming light in this fashion.  Thus,  the virtual  objects
appear  ghostlike and semitransparent.  This appearance
damages the illusion of reality  because  occlusion  is  one
of the strongest depth cues.  In contrast, video see-
through is far more flexible  about how it merges  the real
and virtual images.  Since  both the real  and virtual are
available in digital form, video  see-through  compositors
can,  on a pixel-by-pixel  basis,  take  the real, or the virtual,
or some  blend between  the two to simulate transpar-
ency. Because  of this flexibility, video  see-through  may
ultimately produce  more  compelling environments  than
optical  see-through  approaches.

Wide Field of View.  Distortions  in optical  systems
are  a function of the radial  distance away from the opti-
cal  axis.  The  further one looks away from the center of
the view, the larger  the distortions  get. A digitized image
taken through  a distorted  optical  system can  be  undis-
torted by  applying image processing  techniques  to un-
warp the image, provided  that  the optical distortion is
well  characterized.  This requires  significant amounts  of
computation,  but this constraint will  be less important  in
the future as  computers  become faster. It is harder to
build wide field-of-view  displays with optical see-
through techniques. Any distortions  of the user's view of
the real world must  be corrected  optically, rather than
digitally, because  the system has no digitized image  of
the real world to  manipulate.  Complex optics are  expen-

sive  and add weight  to the HMD. Wide field-of-view
systems  are  an exception  to the  general  trend of optical
approaches  being simpler  and cheaper  than video  ap-
proaches.

Matching the Delay between Real and Virtual

Views.  Video offers  an approach  for reducing  or avoid-
ing problems  caused  by temporal  mismatches  between
the real  and virtual images.  Optical see-through  HMDs
offer  an almost  instantaneous  view of the real  world but
a  delayed view of the virtual. This temporal  mismatch
can cause  problems. With video  approaches, it is possible
to delay the video of the real world to match  the delay
from the virtual image  stream. For details,  see Section
4.3.

Additional Registration Strategies. In optical  see-
through, the only information  the system has about the
user's head  location  comes  from the head  tracker. Video
blending  provides another source  of information:  the
digitized image  of the real scene.  This digitized image
means  that video  approaches  can  employ additional  reg-
istration strategies unavailable  to optical  approaches.
Section 4.4 describes these  in more  detail.

Matching the Brightness of Real and Virtual
Objects. This advantage  is discussed in Section  3.3.

Both optical  and video  technologies have  their roles,
and the choice of technology  depends on the application
requirements.  Many of the mechanical  assembly and
repair prototypes  use optical  approaches,  possibly be-
cause  of the cost and safety issues.  If successful,  the
equipment would  have to be replicated  in large  numbers
to equip workers  on a  factory floor. In contrast, most of
the prototypes  for medical  applications  use video  ap-
proaches,  probably for the flexibility  in blending  real  and
virtual and for the additional registration  strategies  of-
fered.

3.3  Focus and  Contrast

Focus  can be a  problem for both optical  and video
approaches.  Ideally, the virtual should match the real.  In
a video-based  system,  the combined  virtual and real  im-

366  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

age  will be projected at  the same distance  by the monitor
or HMD optics.  However,  depending on the video  cam-
era's  depth-of-field  and focus  settings, parts of the real
world may not be  in focus.  In typical  graphics software,
everything  is rendered with  a pinhole model, so all the
graphic objects,  regardless  of distance,  are  in focus. To
overcome this,  the graphics could be  rendered to simu-
late  a limited depth of field, and the video  camera might
have  an  autofocus  lens.

In the  optical case,  the virtual image  is projected  at

some distance  away from  the user. This distance may be
adjustable,  although it is often fixed.  Therefore,  while
the real objects  are  at varying  distances  from the user,
the virtual objects  are  all projected  to the same  distance.
If the virtual and real  distances  are  not matched  for  the
particular objects  that  the user is looking at, it may not
be possible to  clearly view both  simultaneously.

Contrast is another issue because  of the large  dynamic

range  in real  environments  and in what the human eye
can detect. Ideally, the  brightness  of the real and virtual
objects  should be  appropriately  matched. Unfortunately,
in the worst case  scenario, this means  the system must
match  a very large range  of brightness levels.  The  eye is a
logarithmic  detector, where  the brightest light that it
can  handle is about  11  orders  of magnitude  greater  than
the smallest, including  both dark-adapted  and light-
adapted  eyes.  In  any one  adaptation state, the eye  can
cover about six  orders  of magnitude. Most display de-
vices cannot  come close to this level  of contrast. This
limitation  is  a particular  problem with optical  technolo-
gies,  because  the user has  a direct view of the real world.
If the real  environment is too bright, it will wash  out the
virtual image. If the real environment  is  too dark, the
virtual image will  wash out the real world. Contrast
problems are  not as  severe with  video, because  the video
cameras  themselves  have limited  dynamic response.  The
view  of both the real  and virtual is generated by the
monitor, so  everything must be clipped  or compressed
into the monitor's  dynamic  range.

3.4  Portability

In almost all virtual environment  systems,  the user

is not encouraged  to walk around  much.  Instead, the

user navigates  by  "flying"  through the environment,
walking on a treadmill, or driving  some mockup  of a
vehicle.  Whatever the  technology, the result is  that the
user stays in one place in the real world.

Some AR applications, however,  will need to support

a user who will walk around a large  environment.  AR
requires  that the user  actually be at  the place  where the
task is to take  place.  "Flying,"  as performed in a VE  sys-
tem,  is no longer an option.  If a mechanic  needs to go to
the other  side of a jet engine,  she must physically  move
herself and the display  devices  she wears.  Therefore,  AR
systems will place  a premium on portability, especially
the ability to walk around outdoors,  away  from con-
trolled environments.  The scene  generator,  the HMD,
and the tracking  system  must all be  self-contained  and
capable of surviving  exposure  to the environment.  If this
capability  is achieved,  many more  applications  that have
not been tried will  become  available.  For example,  the
ability to annotate  the  surrounding environment  could
be useful  to soldiers,  hikers,  or tourists in an unfamiliar
new location.

3.5  Comparison  Against
Virtual Environments

The overall requirements  of AR can be summa-

rized  by comparing  them against  those for virtual envi-
ronments, for the three basic  subsystems  that they re-
quire.

1.  Scene  Generator.  Rendering is not currently  one of
the major problems in AR. VE  systems have much
higher requirements for realistic  images because
they completely replace  the real  world with the
virtual environment.  In AR, the virtual images  only
supplement  the real world. Therefore,  fewer virtual
objects need to be drawn,  and they do  not neces-
sarily have  to  be realistically rendered in order to
serve the purposes  of the application.  For example,
in the annotation  applications,  text and  3D wire-
frame drawings might suffice.  Ideally, photorealis-
tic  graphic objects would be  seamlessly  merged
with the real  environment (see  Section  7),  but
more basic  problems  have  to be  solved first.

Azuma  367

2.  Display Device.  The display devices  used in AR

may have less stringent requirements  than VE sys-
tems  demand, again  because AR does  not replace
the real  world. For example,  monochrome displays
may be  adequate  for some AR applications,  while
virtually all VE  systems today use full color. Optical
see-through HMDs  with a  small field of view may
be  satisfactory because  the user can still see the real
world with  his peripheral vision;  the see-through
HMD  does not  shut off the user's  normal  field of
view. Furthermore,  the resolution of the monitor
in an  optical see-through  HMD  might be lower
than what a user would  tolerate in a VE  applica-
tion, since the optical  see-through  HMD does  not
reduce  the resolution  of the real environment.

3.  Tracking  and Sensing.  While in the previous  two
cases  AR had lower requirements  than VE,  that is
not the  case for tracking  and sensing. In this area,
the requirements for AR are  much stricter than
those  for VE systems. A major reason  for this is the
registration  problem,  which is described  in the
next section.  The other factors  that make  the track-
ing and sensing requirements  higher are  described
in Section  5.

4  Registration

4.1  The Registration  Problem

One of the most basic  problems  currently limiting
augmented reality  applications  is the registration prob-
lem.  The  objects in the real  and virtual worlds  must  be
properly aligned with  respect  to each other, or the illu-
sion that the two  worlds  coexist will be  compromised.
More seriously, many applications  demand accurate  reg-
istration. For example, recall  the needle biopsy  applica-
tion.  If the virtual  object is not where  the real  tumor is,
the surgeon will miss the tumor and the  biopsy will  fail.
Without accurate  registration,  augmented  reality will  not
be  accepted  in many  applications.

Registration  problems  also exist  in virtual environ-

ments,  but they are  not nearly as  serious because  they are
harder to detect  than in augmented reality. Since  the
user only sees virtual objects  in VE  applications,  registra-

tion errors  result in visual-kinesthetic and visual-proprio-
ceptive conflicts.  Such conflicts  between different  hu-
man senses  may be  a source of motion  sickness  (Pausch
et al.,  1992).  Because  the kinesthetic  and proprioceptive
systems  are  much less  sensitive than  the visual  system,
visual-kinesthetic  and visual-proprioceptive  conflicts  are
less noticeable  than visual-visual  conflicts.  For example,  a
user wearing  a closed-view  HMD  might hold up  her real
hand and see a virtual hand.  This virtual hand  should be
displayed exactly where  she would see her real  hand, if
she were  not wearing  an HMD.  But if the virtual hand  is
wrong by five  millimeters,  she may not detect that unless
actively looking for such  errors. The  same error is much
more  obvious in a see-through HMD,  where the conflict
is visual-visual.

Furthermore,  a phenomenon known  as  visual capture

(Welch,  1978)  makes  it even more  difficult to  detect
such registration  errors.  Visual  capture is the tendency  of
the brain to believe  what it sees  rather  than what it feels,
hears,  and so on.  That is, visual information  tends to
override  all  other senses. When watching  a television
program,  a viewer  believes  the sounds come from the
mouths  of the actors  on the screen,  even  though they
actually come from a speaker  in the TV. Ventriloquism
works because  of visual capture.  Similarly, a  user might
believe that her hand  is where  the virtual hand  is drawn,
rather than where  her real hand  actually is,  because  of
visual capture.  This effect increases  the amount of regis-
tration error users can  tolerate  in virtual environment
systems.  If the errors are  systematic,  users  might even be
able  to adapt  to the new environment,  given a long ex-
posure  time of several  hours or days  (Welch,  1978).

Augmented reality  demands  much more  accurate  reg-

istration than  do virtual environments  (Azuma,  1993).
Imagine the same  scenario  of a user holding up  her
hand, but this time wearing a  see-through  HMD. Regis-
tration errors now result in visual-visual  conflicts  be-
tween the images  of the virtual and real hands.  Such
conflicts are  easy  to  detect because  of the resolution of
the human eye and the sensitivity  of the human visual
system to  differences.  Even tiny offsets in the images of
the real  and virtual hands are easy  to detect.

What angular  accuracy  is needed  for good registration
in augmented  reality? A simple  demonstration  will  show

368  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

the order of magnitude  required.  Take  out a dime  and
hold it at  arm's length, so  that it looks like  a circle.  The
diameter of the dime  covers  about  1.2 to 2.0 degrees  of
arc,  depending on your arm length.  In comparison,  the
width of a full moon is about 0.5  degrees of arc! Now
imagine  a virtual object superimposed  on a real object,
but offset by  the diameter of the full moon.  Such a  dif-
ference  would be  easy to detect. Thus, the  angular  accu-
racy required  is a small fraction of a degree.  The lower
limit is bounded  by the resolving power of the human
eye itself. The  central part of the retina  is called the fo-
vea; it has  the highest  density of color-detecting  cones,
about  120 per  degree of arc,  corresponding  to a spacing
of half a minute  of arc  (Jain,  1989).  Observers  can dif-
ferentiate  between  a dark and light  bar grating  when
each  bar subtends  about one minute of arc, and under
special  circumstances  they can detect even smaller differ-
ences  (Doenges,  1985).  However, existing  HMD track-
ers  and displays  are not  capable of providing  one minute
of arc in accuracy, so the present achievable  accuracy is
much  worse than that ultimate  lower bound. In practice,
errors of a few pixels are  detectable in modern HMDs.
Registration of real  and virtual objects  is not limited
to AR. Special-effects  artists seamlessly  integrate com-
puter-generated  3D  objects with live actors in film and
video.  The difference  lies in the amount of control  avail-
able.  With film, a director can carefully plan  each  shot,
and artists can  spend hours per frame,  adjusting each by
hand if necessary, to  achieve perfect  registration.  As an
interactive  medium, AR is far more difficult  to work
with.  The AR system  cannot control  the motions of the
HMD wearer. The  user looks where she wants,  and the
system must  respond within tens of milliseconds.

Registration  errors are difficult  to adequately  control
because  of the high accuracy requirements and the nu-
merous  sources of error. These  sources of error can be
divided into two  types:  static and dynamic.  Static errors
are  the ones  that cause  registration  errors even when the
user's viewpoint and the objects in the environment  re-
main completely  still.  Dynamic errors  are  the ones that
have  no effect  until either the viewpoint or the objects
begin moving.

For current  HMD-based  systems,  dynamic  errors are
by  far the largest  contributors  to registration  errors,  but

static errors cannot be  ignored either. The next two  sec-
tions discuss static and dynamic  errors and what has
been done  to reduce  them. See Holloway  (1995)  for  a
thorough  analysis of the sources  and magnitudes of reg-
istration errors.

4.2  Static Errors

The four main  sources of static errors are:

- Optical distortion
- Errors in the tracking  system
- Mechanical  misalignments
- Incorrect viewing parameters  (e.g.,  field of view,

tracker-to-eye  position and orientation,  interpupil-
lary distance)

4.2.1  Distortion in the Optics.  Optical distor-
tions exist  in most  camera  and lens  systems,  both in the
cameras  that record  the real  environment and in the op-
tics  used for the display. Because  distortions  are  usually a
function of the radial  distance  away from the  optical axis,
wide  field-of-view displays  can be especially  vulnerable  to
this error. Near the center  of the field of view, images  are
relatively undistorted,  but far away from the center, im-
age distortion  can be  large. For example,  straight lines
may appear  curved.  In a see-through  HMD with  narrow
field-of-view displays, the optical  combiners add virtually
no distortion, so  the user's view of the real  world is not
warped.  However, the optics used to  focus and magnify
the graphic images  from the display monitors  can intro-
duce distortion. This mapping  of distorted virtual im-
ages on top of an undistorted view of the real world
causes static registration  errors.  The  cameras and displays
may also have  nonlinear distortions  that cause  errors
(Deering,  1992).

Optical distortions  are  usually  systematic  errors, so
they can be  mapped and compensated. This  mapping
may not be trivial,  but it is often possible.  For example,
(Robinett  and Rolland,  1992)  describes the distortion  of
one commonly  used set of HMD optics. The  distortions
might be compensated  by additional  optics.  Edwards
and colleages  (1993)  describe such  a design  for a video
see-through  HMD.  Eliminating distortion can  be a  diffi-

Azuma  369

cult design problem,  though, and it adds weight, which
is not desirable  in HMDs. An  alternate  approach  is to do
the compensation  digitally by  image-warping  tech-
niques,  both on the digitized video and  the graphic  im-
ages.  Typically, this involves predistorting  the images  so
that they will appear  undistorted  after being displayed
(Watson and Hodges,  1995).  Another way to perform
digital compensation  on the graphics is to  apply the pre-
distortion  functions on the vertices  of the polygons, in
screen  space,  before rendering  (Rolland and Hopkins,
1993).  This requires  subdividing polygons that cover
large  areas in screen  space.  Both  digital compensation
methods  can be  computationally  expensive,  often requir-
ing special  hardware  to accomplish  in real time.  Hollo-
way determined  that the additional  system delay re-
quired by  the distortion  compensation  adds  more
registration  error than  the distortion compensation  re-
moves,  for typical  head  motion  (Holloway, 1995).

4.2.2  Errors in the Tracking System.  Errors in
the reported outputs  from the tracking  and sensing sys-
tems are  often  the most serious  type of static registration
errors. These  distortions  are  not easy  to measure  and
eliminate,  because  that requires another  "3D  ruler"  that
is more  accurate  than the tracker  being tested. These
errors  are  often nonsystematic  and difficult  to fully char-
acterize.  Almost all commercially available  tracking  sys-
tems  are  not accurate  enough  to satisfy  the requirements
of AR systems. Section  5 discusses  this important  topic
further.

4.2.3  Mechanical  Misalignments.  Mechanical
misalignments  are  discrepancies  between the model  or
specification of the hardware  and the actual physical
properties of the real  system.  For example,  the combin-
ers,  optics, and monitors  in an  optical  see-through
HMD  may not be at the expected  distances  or orienta-
tions with respect to  each other. If the frame is not suffi-
ciently rigid, the various component  parts may change
their relative positions  as the user moves around,  causing
errors.  Mechanical  misalignments  can cause  subtle
changes in the position  and orientation of the projected
virtual images that  are  difficult to  compensate. While

some  alignment  errors  can be  calibrated,  for many others
it may be more  effective  to "build  it right"  initially.

4.2.4  Incorrect Viewing Parameters.  Incorrect
viewing parameters,  the last major source of static regis-
tration errors,  can be thought of as a  special  case of
alignment  errors for which  calibration  techniques  can be
applied. Viewing parameters  specify how to convert  the
reported head  or camera  locations into viewing matrices
used by the scene  generator  to draw the graphic  images.
For an  HMD-based  system, these parameters  include:

- Center of projection  and viewport dimensions
- Offset,  both in translation and orientation,  between
the location  of the head tracker and the user's eyes

- Field  of view

Incorrect viewing parameters  cause  systematic  static

errors.  Take the example  of a head  tracker located above
a user's  eyes.  If the vertical  translation  offsets between
the  tracker and the eyes  are too small,  all the virtual ob-
jects will  appear lower than they should.

In some  systems,  the viewing  parameters  are  estimated
by  manual adjustments,  in a  nonsystematic  fashion. Such
approaches  proceed  as follows:  Place a real  object in the
environment  and attempt to register a  virtual object with
that real  object. While wearing the HMD or positioning
the cameras,  move to  one viewpoint or a few selected
viewpoints  and manually adjust  the location of the vir-
tual object  and the other viewing parameters  until  the
registration  "looks  right."  This action may achieve  satis-
factory  results if the environment  and the viewpoint re-
main static.  However,  such  approaches  require  a skilled
user and generally do not achieve  robust results for many
viewpoints.  Achieving  good registration  from a  single
viewpoint  is much  easier than  achieving  registration
from a wide  variety of viewpoints  using a  single  set of
parameters.  Usually what happens is satisfactory  registra-
tion at one viewpoint,  but when  the user walks  to a sig-
nificantly  different viewpoint,  the registration  is inaccu-
rate  because  of incorrect viewing parameters  or tracker
distortions.  This means  many  different sets  of param-
eters  must be  used-a less than satisfactory solution.

Another approach  is  to directly measure  the param-
eters,  using various  measuring tools and sensors.  For

370  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

example,  a commonly used optometrist's tool can mea-
sure  the interpupillary distance.  Rulers might measure
the  offsets  between the tracker  and eye positions. Cam-
eras  could be placed where  the user's eyes  would nor-
mally be in an optical  see-through  HMD.  By recording
what  the camera  sees  of the real environment through
the see-through HMD,  one might be  able to determine
several viewing parameters.  So far, direct  measurement
techniques  have enjoyed  limited success  (Janin et al.,
1993).

View-based  tasks are another  approach to calibration.

These ask  the user to perform various tasks  that set up
geometric  constraints.  By performing  several tasks,
enough  information is gathered  to determine  the view-
ing parameters.  For example,  Azuma and  Bishop (1994)
asked a user wearing  an optical  see-through HMD to
look straight through a narrow pipe mounted in the real
environment.  This sets  up the constraint that the user's
eye must  be located along a line  through the center of
the pipe.  Combining this with other tasks created
enough constraints  so  that all the viewing parameters
could be measured.  Caudell  and Mizell (1992)  used a
different set of tasks,  involving lining up two  circles that
specified a cone in the real  environment.  Oishi and Tachi
(1996)  move virtual  cursors to appear on top of beacons
in the real environment.  All view-based  tasks  rely upon
the user accurately  performing  the specified  task and
assume the tracker is  accurate.  If the  tracking and sens-
ing equipment is not accurate,  then multiple measure-
ments must be taken  and optimizers  used to find the
"best-fit"  solution  (Janin et al.,  1993).

For video-based  systems,  an  extensive  body of litera-

ture  exists in the robotics  and photogrammetry commu-
nities on camera calibration  techniques;  see the refer-
ences in (Lenz  and Tsai,  1988)  for a start. Such
techniques  compute  a camera's viewing parameters  by
taking several pictures  of an  object of fixed and some-
times unknown  geometry. These pictures  must be taken
from different  locations.  Matching points in the 2D im-
ages with corresponding  3D  points on the object  sets up
mathematical  constraints.  With enough pictures,  these
constraints  determine  the viewing  parameters  and the
3D location  of the calibration  object. Alternatively, they

can  serve  to drive an  optimization routine  that will
search for the best set of viewing parameters  that fits the
collected data.  Several AR systems have used camera  cali-
bration techniques, including  (Drascic  and Milgram,
1991; ARGOS,  1994; Bajura,  1993; Tuceryan  et al.,
1995; Whitaker et al.,  1995).

4.3  Dynamic  Errors

Dynamic  errors occur because  of system  delays,  or

lags.  The  end-to-end system delay is defined  as  the time
difference  between  the moment that the tracking system
measures the position and orientation of the viewpoint
to the moment when the generated  images correspond-
ing to that position and orientation appear  in the dis-
plays.  These  delays  exist because  each component  in an
augmented reality  system requires some  time to do its
job. The  delays in the tracking  subsystem,  the communi-
cation delays,  the time  it takes the  scene  generator  to
draw the appropriate images  in the frame  buffers, and
the scanout time  from the frame buffer to the displays all
contribute to end-to-end  lag. End-to-end  delays  of 100
ms are  fairly typical  on existing  systems.  Simpler  systems
can have  less delay, but other systems  have more.  Delays
of 250 ms or more can exist  on slow, heavily  loaded, or
networked  systems.

End-to-end  system  delays  cause registration  errors
only when motion occurs.  Assume that the viewpoint
and all objects  remain  still.  Then the lag does not cause
registration  errors.  No matter how long the delay is,  the
images  generated  are appropriate,  since  nothing  has
moved since  the time the tracker measurement  was
taken.  Compare this to the case with  motion. For ex-
ample,  assume a user wears  a see-through HMD and
moves  her head.  The tracker  measures the head at an
initial time  t. The  images corresponding  to time  twill
not appear until some  future time  t2, because  of the end-
to-end system  delays. During this delay, the user's head
remains in motion, so when the images  computed at
time  t finally appear,  the user sees  them  at a different
location  than the one for which they were  computed.
Thus,  the images are  incorrect  for the time  they are  actu-
ally viewed.  To the user, the virtual objects appear to

-I

Azuma  371

Figure  |7.  Effect of motion  and system delays on  registration. Picture on the left is a static scene. Picture  on the right shows  motion. (Courtesy
UNC  Chapel  Hill Dept. of Computer Science.)

"swim  around"  and "lag  behind"  the real  objects.  This
delay was graphically demonstrated  in a videotape  of
UNC's ultrasound experiment shown at SIGGRAPH
'92 (Bajura  et al.,  1992). In Figure  17,  the picture on
the left  shows what  the registration looks like when ev-
erything stands still.  The virtual gray  trapezoidal  region
represents what  the ultrasound wand is scanning. This
virtual trapezoid should be  attached to the tip of the real
ultrasound wand, as  it is in the picture on the left, where
the tip of the wand is visible at the bottom of the pic-
ture,  to the left of the  "UNC" letters. But when the
head or the wand moves, large  dynamic registration  er-
rors occur, as shown in the picture  on the right. The tip
of the wand is now far away from the virtual trapezoid.
Also note the motion blur in the background,  caused by
the user's head motion.

System delays seriously hurt  the illusion  that the real

and virtual worlds coexist  because they cause  large regis-
tration errors. With a typical  end-to-end lag of 100 ms
and a moderate head rotation rate  of 50 degrees  per sec-
ond, the angular dynamic  error is 5  degrees. At a 68 cm
arm length, this results in registration  errors of almost
60 mm. System  delay is the largest single  source  of regis-
tration error in existing AR systems,  outweighing  all
others combined (Holloway,  1995).

Methods  used to reduce dynamic  registration fall  un-

der four main categories:

- Reduce  system  lag
- Reduce  apparent lag
- Match temporal streams  (with video-based  systems)
- Predict  future locations

4.3.1  Reduce  System  Lag.  The most direct ap-
proach  is simply to reduce,  or ideally eliminate,  the sys-
tem delays. If there are  no delays,  there are no dynamic
errors. Unfortunately, modern  scene generators  are usu-
ally built for throughput,  not minimal latency  (Foley et
al.,  1990; Mine,  1993).  It is sometimes  possible to re-
configure  the software to sacrifice throughput  to mini-
mize latency. For example,  the SLATS  system completes
rendering a pair of interlaced NTSC  images  in one field
time (16.67  ms)  on Pixel-Planes  5  (Olano et al.,  1995).
Being careful  about synchronizing pipeline tasks  can also
reduce the  end-to-end lag  (Wloka, 1995).

System delays  are not likely to completely disappear
anytime soon.  Some believe  that the current course  of
technological  development will automatically  solve this
problem.  Unfortunately, it is difficult to reduce  system
delays  to the point where  they are no longer an issue.

372  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

Recall that registration errors must be  kept to a small
fraction of a degree. At the moderate  head  rotation rate
of 50 degrees per  second, system  lag must  be  10 ms or
less to keep  angular errors  below 0.5  degrees.  Just scan-
ning out a frame  buffer to  a display at 60 Hz requires
16.67  ms. It might be possible to build an HMD  system
with less than  10  ms  of lag,  but the  drastic cut in
throughput  and the expense required  to construct the
system would  make alternate  solutions  attractive.  Mini-
mizing system  delay is important, but reducing  delay to
the point where it is no longer a source of registration
error  is not currently  practical.

4.3.2  Reduce  Apparent  Lag.  Image  deflection is

a clever  technique for reducing the  amount of apparent
system  delay for systems  that  only use head orientation
(Burbidge  and Murray,  1989; Regan and  Pose,  1994;
Riner  and Browder,  1992; So and Griffin,  1992).  It is a
way to incorporate  more recent orientation measure-
ments into the late  stages of the rendering  pipeline.
Therefore,  it is a feed-forward  technique.  The  scene
generator  renders an  image  much larger than  needed  to
fill the display. Then, just before  scanout, the  system
reads the most recent orientation report. The orienta-
tion value is  used to select  the fraction of the frame
buffer to send  to the display,  since small orientation
changes  are  equivalent to shifting the frame  buffer out-
put horizontally  and vertically.

Image  deflection does not work  on translation,  but
image-warping  techniques  might (Chen and Williams,
1993; McMillan  and Bishop,  1995a, b).  After  the scene
generator renders  the image  based upon  the head tracker
reading, small adjustments  in orientation and translation
could be done  after rendering  by warping the image.
These  techniques  assume knowledge  of the depth at ev-
ery pixel, and the warp must  be done  much more
quickly  than rerendering  the entire  image.

Additional delay is added to the video  from the real
world to match the scene-generator  delays  in generating
the virtual images.  This  additional delay to the video
stream will probably not remain  constant,  since the
scene-generator  delay will vary with the complexity  of
the rendered scene.  Therefore,  the system  must dynami-
cally synchronize  the two streams.

Note that while this reduces conflicts  between the real
and virtual,  now both the real and virtual objects are  de-
layed in time. While  this may not be  bothersome  for
small  delays, it is a major problem in the related area  of
telepresence  systems and will not be  easy to overcome.
For long delays,  this can produce  negative effects  such as
pilot-induced  oscillation.

4.3.4  Predict.  The last method is to predict the

future viewpoint and object locations.  If the future  loca-
tions are known,  the scene  can be rendered with  these
future  locations, rather than  the measured  locations.
Then when the scene finally appears,  the viewpoints  and
objects  have moved to the predicted locations,  and the
graphic images are  correct at the time they are viewed.
For  short system  delays  (under -80  ms),  prediction  has
been shown to reduce  dynamic errors  by up to  an order
of magnitude  (Azuma and Bishop,  1994). Accurate  pre-
dictions  require  a  system built for real-time  measure-
ments  and computation.  Using inertial  sensors makes
predictions  more accurate  by a factor of 2-3.  Predictors
have  been  developed for a few AR systems  (Emura  and
Tachi,  1994;  Zikan et al.,  1994b),  but the  majority were
implemented and evaluated  with VE systems,  as  shown
in the reference  list of (Azuma  and Bishop,  1994). More
work needs to be done  on ways  of comparing the theo-
retical performance  of various predictors  (Azuma,  1995;
Azuma  and Bishop,  1995)  and in developing  prediction
models  that better  match actual head  motion (Wu and
Ouhyoung,  1995).

4.3.3  Match  Temporal  Streams.  In video-
based AR systems, the video camera and digitization
hardware  impose inherent delays  on the user's  view of
the real world.  This delay is potentially  a  blessing when
reducing dynamic  errors, because  it allows the temporal
streams  of the real  and virtual images  to be  matched.

4.4  Vision-based Techniques

Mike Bajura  and Ulrich Neumann  (Bajura  and

Neumann,  1995)  point out that registration  based solely
on the information  from the tracking  system is like
building an  "open-loop"  controller. The  system has no

Azuma  373

Figure  18.  A virtual arrow and virtual chimney aligned with two real
objects. (Courtesy Mike Bajura,  UNC  Chapel  Hill Dept  of Computer
Science, and Ulrich  Neumann, USC.)

feedback on how closely the real  and virtual actually
match. Without feedback,  it is difficult  to build a system
that achieves perfect  matches.  However, video-based
approaches  can use image  processing  or computer vision
techniques to aid registration. Since  video-based AR sys-
tems have  a digitized image  of the real environment,  it
may be possible to detect  features in the environment
and use those to  enforce registration. They  call this a
"closed-loop"  approach,  since the digitized image  pro-
vides  a mechanism  for bringing  feedback into the sys-
tem.

Implementing this approach is not a trivial task. De-

tection and matching must run in real  time and must be
robust. Special  hardware  and sensors  are often required.
However, it is also  not an  "AI-complete"  problem  be-
cause  this is simpler than the general computer-vision
problem.

For example,  in some AR applications  it is acceptable

to place  fiducials in the environment.  These  fiducials
may be  LEDs (Bajura  and Neumann,  1995)  or special
markers  (Mellor,  1995a, b; Neumann and Cho,  1996).
Recent  ultrasound experiments at  UNC Chapel Hill
have  used colored dots  as fiducials  (State  et al.,  1996a).
The  locations or patterns  of the fiducials  are  assumed to
be  known.  Image processing  detects  the locations of the

Figure  19.  Real skull with five fiducials. (Courtesyj. P. Mellor, MIT Al
Lab.)

fiducials;  then those  are  used to make  corrections that
enforce  proper registration.

These routines assume that one or more  fiducials  are

visible at all times; without them,  the registration can fall
apart. But when the fiducials  are  visible, the results can
be  accurate  to one pixel-about as  close as one  can get
with video techniques. Figure  18,  taken from (Bajura
and Neumann,  1995),  shows a virtual arrow and a vir-
tual  chimney exactly aligned with their desired  points on
two  real objects.  The  real objects  each have  an LED  to
aid the registration. Figures  19  through 21  show regis-
tration from (Mellor,  1995a) that uses dots with a circu-
lar pattern as the fiducials.  The registration  is also nearly
perfect. Figure 22 demonstrates  merging virtual objects
with the real environment, using colored  dots as  the fi-
ducials in a video-based  approach.  In the picture on the
left, the stack of cards in the  center are  real,  but the ones
on the right  are virtual.  Notice that these penetrate  one

374  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

Figure 20.  Virtual wireframe skull registered with real skull. (Courtesy 
J. P. Mellor, MIT Al Lab.)

Figure  21.  Virtual  wireframe  skull registered  with  real skull  moved to

a different position. (Courtesy j  P. Mellor,  MIT Al  Lab.)

of the blocks.  In the image on the right, a virtual spiral
object interpenetrates  the real blocks  and table and also
casts virtual shadows  upon the real objects  (State et al.,
1996a).

perform all potential AR tasks. For example,  these two
approaches do not recover  true depth information,
which is useful when compositing the real and the vir-
tual.

Instead of fiducials,  (Uenohara and Kanade,  1995)

Techniques  that use fiducials  as the sole  tracking

uses template matching to achieve  registration. Template
images  of the real object are taken  from a variety of view-
points.  These are used to search the  digitized image  for
the real object.  Once that is found, a virtual wireframe
can be  superimposed  on the real object.

Recent  approaches in video-based  matching avoid the
need for any calibration.  (Kutukalos  and Vallino,  1996)
represents virtual objects in a non-Euclidean,  affine
frame  of reference  that allows rendering without knowl-
edge  of camera parameters.  (Lu  and Rogovin,  1996)  ex-
tracts contours  from the video of the real world, then
uses an optimization  technique to match the contours  of
the rendered  3D virtual object with the contour ex-
tracted from the video.  Note that calibration-free  ap-
proaches  may not recover  all the information  required to

source determine  the relative projective  relationship  be-
tween the objects in the environment and the video
camera.  Although this is enough to ensure registration,
it does not provide  all the information  one might need
in some AR applications,  such as  the absolute  (rather
than  relative)  locations of the objects and the camera.
Absolute locations are needed to include virtual and real
objects that are not tracked by the video  camera,  such as
a 3D  pointer or other virtual object not directly tied to
real objects in the scene.

Additional sensors  besides video cameras  can aid regis-

tration. Both (Mellor,  1995a,  b) and (Grimson  et al.,
1994,  1995)  use a laser rangefinder  to acquire an initial
depth map of the real object in the environment.  Given a
matching virtual model, the system  can match the depth

Azuma  375

Figure 22.  Virtual cards and spiral object merged  with real blocks and table. (Courtesy Andrei State, UNC  Chapel Hill Dept. of Computer Science.)

maps from the real  and virtual until  they are properly
aligned,  and that provides the information  needed for
registration.

Another way to reduce  the difficulty of the problem is
to accept  the fact  that the system  may not be robust and
may not be able  to perform all tasks  automatically. Then
it can ask  the user to perform certain tasks. The  system
described in Sharma and Molineros  (1994)  expects
manual intervention  when  the vision algorithms fail to
identify a part because  the view is obscured. The  calibra-
tion techniques  in Tuceryan  et al.  (1995)  are heavily
based on computer vision  techniques,  but they ask the
user to manually intervene  by specifying  correspon-
dences when necessary.

both. Even  if the viewpoint or objects  are allowed  to
move, they are  often restricted in how far they can travel.
Registration is shown under controlled  circumstances,
often with only a small number of real-world  objects,  or
where  the objects are already well-known  to the  system.
For example,  registration  may only work on one object
marked with fiducials,  and not on any other objects in
the scene. Much  more work needs to be  done  to in-
crease the domains in which registration is robust. Du-
plicating  registration  methods remains a nontrivial  task,
due  to both  the complexity of the methods  and the addi-
tional  hardware required.  If simple yet  effective solutions
could  be developed,  that would  speed the acceptance  of
AR systems.

4.5  Current Status

S  Sensing

The  registration requirements  for AR are  difficult
to satisfy, but a few  systems have achieved  good results.
(Azuma and Bishop,  1994)  is an  open-loop  system  that
shows registration  typically within  5  millimeters  from
many viewpoints for an object at about arm's length.
Closed-loop systems,  however, have  demonstrated
nearly perfect  registration, accurate  to within a pixel
(Bajura  and Neumann,  1995; Mellor,  1995a, b; Neu-
mann  and Cho, 1996; State et al.,  1996a).

The registration  problem is far from solved. Many

systems assume  a static viewpoint, static objects,  or even

Accurate  registration  and positioning  of virtual

objects in the real environment requires  accurate  track-
ing of the user's  head and sensing  the locations of other
objects in the environment.  The  biggest single  obstacle
to building effective augmented  reality systems  is the
requirement  of accurate,  long-range  sensors and trackers
that report the locations of the user and the surrounding
objects in  the environment.  For details of tracking tech-
nologies,  see the surveys  in (Ferrin,  1991; Meyer  et al.,
1992)  and Chapter 5 of Durlach and Mavor  (1995).

376  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

Commercial  trackers  are aimed at the needs of virtual
environments  and motion-capture  applications.  Com-
pared to those two  applications,  augmented reality  has
much  stricter accuracy  requirements  and demands  larger
working volumes.  No tracker currently  provides high
accuracy  at long ranges  in real time.  More work needs  to
be done to develop  sensors and trackers  that can meet
these  stringent requirements.

Specifically, AR demands  more  from trackers  and sen-

sors in three areas:

- Greater input variety  and bandwidth
- Higher accuracy
- Longer  range

S. I  Input Variety and  Bandwidth

VE  systems  are  primarily built to  handle  output

bandwidth,  for example,  the images displayed  and
sounds generated.  The input bandwidth  is tiny--for ex-
ample,  the locations  of the user's head  and hands,  the
outputs from the buttons and other control  devices.  AR
systems,  however, will  need a  greater variety  of input
sensors  and much more  input bandwidth  (Buxton, per-
sonal communication,  MIT Workshop  on Ubiquitous
Computing,  Cambridge,  MA,  1993).  There  are  a
greater  variety of possible input sensors  than output  dis-
plays.  Outputs  are  limited to the  five human senses.  In-
puts can come from anything  a sensor can detect. Robi-
nett speculates that augmented reality may be  useful in
any application  that requires  displaying information  not
directly available  or detectable  by human senses  by  mak-
ing that information  visible  (or audible,  touchable, etc.)
(Robinett,  1992).  Recall  that the proposed medical  ap-
plications  in Section 2.1  use CT, MRI,  and ultrasound
sensors as  inputs.  Other future applications  might use
sensors to extend  the user's  visual range  into infrared  or
ultraviolet frequencies,  and remote  sensors would let
users view objects hidden  by walls or hills. Conceptually,
anything not detectable  by human senses  but detectable
by machines  might be transduced  into something that a
user can sense  in an AR system.

Range  data is a particular input that  is vital for many
AR applications  (Aliaga,  1997; Breen  and Rose,  1996).

The AR system knows  the distance  to the virtual objects,
because  that model is built into the system.  But the AR
system  may not know where all the real  objects are  in the
environment.  The  system might assume that  the entire
environment  is measured  at the beginning  and remains
static thereafter.  However, some  useful applications  will
require  a dynamic  environment,  in which real  objects
move,  so the objects  must  be tracked in real  time.  How-
ever,  for some  applications  a depth map of the real envi-
ronment would  be sufficient.  That would allow real ob-
jects to  occlude virtual objects  through  a pixel-by-pixel
depth value  comparison. Acquiring  this depth map in
real  time is not trivial. Sensors like laser rangefinders
might be  used. Many computer-vision  techniques  for
recovering  shape through various  strategies  (e.g.,  "shape
from stereo,"  or "shape  from shading")  have  been  tried.
A recent work  (Wloka  and Anderson,  1995)  uses  inten-
sity-based  matching from a pair  of stereo images  to do
depth recovery. Recovering  depth through existing  vi-
sion techniques is  difficult to do robustly in real time.

Finally, some  annotation applications  require  access  to
a detailed database  of the environment;  this database  is a
type of input to  the system.  For example,  the architec-
tural application  of "seeing  into the walls"  assumes that
the system has  a database  describing where all the pipes,
wires,  and other hidden objects  are  within the  building.
Such a database  may not be  readily available,  and even  if
it is,  it may not be  in a format that is easily usable. For
example,  the data may not be  grouped to segregate  the
parts of the model that represent wires from the parts
that represent  pipes. Thus,  a  significant  modeling effort
may be  required and should be taken  into consideration
when  building an AR application.

5.2  High Accuracy

The  accuracy  requirements for the trackers  and
sensors  are  driven  by  the accuracies  needed  for visual
registration,  as described  in Section  4. For many  ap-
proaches,  the registration  is only as  accurate  as the
tracker.  Therefore,  the AR system needs trackers  that are
accurate  to around  one millimeter  and a tiny fraction  of
a  degree, across  the entire working  range  of the tracker.

Few trackers can meet  this specification,  and every

Azuma  377

technology  has weaknesses.  Some mechanical  trackers
are  accurate  enough, although  they tether the user to a
limited working volume.  Magnetic  trackers  are  vulner-
able  to distortion  by metal that exists in many desired
AR application environments.  Ultrasonic trackers  suffer
from noise  and are  difficult to make  accurate  at long
ranges  because  of variations  in the ambient  temperature.
Optical  technologies  (Janin et al.,  1994)  have distortion
and calibration  problems.  Inertial trackers  drift with
time.  Of the individual technologies,  optical technolo-
gies  show the most promise  because  of trends  toward
high-resolution  digital cameras,  real-time  photogram-
metric techniques,  and structured light sources that  re-
sult in more  signal strength  at long distances.  Future
tracking  systems that can meet the stringent require-
ments of AR will probably  be hybrid systems  (Azuma,
1993; Durlach and Mavor,  1995; Foxlin,  1996; Zikan et
al.,  1994b),  such as  a combination  of inertial and optical
technologies.  Using multiple  technologies  opens the
possibility of covering  for each technology's  weaknesses
by  combining their strengths.

Attempts  have  been made  to calibrate  the distortions
in commonly  used  magnetic  tracking  systems  (Bryson,
1992; Ghazisaedy  et al.,  1995).  These  have succeeded  at
removing  much of the gross error  from the tracker at
long ranges,  but not to the level required  by AR systems
(Holloway,  1995).  For example,  mean errors at long
ranges can  be  reduced from several inches  to around  one
inch.

The requirements  for registering other sensor modes
are  not nearly as stringent.  For example,  the human au-
ditory system is not very good  at localizing deep  bass
sounds. For this reason  subwoofer placement is not criti-
cal in a home-theater  system.

5.3  Long Range

Few trackers  are  built for accuracy  at long ranges,
since most VE applications  do not require  long ranges.
Motion capture applications  track an  actor's body parts
to control a computer-animated  character  or for the
analysis of an  actor's movements.  This approach  is fine
for position recovery, but not for orientation.  Orienta-
tion recovery is based upon  computed positions. Even

tiny errors in those  positions can cause  orientation errors
of a few degrees, a variation that is  too large  for AR sys-
tems.

Two scalable tracking  systems for HMDs have  been
described in the literature  (Ward  et al.,  1992; Sowizral
and Barnes,  1993).  A scalable  system is one that can be
expanded  to cover  any desired  range,  simply  by adding
more modular  components  to the  system.  This type of
system is created by  building a cellular tracking  system in
which  only nearby sources  and sensors are  used to track
a user. As the user walks  around, the set of sources  and
sensors changes,  thus  achieving large working volumes
while  avoiding long distances between  the current work-
ing set of sources and sensors. While  scalable trackers  can
be effective,  they are  complex  and by their very nature
have many  components,  making  them relatively expen-
sive to construct.

The Global  Positioning System (GPS)  is used to track
the locations of vehicles  almost anywhere  on the planet.
It might be  useful as  one part of a long range  tracker for
AR systems.  However,  by itself it will  not be  sufficient.
The  best reported  accuracy is  approximately  one centi-
meter,  assuming  that many measurements  are  integrated
(so that accuracy is not generated  in real time),  when
GPS is run in differential mode. That is not sufficiently
accurate  to recover  orientation from a set of positions on
a user.

Tracking  an AR system  outdoors in real  time with the

required  accuracy has not been  demonstrated and re-
mains  an  open problem.

6 

Future Directions

This section identifies  areas and approaches  that
require  further research  to produce  improved AR sys-
tems.

6.1  Hybrid Approaches

Future tracking  systems may be hybrids,  because
combined  approaches  can cover weaknesses.  The  same
may be true for other problems in AR. For example,  cur-
rent registration  strategies generally focus  on a single

378  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

strategy. Future systems may be more  robust if several
techniques  are  combined. An example  is  combining vi-
sion-based  techniques with prediction:  If the fiducials
are  not available,  the system switches  to open-loop  pre-
diction to reduce  the registration  errors,  rather than
breaking down completely. The  predicted viewpoints  in
turn produce  a more accurate  initial location  estimate  for
the vision-based  techniques.

6.2  Real-Time  Systems and
Time-Critical Computing

Many VE systems  are  not truly run in real  time.

Instead, it is common  to build the  system,  often  on
UNIX,  and then see how fast it runs. This approach may
be  sufficient  for some  VE applications;  since everything
is virtual,  all the objects are  automatically  synchronized
with each  other. AR is a  different  story. Now  the virtual
and real must be  synchronized,  and the real  world
"runs"  in real time. Therefore,  effective AR systems
must  be built with real-time  performance  in mind. Accu-
rate  timestamps  must be  available.  Operating systems
must not arbitrarily swap  out the AR software  process at
any time, for arbitrary  durations. Systems  must be  built
to guarantee  completion within specified time  budgets,
rather  than just "running  as  quickly  as possible."  These
are  characteristics  of flight simulators  and a few VE sys-
tems  (Krueger,  1992).  Constructing and debugging
real-time  systems  is often  painful  and difficult, but the
requirements  for AR demand  real-time  performance.

6.3  Perceptual  and
Psychophysical Studies

when  she stands  still? Furthermore,  not much is known
about potential optical illusions  caused by errors or con-
flicts in the simultaneous  display of real  and virtual ob-
jects  (Durlach  and Mayor,  1995).

Few experiments  in this area  have been  performed.

Jannick Rolland, Frank Biocca,  and their students  con-
ducted a study of the effect  caused  by eye displacements
in video see-through HMDs  (Rolland  et al.,  1995).
They found that users  partially adapted  to the eye  dis-
placement, but they also had negative  aftereffects  after
removing  the HMD. Steve  Ellis's group  at NASA  Ames
has conducted work  on perceived depth in a see-through
HMD  (Ellis  and Bucher,  1994;  Ellis and Menges,
1995).  ATR (Advanced Telecommunications  Research)
has also conducted  a study  (Utsumi et al.,  1994).

6.4  Portability

Section  3.4 explained why some potential AR ap-

plications require  giving  the user the  ability to walk
around  large  environments,  even outdoors.  For this rea-
son the equipment must  be self-contained  and portable.
Existing  tracking  technology is not capable  of tracking a
user outdoors  at the required accuracy.

6.5  Multimodal Displays

Almost all  work in AR has focused  on the visual
sense:  virtual graphic  objects  and overlays. But, as  Sec-
tion 3.1  explained,  that augmentation  might apply to  all
other senses  as well.  In particular,  adding  and removing
3D  sound is a capability  that could be useful  in some AR
applications.

Augmented  reality is an area  ripe for psychophysi-
cal studies.  How much lag can a user detect?  How much
registration error is  detectable when  the head  is moving?
Besides questions  on perception,  psychological  experi-
ments that explore performance issues  are  also needed.
How much does  head-motion  prediction  improve user
performance  on a specific  task?  How much  registration
error is tolerable  for a specific  application  before perfor-
mance  on that task degrades  substantially?  Is the allow-
able error larger while the user moves her  head versus

6.6  Social and  Political Issues

Technological  issues  are  not the only ones  that

need to  be considered  when building  a  real application.
There  are also  social  and political dimensions  when  get-
ting new technologies  into the hands of real users.
Sometimes, perception is what counts, even if the tech-
nological  reality is different. For  example, if workers  per-
ceive  lasers  to be  a health  risk,  they may refuse  to use a
system with lasers  in the display or in the trackers,  even if

!J'JE 

___________

Azuma  379

those lasers  are eye  safe.  Ergonomics  and ease of use  are
paramount  considerations.  Whether AR is  truly a cost-
effective  solution in its proposed  applications  has yet to
be  determined. Another  important factor is whether or
not the technology  is perceived  as a threat to jobs and as
a replacement  for workers,  especially now that many  cor-
porations have  downsized.  AR may be  positively per-
ceived  in this regard,  because  it is intended  as a tool to
make  the user's job easier, rather than  something that
completely replaces  the human worker. Although tech-
nology transfer is not normally a subject of academic
papers, it is a real problem.  Social and political concerns
should not be ignored  during attempts  to move AR out
of the research  lab and into the hands  of real users.

7  Conclusion

Augmented  reality is far behind virtual environ-

ments in maturity. Several  commercial  vendors  sell  com-
plete,  turnkey virtual environment systems.  However,  no
commercial  vendor currently sells  an HMD-based  aug-
mented  reality system.  A few monitor-based  "virtual
set"  systems  are  available,  but today AR systems  are  pri-
marily  found  in academic  and industrial  research labora-
tories.

The  first deployed  HMD-based  AR systems  will prob-
ably  be in the application  of aircraft  manufacturing.  Both
Boeing  (Boeing  TRP, 1994; ARPA,  1995)  and McDon-
nell Douglas  (Neumann and  Cho,  1996)  are  exploring
this technology. The  former uses  optical  approaches,
while the latter is pursuing video approaches.  Boeing has
performed trial runs with workers  using  a prototype  sys-
tem but has not yet made  any deployment decisions.
Annotation  and visualization  applications  in restricted,
limited-range  environments  are  deployable today, al-
though  much more work needs  to be  done  to make
them cost  effective and flexible.  Applications  in medical
visualization will take  longer. Prototype visualization
aids have  been  used on an experimental  basis,  but the
stringent registration  requirements  and ramifications  of
mistakes  will postpone  common usage  for many years.
AR will probably  be used for medical  training  before it is
commonly used in surgery.

The next generation  of combat aircraft will  have  hel-
met-mounted  sights, with graphics  registered  to targets
in the environment (Wanstall,  1989).  These displays,
combined with  short-range  steerable  missiles that can
shoot at targets  off-boresight,  give a  tremendous  combat
advantage  to pilots in dogfights.  Instead of having  to be
directly behind his target in order to  shoot at it, a pilot
can now shoot at anything within a  60-90'  cone of his
aircraft's forward  centerline.  Russia and Israel currently
have systems  with this capability,  and the United States  is
expected to  field the AIM-9X  missile with  its associated
Helmet-Mounted  Sight in 2002  (Dornheim and
Hughes,  1995; Dornheim,  1995a).  Registration  errors
due to delays  are  a  major problem in this application
(Dornheim,  1995b).

Augmented  reality is a relatively new field.  Most of the

research efforts have  occurred in the past four years,  as
shown by the references  listed at the end of this paper.
The  SIGGRAPH  "Rediscovering  Our Fire"  report iden-
tified augmented  reality as  one of four areas where SIG-
GRAPH should encourage  more  submissions  (Mair,
1994).  Because  of the numerous challenges  and unex-
plored avenues  in this area, AR will remain  a vibrant  area
of research for at least the next several years.

One area  where a breakthrough  is  required is tracking

an  HMD  outdoors at the accuracy  required  by AR. If
this is  accomplished,  several interesting  applications  will
become  possible.  Two examples  are  described  here:  navi-
gation  maps and visualization  of past and future environ-
ments.

The  first application  is a navigation  aid to people  walk-

ing outdoors.  These individuals  could  be soldiers ad-
vancing upon  their objective,  hikers lost in the woods,  or
tourists seeking  directions  to their intended destination.
Today, these individuals  must pull out a physical  map
and associate  what they see in the real environment
around  them with the markings  on the 2D map.  If land-
marks  are not  easily identifiable,  this association  can be
difficult to perform,  as anyone  lost in the woods can at-
test. An AR system  makes navigation  easier  by perform-
ing the association  step  automatically. If the user's posi-
tion and orientation  are  known, and the AR system  has
access  to a digital map of the area,  then the AR system
can draw the map in 3D  directly upon the user's view.

380  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

The user looks at  a nearby mountain  and sees graphics
directly  overlaid  on the real environment  explaining  the
mountain's  name, how tall it is,  how far away it is,  and
where the trail is that leads to the top.

The  second  application is visualization  of locations

and events  as  they were in the past or as  they will be after
future  changes  are performed.  Tourists  that visit histori-
cal  sites,  such  as a Civil War battlefield or the Acropolis
in Athens,  Greece,  do not see these  locations as they
were  in the past,  due to changes  over  time. It is often
difficult  for a modern visitor to imagine  what these sites
really looked  like in the past. To  help, some  historical
sites stage  "living  history"  events where volunteers wear
ancient clothes  and reenact historical  events. A tourist
equipped with an outdoors AR system  could see a com-
puter-generated  version of the living history. The  HMD
could cover up modern buildings  and monuments  in the
background  and show, directly on the grounds at  Get-
tysburg, where  the Union and Confederate  troops  were
at the fateful moment of Pickett's  charge.  The gutted
interior of the modern Parthenon  could be filled  in by
computer-generated  representations  of what it looked
like in 430  B.C.  including the long-vanished  gold  statue
of Athena in the middle.  Tourists and students  walking
around the  grounds with such  AR displays would  gain a
much better  understanding of these historical  sites and
the important events  that took place  there. Similarly, AR
displays  could show what proposed architectural  changes
would  look like before  they were  carried out. An  urban
designer could show clients and politicians  what  a new
stadium would  look like as they walked around  the ad-
joining neighborhood,  to better understand  how the
stadium  project would  affect nearby residents.

After  the basic problems  with AR are  solved,  the ulti-
mate goal will  be  to generate  virtual objects that are  so
realistic that they are  virtually indistinguishable  from the
real  environment.  Photorealism has  been demonstrated
in feature films,  but accomplishing  this in an interactive
application will  be  much harder. Lighting conditions,
surface  reflections,  and other properties must  be mea-
sured  automatically, in real  time.  More sophisticated
lighting, texturing,  and shading capabilities must  run at
interactive  rates in future scene  generators.  Registration

must  be nearly perfect,  without manual intervention  or
adjustments.  While  these  are difficult problems,  they  are
probably not insurmountable.  It took about 25  years to
progress from drawing  stick figures  on  a screen  to the
photorealistic  dinosaurs in "Jurassic  Park."  Within  an-
other 25  years,  we should be  able to wear  a pair of AR
glasses outdoors  to see and interact with photorealistic
dinosaurs  eating a tree  in our backyard.

Acknowledgments

This paper is an updated version  of my course notes for an
ACM  SIGGRAPH  '95 class called "Developing  Advanced Vir-
tual Reality Applications,"  given  in Los Angeles,  CA, in Au-
gust  1995.

I thank the  anonymous reviewers  for their constructive criti-
cism  and suggestions  for improving  this paper. I also thank the
following  individuals  and organizations  for sending pictures to
include  with  this paper:  Mike  Bajura,  Andrei State,  and Linda
Houseman, University  of North Carolina  at Chapel  Hill De-
partment  of Computer Science;  David Drascic  and  Paul Mil-
gram, University  of Toronto;  Steve Feiner and Blair MacIn-
tyre,  Columbia University; Alessandro  Giacalone,  The
European Computer-Industry  Research  Centre (ECRC)  and
David Breen, Caltech;  J. P. Mellor, MIT Al  Laboratory;  David
Mizell, Boeing;  Ulrich  Neumann,  University  of Southern Cali-
fornia; Jannick Rolland,  Center for  Research  and Engineering
in Optics  and Lasers (CREOL)  at the University  of Central
Florida (rolland@creol.ucf.edu).

References

Note: Some  of these references  are available  electronically  at

the following  sites on the World Wide  Web:
Columbia U. http://www.cs.columbia.edu/graphics/
ECRC  http://www.ecrc.de/
MIT Al  Lab http://www.ai.mit.edu/
UNC  Chapel  Hill http://www.cs.unc.edu/
U.  Toronto http://vered.rose.utoronto.ca/etc-lab.html/

Aliaga, D.  G. (1997).  Virtual  objects in the real world.  Com-

munications of the ACM  40, 3  (49-54).

ARGOS  virtual pointer camera  calibration  procedure  WWW

Azuma  381

page.  (1994).  http://vered.rose.utoronto.ca/people/dav-
id  dir/POINTER/Calibration.html.

ARPA ESTO WWW page. (1995).  http://molothrus.sysplan-

.com/ESTO/.

Azuma,  R. (1993).  Tracking  requirements  for augmented  real-

ity. Communications of the ACM,  36 (7),  50-51.

Azuma,  R. T. (1995).  Predictive tracking for augmented real-
ity. Ph.D.  dissertation, Dept. of Computer  Science,  Univer-
sity of North Carolina  at Chapel  Hill. Available  as  UNC-CH
CS Dept. Technical  Report  TR95-007.

Azuma,  R.,  & Bishop,  G.  (1994).  Improving  static  and dy-

namic  registration in a see-through  HMD.  Computer Graph-
ics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '94),  Orlando,  197-204.

Azuma,  R.,  & Bishop,  G.  (1995).  A frequency-domain  analysis
of head-motion prediction.  Computer Graphics (Proceedings
of SIGGRAPH  '95),  Los Angeles, 401-408.

Barfield, W.,  Rosenberg,  C.,  and Lotens, W. A.  (1995).  Aug-

mented-reality  displays.  In W. Barfield,  & Furness, T. A.,  III
(Eds.).  Virtual Environments and Advanced Interface De-
sign (542-575).  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press.

Bajura,  M. (1993).  Camera calibration for video see-through

head-mounted display. Technical  Report TR93-048.  Dept. of
Computer Science,  University  of North Carolina  at Chapel
Hill.

Bajura,  M.,  & Neumann,  U.  (1995).  Dynamic registration

correction in video-based  augmented reality  systems.  IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 15  (5),  52-60.

Bajura,  M.,  Fuchs, H.,  & Ohbuchi,  R. (1992).  Merging  virtual
reality with  the real  world:  Seeing ultrasound imagery  within
the patient.  Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH
'92),  26 (2), 203-210.

Betting, F.,  Feldmar, J., Ayache,  N.,  & Devernay, F.  (1995).  A

new framework  for fusing stereo images with volumetric
medical images.  Proceedings of Computer Vision,  Virtual Re-
ality, and Robotics in Medicine '95, Nice,  30-39.

Boeing TRP WWW page.  (1994).  http://esto.sysplan.com/

ESTO/Displays/HMD-TDS/Factsheets/Boeing.html.

Bowskill,  J.,  & Downie, J. (1995).  Extending  the  capabilities

of the human  visual system:  An introduction  to enhanced
reality.  Computer Graphics, 29 (2),  61-65.

Breen,  D.  E.,  Whitaker, R. T.,  Rose, E.,  & Tuceryan,  M.

(1996).  Interactive  occlusion  and automatic  object  place-
ment for augmented reality.  Proceedings of Eurographics '96,
Futuroscope-Poitiers,  11-22.

Brooks, F.  P.,  Jr.  (1996).  The computer  scientist  as toolsmith

II.  Communications of the ACM,  39 (3),  61-68.

Bryson, S. (1992).  Measurement  and calibration  of static  dis-

tortion of position data from 3D trackers.  SPIE Proceedings
Vol. 1669:  Stereoscopic Displays and Applications III, San
Jose, 244-255.

Burbidge,  D.,  & Murray,  P. M. (1989).  Hardware  improve-
ments to the helmet-mounted  projector on the Visual  Dis-
play  Research  Tool  (VDRT) at the  Naval  Training Systems
Center. SPIE Proceedings Vol.  1116: Head-Mounted Displays,
52-59.

Caudell, T. P. (1994).  Introduction to Augmented Reality.

SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:  Telemanipulator and Telepres-
ence Technologies, Boston, 272-281.

Caudell, T. P.,  & Mizell,  D.  W. (1992).  Augmented reality:  An
application  of heads-up  display technology to  manual manu-
facturing processes.  Proceedings of the Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, 659-669.

Chen,  S. E.,  & Williams,  L. (1993).  View interpolation  for im-

age synthesis.  Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIG-
GRAPH '93), Anaheim,  279-288.

Deering,  M.  (1992).  High-resolution  virtual reality.  Computer
Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH  '92),  26 (2),  Chicago,
195-202.

Doenges,  P. K. (1985).  Overview  of computer image  genera-

tion  in visual simulation.  Course Notes, 14: ACM  SIG-
GRAPH 1985, San Francisco.

Dornheim, M. A.  (1995a).  U.S.  fighters to  get helmet displays

after 2000.  Aviation Week  and Space Technology, 143 (17),
46-48.

Dornheim, M. A.  (1995b).  Helmet-mounted  sights must over-

come  delays.  Aviation Week  and Space Technology,  143 (17),
54.

Dornheim, M. A.,  & Hughes,  D.  (1995).  U.S.  intensifies  ef-
forts to  meet missile threat. Aviation Week  and Space Tech-
nology, 143 (16),  36-39.

Drascic,  D.  (1993).  Stereoscopic  vision and  augmented reality.

Scientific Computing and Automation, 9 (7),  31-34.

Drascic,  D.,  & Milgram, P. (1991).  Positioning  accuracy of a

virtual stereographic  pointer in  a real stereoscopic  video
world.  SPIE Proceedings Vol. 1457: Stereoscopic Displays and
Applications II, San Jose,  302-313.

Drascic, D.,  Grodski,  J. J.,  Milgram,  P.,  Ruffo,  K.,  Wong,  P.,  &

Zhai, S. (1993).  ARGOS:  A display  system for augmenting
reality.  Video Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computer-Human Interaction '93: Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. Also in ACM  SIGGRAPH Technical Video
Review,  88. Extended  abstract in  Proceedings of INTERCHI
'93, 521.

- oh- 

-

__  __

382  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6,  NUMBER  4

Durlach, N.  I.,  & Mavor, A. S. (Eds.)  (1995).  Virtual reality:
Scientific and technological challenges. Washington  DC:  Na-
tional Academy  Press.

Edwards, E.,  Rolland,  J.,  & Keller,  K. (1993).  Video see-
through  design for merging  of real and virtual environ-
ments. Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality Annual In-
ternational Symposium '93, Seattle,  222-233.

Edwards, P. J.,  Hill,  D.  L. G.,  Hawkes,  D.  J.,  Spink, R.,  Col-

chester, A.  C.  F.,  Strong, A.,  & Gleeson,  M.  (1995).  Neuro-
surgical  guidance  using the stereo microscope.  Proceedings of
Computer Vision,  Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine
'95, Nice,  555-564.

Foley, J. D.,  van Dam, A.,  Feiner, S. K.,  & Hughes,  J. F.

(1990).  Computer graphics: Principles and practice (2nd
ed.).  Reading,  MA:  Addison-Wesley.

Foxlin,  E.  (1996).  Inertial head-tracker  sensor fusion  by a

complementary  separate-bias  Kalman Filter.  Proceedings of
the Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium  '96,
Santa Clara,  185-194.

Ghazisaedy,  M.,  Adamczyk, D.,  Sandin,  D. J.,  Kenyon,  R. V.,
& DeFanti,  T. A.  (1995).  Ultrasonic calibration  of a mag-
netic  tracker in  a virtual reality  space.  Proceedings of the IEEE
Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium  '95, Re-
search  Triangle  Park,  179-188.

Ellis, S. R.,  & Bucher,  U. J.  (1994).  Distance  perception  of

Grimson, W.,  Lozano-P6rez, T.,  Wells,  W.,  Ettinger, G.,

stereoscopically  presented virtual objects  optically superim-
posed on physical  objects  by  a head-mounted  see-through
display. Proceedings of 38th Annual Meeting of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, Nashville,  1300-1305.

Ellis,  S. R.,  & Menges,  B.  M. (1995).  Judged  distance  to vir-
tual objects  in the near  visual field. Proceedings of 39th An-
nual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society,
San Diego,  1400-1404.

Emura, S.,  & Tachi,  S. (1994).  Compensation  of time lag be-
tween actual and virtual spaces  by multi-sensor integration.
Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE International Conference on
Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems,
Las Vegas, 463-469.

Feiner, S. (1994a).  Augmented reality. Course Notes, 2: ACM

SIGGRAPH  1994, 7, 1-11.

Feiner, S. (1994b).  Redefining the  user interface:  Augmented

reality.  Course Notes, 2: ACM  SIGGRAPH 1994, 18, 1-7.
Feiner, S.,  MacIntyre,  B.,  & Seligmann,  D.  (1993a).  Knowl-

edge-based  augmented  reality.  Communications of the ACM,
36 (7),  52-62.

Feiner, S.,  MacIntyre,  B.,  Haupt,  M.,  & Solomon,  E.  (1993b).
Windows on the world:  2D  windows  for 3D  augmented re-
ality. Proceedings of the  1993  User Interface Software and
Technology, Atlanta,  145-155.

Feiner,  S. K.,  Webster, A.  C.,  Krueger, T. E.  III, MacIntyre,  B.,

& Keller,  E.  J. (1995).  Architectural  Anatomy. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 4 (3),  3 18-325.
Ferrin, F. J. (1991).  Survey of helmet tracking  technologies.

SPIE Proceedings Vol. 1456: Large-Screen Projection, Avionic,
and Helmet-Mounted Displays, 86-94.

Fitzmaurice,  G.  (1993).  Situated  information spaces:  Spatially
aware  palmtop  computers.  Communications of the ACM, 36
(7),  38-49.

White,  S.,  & Kikinis,  R. (1994).  An  automatic registration
method for  frameless stereotaxy, image  guided  surgery, and
enhanced  reality visualization.  Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Los
Alamitos,  430-436.

Grimson, W. E.  L.,  Ettinger, G. J.,  White,  S. J.,  Gleason,  P. L.,

Lozano-P6rez,  T., Wells,  W. M. III,  & Kikinis,  R. (1995).
Evaluating and validating  an automated  registration system
for enhanced reality  visualization  in surgery.  Proceedings of
Computer Vision,  Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine
'95, Nice,  3-12.

Holloway, R. (1995).  Registration errors in augmented reality.

Ph.D. dissertation.  Dept. of Computer  Science,  University
of North Carolina  at Chapel  Hill. Available  as  UNC-CH  CS
Dept. Technical  Report  TR95-016.

Holmgren,  D.  E.  (1992).  Design and construction of a 30-de-

gree see-through head-mounted display. Technical  Report
TR92-030.  Dept. of Computer Science,  University of North
Carolina  at Chapel Hill.

Iu, S.-L.,  & Rogovin,  K. W. (1996).  Registering perspective
contours with  3D objects  without correspondence  using
orthogonal  polynomials.  Proceedings of the Virtual Reality
Annual International Symposium  '96, Santa Clara,  37-44.
Jain, A.  K. (1989).  Fundamentals of digital image processing.

Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice Hall.

Janin, A.  L.,  Mizell,  D. W.,  & Caudell, T. P. (1993).  Calibra-
tion  of head-mounted  displays  for augmented  reality  appli-
cations. Proceedings of the  Virtual Reality Annual Interna-
tional Symposium  '93, Seattle,  246-255.

Janin,  A.,  Zikan,  K.,  Mizell,  D.,  Banner,  M.,  & Sowizral,  H.
(1994). A videometric  head  tracker for augmented  reality.
SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:  Telemanipulator and Telepres-
ence Technologies, Boston,  308-315.

Azuma  383

Kancherla, A.  R.,  Rolland,  J. P.,  Wright,  D.  L.,  & Burdea,  G.
(1995). A  novel virtual reality  tool for  teaching dynamic  3D
anatomy. Proceedings of Computer Vision,  Virtual Reality,
and Robotics in Medicine '95, Nice,  163-169.

Kim,  W. S. (1993).  Advanced  teleoperation,  graphics aids,  and

application  to time delay environments.  Proceedings of the
First Industrial Virtual Reality Show  and Conference, Maku-
hari  Meese,  202-207.

Kim, W. S. (1996).  Virtual reality calibration  and preview/

Predictive  displays for telerobotics.  Presence: Teleoperators
and Virtual Environments, 5 (2),  173-190.

Krueger, M. W. (1992).  Simulation versus artificial reality.  Pro-

ceedings of IMAGE  VI Conference, Scottsdale,  147-15 5.

Kutulakos,  K. N.,  & Vallino, J. (1996).  Affine  object represen-
tations  for calibration-free  augmented  reality. Proceedings of
the  Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium  '96,
Santa Clara,  CA, 25-36.

Lenz,  R. K.,  & Tsai,  R. Y.  (1988).  Techniques for calibration

of the  scale factor and  image center for high  accuracy 3D
machine  vision  metrology. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 10  (5),  713-720.

Lion,  D.,  Rosenberg,  C.,  & Barfield, W. (1993).  Overlaying

three-dimensional  computer  graphics with stereoscopic  live
motion video: Applications  for virtual  environments.  Society
for Information Display International Symposium Digest of
Technical Papers, Seattle, 483-486.

Lorensen,  W.,  Cline,  H.,  Nafis,  C.,  Kikinis,  R.,  Altobelli,  D.,  &

Gleason,  L.  (1993).  Enhancing reality  in the operating
room. Proceedings of Visualization '93, Los Alamitos, 410-
415.

Maes,  P. (1995).  Artificial  life  meets entertainment:  Lifelike
autonomous  agents.  Communications of the A CM,  38 (11),
108-114.

Mair,  S. G.  (1994).  Preliminary  Report  on SIGGRAPH  in the
21st Century:  Rediscovering  Our Fire.  Computer Graphics,
28 (4),  288-296.

McMillan,  L.,  & Bishop,  G.  (1995a).  Head-tracked  stereo-

scopic  display using  image  warping.  SPIE Proceedings 2409:
Electronic Imaging Science and Technology, San Jose,  21-30.

McMillan,  L.,  & Bishop,  G. (1995b).  Plenoptic modeling.

Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH  '95),  Los
Angeles,  39-46.

Mellor, J. P. (1995a).  Enhanced reality visualization in a surgi-

cal environment. Master's thesis,  Dept. of Electrical  Engi-
neering,  MIT.

Mellor,  J. P. (1995b).  Realtime camera  calibration for  en-

hanced  reality visualization.  Proceedings of Computer Vision,

Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95, Nice, 471-
475.

Meyer,  K., Applewhite,  H.  L.,  & Biocca,  F. A.  (1992).  A sur-
vey of position-trackers. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 1 (2),  173-200.

Milgram, P.,  Zhai, S.,  Drascic,  D.,  & Grodski,  J. J.  (1993).

Applications  of augmented reality  for human-robot commu-
nication. Proceedings of International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robotics and Systems, Yokohama,  1467-1472.

Milgram,  P.,  & Kishino,  F.  (1994a).  A taxonomy of mixed re-

ality virtual  displays.  Institute of Electronics, Information,
and Communication Engineers Transactions on Information
and Systems, E77-D  (9)  1321-1329.

Milgram,  P.,  Takemura,  H.,  Utsumi, A.,  & Kishino, F.

(1994b).  Augmented reality:  A  class  of displays  on the real-
ity-virtuality  continuum.  SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:  Tele-
manipulator and Telepresence Technologies, Boston, 282-
292.

Milgram, P.,  Drascic,  D.,  Grodski,  J. J.,  Restogi, A.,  Zhai, S.,
& Zhou,  C. (1995).  Merging  real  and virtual worlds.  Pro-
ceedings of IMAGINA  '95, Monte  Carlo, 218-230.

Mine,  M.  R. (1993).  Characterization of end-to-end delays in
head-mounted display systems. Technical  Report TR93-001.
Dept. of Computer  Science,  University  of North Carolina  at
Chapel  Hill.

Neumann,  U.,  & Cho, Y. (1996).  A self-tracking augmented
reality system.  Proceedings of Virtual Reality Software and
Technology '96, Hong Kong,  109-115.

Oishi,  T.,  & Tachi,  S. (1996).  Methods  to calibrate  projection

transformation parameters  for see-through  head-mounted
displays.  Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 5
(1),  122-135.

Olano, M.,  Cohen,  J., Mine,  M.,  & Bishop,  G.  (1995).  Com-

bating graphics  system latency. Proceedings of 1995  Sympo-
sium on Interactive 3D  Graphics, Monterey,  19-24.

Oyama, E.,  Tsunemoto,  N.,  Tachi,  S.,  & Inoue, Y. (1993).

Experimental study on remote  manipulation using virtual
reality. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 2
(2), 112-124.

Pausch,  R.,  Crea,  T.,  & Conway, M.  (1992).  A  literature sur-
vey for virtual environments:  Military  flight simulator visual
systems  and simulator sickness.  Presence: Teleoperators and
Virtual Environments, 1 (3),  344-363.

Peuchot, B.,  Tanguy, A.,  & Eude,  M.  (1995).  Virtual reality as

an operative  tool  during scoliosis  surgery. Proceedings of
Computer Vision, Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine
'95, Nice,  549-554.

384  PRESENCE:  VOLUME  6, NUMBER  4

Regan, M.,  & Pose,  R. (1994).  Priority rendering  with a vir-

tual  reality address  recalculation  pipeline.  Computer Graphics
(Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '94),  Orlando,  15 5-162.

Rekimoto,  J. (1995).  The magnifying  glass  approach  to aug-
mented reality systems.  Proceedings of ICAT '95, Makuhari
Meese.

Rekimoto,  J.,  & Nagao,  K. (1995).  The  world through  the

computer: Computer  augmented  interaction  with real world
environments.  Proceedings of the 1995  User Interface Soft-
ware Technology, Pittsburgh, 29-36.

Riner, B.,  & Browder, B.  (1992).  Design guidelines  for a car-

rier-based training  system.  Proceedings of IMAGE  VI,
Scottsdale,  65-73.

Robinett, W. (1992).  Synthetic experience:  A proposed  tax-

onomy. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1
(2),  229-247.

Robinett, W.,  & Rolland, J. (1992).  A computational  model

for the  stereoscopic  optics  of a head-mounted  display. Pres-
ence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1 (1),  45-62.

Rolland, J. P.,  & Hopkins, T. (1993).  A  method of computa-
tional correction for optical distortion in head-mounted dis-
plays. Technical  Report  TR93-045.  Dept. of Computer Sci-
ence,  University  of North Carolina  at Chapel  Hill.

Rolland, J.,  Holloway, R.,  & Fuchs, H.  (1994).  A comparison

of optical and video see-through  head-mounted  displays.
SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:  Telemanipulator and Telepres-
ence Technologies, Boston, 293-307.

Rolland, J.,  Biocca,  F.,  Barlow, T.,  & Kancherla,  A.  (1995).

Quantification  of adaptation to  virtual-eye  location  in see-
thru head-mounted  displays.  Proceedings of the  Virtual Real-
ity Annual International Symposium '95, Research  Triangle
Park,  NC,  56-66.

Rose,  E.,  Breen,  D.,  Ahlers,  K.,  Crampton,  C., Tuceryan,  M.,

Whitaker, R.,  & Greer, D.  (1995).  Annotating  real-world
objects  using  augmented reality.  Proceedings of Computer
Graphics International '95, Leeds,  3 57-370.

Rosen,  J. M.,  Soltanian,  H.,  Redett, R. J.,  & Laub,  D.  R.

(1996).  Evolution  of virtual reality:  From planning  to per-
forming surgery.  IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology,
15(2),  16-22.

Sharma,  R.,  & Molineros,  J. (1994).  Role  of computer  vision

in  augmented  virtual reality.  SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies, Boston, 220-
231.

Simon, D.  A.,  Hebert, M.,  & Kanade, T. (1994).  Techniques

for fast and accurate  intra-surgical  registration.  Proceedings of

the First International Symposium on Medical Robotics and
Computer Assisted Surgery, 90-97.

Sims,  D.  (1994).  New realities  in aircraft design and manufac-
ture.  IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 14 (2), 91.

So,  R. H. Y.,  & Griffin,  M. J. (1992).  Compensating lags  in
head-coupled  displays using head position  prediction and
image  deflection.  Journal of Aircraft, 29 (6),  1064-1068.
Sowizral,  H.,  & Barnes,  J. (1993).  Tracking  position and ori-
entation  in a large volume.  Proceedings of IEEE VR AIS '93,
Seattle,  132-139.

State, A.,  Chen, D.  T.,  Tector, C.,  Brandt, A.,  Chen, H.,  Oh-
buchi,  R.,  Bajura,  M.,  & Fuchs, H.  (1994).  Case  study:  Ob-
serving a volume  rendered fetus within a pregnant  patient.
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization '94, Washington  DC,
364-368.

State, A.,  Hirota, G.,  Chen,  D. T.,  Garrett,  B.,  & Livingston,

M. (1996a).  Superior augmented  reality registration  by inte-
grating landmark  tracking and magnetic  tracking.  Computer
Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH  '96),  New Orleans,
429-438.

State, A.,  Livingston,  M. A.,  Hirota, G.,  Garrett, W. F.,  Whit-

ton, M. C.,  Fuchs, H.,  & Pisano,  E. D.  (1996b).  Techniques
for augmented-reality  systems:  Realizing  ultrasound-guided
needle  biopsies.  Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIG-
GRAPH '96), New Orleans,  439-446.

Taubes,  G.  (1994).  Surgery in  cyberspace.  Discover, 15(12),

84-94.

Tharp,  G.,  Hayati,  S.,  & Phan, L.  (1994).  Virtual window tele-
presence  system  for telerobotic inspection.  SPIE Proceedings
Vol. 2351:  Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies,
Boston,  366-373.

Tuceryan,  M.,  Greer, D.  S.,  Whitaker,  R. T.,  Breen,  D.,

Crampton,  C.,  Rose,  E.,  & Ahlers,  K. H. (1995).  Calibra-
tion requirements  and procedures  for augmented  reality.
IEEE Transactions on  Visualization and Computer Graphics,
1 (3),255-273.

Uenohara,  M.,  & Kanade,  T. (1995).  Vision-based  object reg-
istration for real-time  image overlay. Proceedings of Computer
Vision,  Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95, Nice,
13-22.

Utsumi, A.,  Milgram, P.,  Takemura, H.,  & Kishino,  F.  (1994).

Effects of fuzziness  in perception  of stereoscopically  pre-
sented  virtual object location.  SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies, Boston,  337-
344.

Wanstall,  B.  (1989).  HUD  on the  head for combat pilots. In-

teravia, 44 (April  1989),  334-338.

Azuma  385

Ward,  M.,  Azuma,  R.,  Bennett,  R.,  Gottschalk, S.,  & Fuchs,

H.  (1992).  A demonstrated optical tracker  with scalable  ork
area for  head-mounted  display systems.  Proceedings of 1992
Symposium  on Interactive 3D Graphics, Cambridge, 43-52.
Watson,  B.,  & Hodges,  L. (1995).  Using texture maps  to cor-

rect for  optical distortion  in head-mounted  displays. Proceed-
ings of the  Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium
'95, Research  Triangle  Park,  172-178.

Welch,  R. B.  (1978).  Perceptual modification: Adapting to al-

tered sensory environments. New York: Academic  Press.

in augmented  reality. Proceedings of 1995 Symposium on In-
teractive 3D Graphics, Monterey, 5-12.

Wu, J.-R.,  & Ouhyoung,  M.  (1995).  A 3D  tracking  experi-
ment on latency  and its compensation  methods  in  virtual
environments.  Proceedings of the 1995  User Interface Soft-
ware and Technology, Pittsburgh,  41-49.

Yoo,  T. S.,  & Olano, T. M.  (1993).  Instant Hole"  (Windows
onto reality). Technical  Report TR93-027.  Department of
Computer Science,  University  of North  Carolina at  Chapel
Hill.

Wellner,  P. (1993).  Interacting with  paper on the  DigitalDesk.

Zikan,  K.,  Curtis, W. D.,  Sowizral,  H., & Janin,  A.  (1994a).

Communications of the ACM,  36 (7),  86-96.

Whitaker, R. T.,  Crampton,  C.,  Breen, D.  E.,  Tuceryan,  M.,  &

Rose,  E. (1995).  Object calibration  for augmented  reality.
Proceedings of Eurographics '95, Maastricht,  15-27.

Wloka,  M. M.  (1995).  Lag  in multiprocessor  virtual  reality.

Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 4 (1),  50-
63.

Wloka,  M. M.,  & Anderson, B.  G.  (1995).  Resolving occlusion

Fusion of absolute  and incremental position  and orientation
sensors.  SPIE Proceedings Vol. 2351:  Telemanipulator and
Telepresence Technologies, Boston, 316-327.

Zikan, K.,  Curtis, W. D.,  Sowizral,  H. A.,  & Janin, A. L.

(1994b).  A note  on dynamics  of human  head motions  and
on  predictive  filtering  of head-set  orientations.  SPIE Pro-
ceedings Vol. 2351: Telemanipulator and Telepresence Tech-
nologies, Boston, 328-336.

