From Stimulus To Symbol:

The Economy Of Biological Computation

Heinz Von Foerster

BCL #135

Man’s heritage is of two different kinds. One has
been accumulated through perhaps two billion years of
evolution and is encoded in the molecular structure of
his genetic make-up. The other has been built-up during
approximately one million years of communication and
is encoded in the symbolic structure of his knowledge.

While man evolved as a result of interplay between
genetic mutability and environmental selectivity, his self-
made symbols evolved as a result of interplay between
his ﬂexibility in expressing and his sensitivity in distin-
guishing. This observation links these two evolutionary
processes in a not too obvious way, and gives rise to the
formidable problem of demonstrating this link by tracing
structure and function of the symbols he uses back to the
cellular organization of his body.

It is clear that we are today still far from a solution
to this problem. First, we do not yet possess a consis-
tent comprehension of structure and function of our sym-
bols, to wit, the Cyclopean efforts by various linguistic
schools to establish a concise language for dealing with
language; second, our knowledge of the cellular organi-
zation of the body is still meager, despite the incredible
amount of knowledge accumulated over the past decades.
As a matter of fact, it is indeed doubtful whether with
presently available conceptual tools this problem can be
solved at all. These tools, however, will permit us to get
an insight into the magnitude of this problem.

An approach which considers symbolization in the
framework suggested by the formulation of this prob-
lem does have the advantage that it can tie together ev-
idences accumulated in a variety of ﬁelds. Moreover,
within the framework suggested here it becomes impos-
sible to talk about symbols in a static, ontological way
and not consider the dynamic evolution of symbolic pre-
sentation. Likewise, it becomes impossible to separate a
symbol from its symbolizer, his sensory motor and men-
tal capabilities and constraints. And further, it becomes
impossible to separate symbol and symbolizer from his
environment which we have to populate with other sym-
bolizers in order that symbolization makes any sense at
all.

The following is an attempt to establish clues for the
understanding of potentialities and limits of symboliza-
tion through the understanding of variety and constraints
in the maker and user of symbols and in his environment.
The argument will be presented in three steps.
the concept of “environment” and the relation
First,
“environment-environmentee” will be discussed. The
second step will be to brieﬂy sketch some basic princi-
ples and some hypotheses of the processes that permit in-
ternal representations of environmental features. Third,
modes of projecting externally these internal represen-
tations will lead to the consideration of possibilities of
interaction by symbolization.

Environment: An Analysis

Evolution, like memory, is an irreversible process. The
man who once knew a datum, but has forgotten it now, is
different from the man who never knew it. Irreversibil-
ity in evolution permits one to picture this process in the
form of a tree with divergent branch points only. Fig.
1 is such a representation of evolutionary differentiation
in vertebrates over the last 500 million years. Time runs
from bottom to top and the number of different species at
any time within each branch is indicated by the width of
this branch. A subspecies among mammals called homo
sapiens, including its entire temporal extension, occupies
in this graph but a tiny speck of space in the upper right
corner of the mammalian branch, number 8.

It is perhaps easy to see that this graph represents pa-
leontological estimates of only those species that were
sufﬁciently stable to leave detectable traces. All instable
mutants escape detection, and thus cannot be accounted
for. In other words, this graph is essentially a picture of
the success story of living forms. This observation per-
mits us to look at this representation in a slightly different
way, namely, to consider each point in a branch as being
an instant at which a crucial problem is presented to a
particular species. If it solves this problem the point will
be retained and moves upward an ever so slight amount.
If not, the point will be removed, i.e., the species is elim-

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

1

From Stimulus to Symbol

inated.
It is clear that the crucial problem referred to
here is how to survive, and it is also clear that this cru-
cial problem is posed by the properties of the particular

environment which is in interaction with elements of this
species or its mutants.

Fig. 1. Evolution of vertebrates over the last 500 million years. Time runs from bottom to top. Width of branches

corresponds to approximate abundance of different species within the branch (class). 1. Jawless ﬁshes. 2. Cartilage

ﬁshes. 3. Placoderms. 4. Bony ﬁshes. 5. Amphibians. 6. Birds. 7. Reptiles. 8. Mammals.

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

2

From Stimulus to Symbol

From this viewpoint “environment” is seen in a
twofold way: as a set of properties of the physical world
that act upon an organism; and also as an accumulation
of successful solutions to the problem of selecting such
conditions in the physical world which are at least surviv-
able. In this discussion “environment” will always carry
this relative notion as “environment of. . . ,” where envi-
ronment and the organism associated with it will be du-
als to each other in the sense that a particular organism O
implies its particular environment E(O), and vice versa,
that a particular environment E implies its appropriate
organism O(E).

Fig. 2. Globular star cluster NGC 5272 in the
constellation Canes Venatici, Mount Wilson and

Palomar Observatories.

By carving out from the physical universe just that

portion E(O) which is “meaningful” for this organism O,
one has carved out a portion that is necessarily of com-
patible complexity with that of the organism. An organ-
ism that tolerates a variation of temperature of, say, thirty
degrees Fahrenheit around a certain mean, cannot “dare”
to move into places where temperatures vary beyond this
tolerance.

This statement can be expressed differently. An or-
ganism that is matched to its environment possesses in
some way or another an internal representation of the or-
der and the regularities of this environment. How this
internal representation within the cellular architecture of
living systems is achieved will be taken up later in this
paper.

At this point the concept of “order” needs further
clariﬁcation. Intuitively one would associate order with
the relation of parts in a whole. But what are parts?
Again, intuitively, parts emerge as “separabilia,” because
the relation among their components is of higher order
than that of the parts of the whole. Although this def-
inition is circular, it points in the right direction, for it
relates order to the strength of constraints that control
the interaction of elements which comprise the whole.
These constraints manifest themselves in the structures
they produce. The globular star cluster (Fig. 2) has
simple spherical symmetry, because the weak gravita-
tional forces that hold the approximately 100,000 ele-
ments of this system in statistical equilibrium have them-
selves radial symmetry. Of course, much more sophisti-
cated structures are obtained if this constraints are more
numerous and stronger. The volume Structure of this
present series1 abounds with beautiful examples from na-
ture and art, where either strong molecular forces (e.g.,
the paper by Cyril Stanley Smith) or the application of
strong principles of construction (e.g., the paper by R.
Buckminster Fuller) generate structures of great intricacy
and sophistication. Here only one shall be given, the al-
most inexhaustible variety of hexagonal symmetries in
snow crystals (Fig. 3). The growth mechanism of these
crystals is subjected to a major constraint, namely the tri-
angular shape of the water molecule H2O which has two
hydrogen atoms attached to the big oxygen atom at an-
gles which are close to either 30°or 60°. This slight devi-
ation from the condition that would produce equilateral
shapes introduces a certain amount of “freedom” for the
molecules to attach themselves to each other, which in
turn allows for the large variability within this constraint.
Note that in spite of the great difference in the individual
shapes of these crystals, no difﬁculty arises in recogniz-
ing these forms at a glance as snow crystals. This sug-
gests that the cognitive apparatus that “ﬁgures out” — or
computes — the answer to the question “What is this?” is
the one thing that is common to all these shapes, and this
is the constraint in their growth mechanism. The name
we give to this constraint is simply “snow crystal.”

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

3

From Stimulus to Symbol

ment.

One clue of how to compute these constraints from
the apparent structure of the environment is suggested
by the preceding examples. Structure in space was deter-
mined by a law in the growth mechanism that permitted
attachment of new neighbor elements only at particular
points; structure in time was determined by a law in the
transition process that permitted only a particular event
to be neighbor to an existing one. In other words, spa-
tiotemporal order is generated by constraints that con-
trol spatiotemporal neighborhood relationships. Hence,
if these can be “sized up,” the constraints can be evalu-
ated.

If chaos permits every event to appear with equal
probability, order emerges from chaos when certain tran-
sitions of events become more probable than others. Cer-
tainty of an event following another creates a perfect, de-
terministic universe, and the problem of how to survive
in such a deterministic universe is reduced to ﬁnding the
constraints that govern the transitions from one event to
the next. Clearly, the simplest of all such determinis-
tic universes is the one where no transitions take pace,
i.e., where everything is at motionless and uniform tran-
quility. Hence, the oceans, where temperature variations,
changes in the concentration of chemicals, destructive
forces, etc., are kept at a minimum, were the cradle for
life.

The dual interdependence of organism-environment
permits a dual interpretation of the tree of evolution (Fig.
1). Instead of interpreting points on this graph as species
of organisms, one may interpret them as species of envi-
ronments. Thus viewed, this chart represents the evolu-
tion of environments which were successively carved out
of the physical universe. These environments evolved
from simple, almost deterministic ones, to extremely
complex ones, where large numbers of constraints reg-
ulate the ﬂow of events. An environmental subspecies
among mammalian environments, called “E (homo sapi-
ens),” occupies in this graph a small speck of space in
the upper right corner of branch number 8. Hence, its
dual, “homo sapiens(E),” sees “his universe” as a result
of two billion years of environmental evolution, which
step by step carved out from the physical universe an ever
increasing number of constraints of all those in this uni-
verse that are computable within the limits of the evolv-
ing organism.

Fig. 3. Snow crystals.

In the temporal domain order is again generated
by the constraints of the “Laws of Nature” which, on
the macroscopic scale of direct observation, control the
chain of events. Chaos would permit transitions from any
state to any other state, mountains transforming them-
selves into ﬂying pink elephants, pink elephants turning
into yellow goo, etc. Not only are organisms impossible
in this world, for by deﬁnition, there is no law that holds
the organism together, but also this world is indescrib-
able, for description requires names, and names refer to
the “invariabilia” — the constraints — in the environ-

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

4

From Stimulus to Symbol

The diagram shown here below sketches the cir-
cular ﬂow of information in the system environment-
organism. In the environment constraints generate struc-
ture. Structural information is received by the organism
which parses this information on to the brain which, in
turn, computes the constraints. These are ﬁnally tested
against the environment by the actions of the organism.

rests on knowledge that can be shared, that is, “together-
knowledge,” or con-scientia.

E

N

V

R

I

C

O

o

N

n

s

E

N

n

i

M

t

r

a

T

s

t

S

t

r

e

u

S

t

c

t

e

t

u

r

u

m

r

r

c

e

t

i

u

n

D

r

a

a

t

l

o

i

n

R

G

A

N

I

S

M

O

i

n

r

a

B

With the emergence of self-reﬂection and conscious-
ness in higher organisms a peculiar complication arises.
A self-reﬂecting subject may insist that introspection
does not permit him to decide whether the world as he
sees it is “real,” or just a phantasmagory, a dream, an
illusion of his fancy. A decision in this dilemma is im-
portant in this discussion, since, if the latter alternative
should hold true, no problems as to how organisms rep-
resent internally the features of their environment would
arise, for all environmental features would be just inter-
nal affairs in the ﬁrst place.

In which sense reality indeed exists for a self-
reﬂecting organism will become clear by the argument
that defeats the solipsistic hypothesis.2 This argument
proceeds by reductio ad absurdum of the thesis: “This
world is only in my imagination; the only reality is the
imagining ‘I.’ ”

Assume for the moment that the gentleman in the
bowler hat in Fig. 4 insists that he is the sole reality, while
everything else appears only in his imagination. How-
ever, he cannot deny that his imaginary universe is popu-
lated with apparitions that are not unlike himself. Hence
he has to grant them the privilege, that they themselves
may insist that they are the sole reality and everything
else is only a concoction of their imaginations. On the
other hand, they cannot deny that their fantasies are pop-
ulated by apparitions that are not unlike themselves, one
of which may be he, the gentleman with the bowler hat.
With this, the circle of contradiction is closed, for if
one assumes to be the sole reality, it turns out he is the
imagination of someone else who, in turn, insists that he
is the sole reality.

The resolution of this paradox establishes the real-
ity of environment through evidence of a second ob-
server. Reality is that which can be witnessed: hence,

Fig. 4. Reductio ad absurdum of the solipsistic

hypothesis. The hominid apparitions of the gentleman
with the bowler had have the gentleman with the bowler

hat as apparition. Picture by Gordon Pask.

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

5

From Stimulus to Symbol

Internal Representation Of Environment:

A Physiology

Distributed over the surface of multicellular organisms
are highly differentiated cells that establish the interface
between the proceedings of the external world and the
representations of these proceedings within the organ-
ism. To some variables in the physical universe these
cells, called sensory receptors, have become speciﬁcally
sensitive: for example, cells sensitive to changes in pres-
sure are insensitive to, say, the changes in the concen-
tration of sodium chloride in the water surrounding the
organism, etc., etc., and vice versa.

Sensitivity of a receptor cell to a speciﬁed perturba-
tion is observed by its response in the form of a short
electric discharge, which, after it has been initiated at the
surface, travels into the interior of the organism along a
thin ﬁber, the axon, which protrudes from the cell.

Fig. 5. Electrical pulse activity measured with a

microprobe on the axon of a tactile sensor neuron under
different pressures. High frequency corresponds to high

pressure.

The approximate duration of this discharge is several
thousandths of a second and its magnitude always about
one-tenth of a volt, irrespective of the intensity of the
perturbation. A prolonged perturbation produces a se-
quence of discharges the frequency of which corresponds
approximately to the logarithm of the intensity of the per-
turbation. A series of such pulse sequences measured
with small electrodes in the axon of a tactile sensor is
shown in Fig. 5. In engineering language the encoding
of an intensity into frequency of a signal is called fre-
quency modulation, or FM, and it may be noted that all
sensory information — irrespective of sensory modality
— is coded into this common language.

If a perturbation is permanently applied, the interval
between pulses slowly increases until the sensor ﬁres at
a low frequency — called the resting rate — which is
independent of the intensity of the permanent perturba-
tion. This phenomenon, “habituation,” is one example of
computational economy in living organisms, for a prop-
erty of the universe that does not change in space or time
can safely be ignored. Air has no smell. It is the change
of things to which an organism must be alerted.

A speciﬁc perturbation that elicits responses of a sen-
sory receptor is called stimulus. Stimulus and receptor
are duals in the same sense as are environment and or-
ganism. Consequently, a tree of the evolution of sensory
receptors could be drawn which, at the same time, would
show the successive acquisition of speciﬁed properties of
the physical universe that are selectively ﬁltered out from
the rest of the universe.

In the higher animals the most intricately developed
sensory system is that of their visual organs. Distributed
over the human retina are 180 million sensory receptors
of essentially two kinds, the rods and the cones. Rods re-
spond to brightness in general and are more concentrated
on the periphery, while cones respond to brightness mod-
iﬁed by a variety of pigments and are more concentrated
in the central part of the retina, the fovea. The fovea,
by proper accommodation of the crystalline lens, has the
lion’s share in transducing the information contained in
the inverted image focused on the retina.3 The concen-
tration of sensors in the fovea is very high indeed. An
area on the retina of the magnitude of the small, black,
circular spot that indicated termination of the previous
sentence contains approximately 20,000 cones and rods.
The projected image of this spot, when looked at un-
der normal reading conditions, is “seen” by about 200
cells. Since each cell distinguishes about 60 levels of
brightness, the number of images distinguishable by this
small ensemble of 200 cells is exactly (60)200, or ap-
proximately 101556. This is a meta-astronomical number
which, if printed out on this page, spreads over 13 lines.
It is clear that this overwhelming mass of information
is neither useful nor desirable, for an organism has to act;
and to act requires making a decision on the available in-
formation, which in this case is so large that it would
take eons of eons to initiate action, even if the evidence
were scanned at lightning speed. Moreover, any acci-
dental distortion of the image — may it be ever so slight
— caused, say, by light scattering in the vitreous humor,
by optical aberrations in the lens, such as achromatism,
astigmatism, temporary failure of single receptors, etc.,
etc., would pass as evidence with equal weight and be
admitted in the decision-making operation.

What, then, protects the brain from overﬂow of infor-

mation?

A ﬁrst clue was discovered by counting the ﬁbers in
the optic tract that is the bundle of nerves which connect

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

6

From Stimulus to Symbol

the eye with the brain. Here one counts only one million
ﬁbers, a reduction by 1/180 compared with the number
of sensors. Why this waste on the sensory level, or why
this redundancy? Is all this tremendous sensory informa-
tion just discarded? One has to look and to measure in
order to answer these questions.

The anatomy of the post-retinal neural structures is

known over many decades; the knowledge of its func-
tions emerges only slowly with advances in electronics
and the reﬁnement of micro-electrodes that permit pene-
tration of single ﬁbers in vivo and thus permit the record-
ing of their activity under controlled conditions of illu-
mination.

Fig. 6. Semi-schematic drawing of the post-retinal neural network. 1. Rods and cones. 2. Nuclei of cones and rods.
3. Interaction between sensors and bipolars. 4. Bipolar cells. 5. Interaction bipolars and ganglion cells. 6. Ganglion

cells. 7. Optic nerve.

Fig. 6 shows a semi-schematic sketch of the multi-
layered post-retinal neural network that connects sen-
sors with the ﬁbers of the optic tract. Rods, and a
few cones, with their associated cell bodies containing
the nucleus, comprise layers 1 and 2, the light-sensitive
nerve-endings in 1, the nuclei in 2. Their axons descend
into layer 3 where contacts are established with ﬁbers
emerging from the nuclei of a second layer of cells, the
“bipolars,” in layer 4. Their axons, in turn, connect in
layer 5 with branch-like ramiﬁcations, the “dendrites,”
emerging from cells of a third kind, the ﬁrst ganglion
cells in layer 6, which send their axons into deeper re-
gions of the brain, making up the ﬁbers of the optic tract,
layer 7.

Two features of this network should be noted. First,
that only a few sensors within a spatial neighborhood
contribute to one ganglion cell, as can be seen more
clearly in Fig. 7, which shows an elementary net of four
rods, one cone, three bipolars and two ganglion cells,
drawn directly from microscopic observation.4 Second,
that the signal pattern generated at the cones and rods
may be modiﬁed only in two places, namely in layers 3
and 5 where cells in different layers connect, and thus

may act on their successors according to rules of signal
transmission from neuron to neuron and according to the
local connection scheme.

The mechanisms that determine the response of a
successor cell when stimulated by the activity of its pre-
decessor at the place of their junction — the synapse —
are still today not clear. Nevertheless, it is clear that
two types of interaction can take place, excitation and
inhibition. An excitatory synapse will transmit to the
successor the oncoming discharge, while an inhibitory
synapse will cancel the trigger action of another excita-
tory synapse. Fig. 8 suggests a symbolic representation
of these two synaptic functions. The triangular ﬁgure
represents the successor neuron with its axon extending
downward. Axons from predecessor neurons forming
excitatory synapses are indicated as knobs, those with
inhibitory synapses as loops.

This observation of the two kinds of signal transmis-
sion sufﬁces to see neural interaction in a new light, for it
suggests the possibility of seeing the function of a neuron
in the form of a logical operation, the afﬁrmative corre-
sponding to excitation, negation corresponding to inhi-
bition. Hence, a network of synapting neurons can be

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

7

From Stimulus to Symbol

regarded as a system that computes certain logical func-
tions depending upon the type and structure of the con-
nections.

upon precisely three neurons in the second “computing”
layer. Two ﬁbers with excitatory synapses connect with
the neuron just below, while two other ﬁbers with in-
hibitory synapses connect with its left- and right-hand
neighbor. This we shall call an elementary net. It repeats
itself periodically over the entire strip, which is thought
to extend far out to both sides of the ﬁgure.

Fig. 9. Periodic network of idealized neurons

incorporating lateral inhibition.

Fig. 10. Periodic network with later inhibition

computing the property “edge.”

What does this net compute? Assume that all sen-
sors are uniformly illuminated. An arbitrary neuron in
the computer layer receives from its corresponding sen-
sor immediately above two excitatory stimuli which are,
however, canceled by the two inhibitory stimuli descend-
ing from the immediate neighbors of its corresponding
sensor. Due to the perfect cancellation of the two “yeses”
and the two “noes,” the net result is no response at all.
Since this is true for all other neurons in the computer
layer, the whole net remains silent, independent of the
intensity of light projected on the sensors. One property
of this scheme is now apparent: the net is insensitive to a
uniform light distribution.

What happens if a perturbation is introduced in the
light path? Fig. 10 illustrates this situation. Again, un-
der regions of uniform darkness or uniform illumination
the computer cells do not respond. However, the neu-
ron at the fringe between darkness and light receives no
inhibitory signal from the sensor in the shade, double
excitation overrides single inhibition and the cell ﬁres.
Due to the periodicity of the elementary net, this prop-
erty, namely, the presence of an edge, will be computed

Fig. 7. Elementary net composed of four rods, one cone,
three bipolars and two ganglion cells. Reproduced from
S. L. Polyak, The Vertebrate Visual System, Chicago,

The University of Chicago Press (1957).

Fig. 8. Symbolic representation of excitation (knob) and

inhibition (loop) of a neuron.

To see clearly the signiﬁcance of this observation,
an idealized two-layer neural network is drawn in Fig.
9. The ﬁrst layer consists of “rods,” each of which acts

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

8

From Stimulus to Symbol

independent of the position of this edge and independent
of the level of over-all illumination. Hence, such a net-

work may be called an “edge detector,” which when the
same principle is extended into two dimensions, may be
called a “contour detector.”

Fig. 11. Anisotropic periodic network computing the property “right edge” and the property “right edge moving

right.”

Other connections will compute other properties in
the visual ﬁeld. Fig. 11 shows a periodic net with two
computer layers, 1 and 2, where layer 2 utilizes re-
sults computed by layer 1. Inspection of the connection
scheme may easily show that layer 1 computes the pres-
ence of a right edge (light right, dark left); while layer
2, utilizing the synaptic delay in elements of layer 1,
computes a right edge moving right. Of course, no re-
sponses are obtained for left edges (light left, dark right),
left edges moving left or right, and right edges moving
left.

These examples are intended to show that owing to
the basic computational properties of the neuron, paral-
lel, periodic arrays of elementary networks are capable
of extracting a variety of useful “invariants” in an oth-
erwise complex environment. The theory that connects
structure and function of such networks with the invari-
ants they compute is fully developed. Given any univer-
sal property to be computed, the appropriate network to
carry out this computation can be synthesized.5

To establish similar correlations in actual physiolog-
ical nerve nets is inﬁnitely more difﬁcult. Nevertheless,
during the last couple of years in a series of brilliant ex-
periments6 the computation of invariants by post-retinal
networks in some vertebrates (frog, pigeon) has been
demonstrated. The experimental procedure consists of
observing responses of single ﬁbers in the optic tract

elicited by the presentation of various visual stimuli to
the retina of an anesthetized animal. These observations
show indeed that certain ﬁbers respond only if the appro-
priate invariant is present in their receptor ﬁeld. Some of
these invariants are:

1. Local sharp edges and contrast.
2. The curvature of edge of a dark object.
3. The movement of edges.
4. Local dimmings produced by movement or rapid

general darkening.
5. Vertical edges only.
6. Vertical edges moving.
7. Vertical edges moving right (left) only.

(etc.)

These abstracts are still on a primitive level, but it
is the way in which they are computed that invites fur-
ther comments. Although only those operations of the
perceptive apparatus have been described which are an
immediate consequence of the stimulation of sensors,
some basic principles are now visible which underlie
the translation of environmental features into represen-
tations of these features within the cellular architecture
of the organism. Perhaps the most fundamental prin-
ciple involved in this translation is the correspondence
between the neighborhood relationships that determine
environmental structures, and the neighborhood logics

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

9

From Stimulus to Symbol

that are incorporated into neural connectivity which de-
termine the “whether” and “where” of certain environ-
mental properties.

This suggests two levels of computation. First, com-
putation on the grand scale of evolutionary differenti-
ation which incorporates the environmental constraints
into the structure of those networks which on the sec-
ond level, compute within the limits of their structure
spatiotemporal quantities of useful universal parameters.
Clearly, the ﬁrst level refers to the species, the second to
the specimen. It is on the ﬁrst level that the notion of
“Platonic ideas” arises, for they refer to the fabric with-
out which experience cannot be gathered.

Fig. 12. Topological mapping of the sensation of touch

into the outer layers of the brain “homunculus.”

The importance of distributed operations that can be
carried out on a distributed stimulus is further empha-
sized by a careful preservation of neighborhood rela-
tionships even after the original stimulus has been re-
layed over many cascades of computational layers into
the deeper regions of the brain. Fig. 12 shows a topo-
logical mapping — that is, a mapping which preserves
neighborhoods — of our body with respect to the sensa-
tion of touch into the appropriate cortical regions. This
“homunculus” is obtained by registering with micro-
electrodes those regions in the brain which become active
when certain regions of the body are stimulated.7 Such
a “signal representation” must not necessarily conform
with original proportions, as seen by the emphasis of or-
gans that convey most of the tactile information. The
importance is the preservation of neighborhoods which
permit further computations of tactile abstracts.

The reliance on neighborhood relationships can
cause peculiar breakdowns of the perceptive apparatus
when presented, for instance, with a triple-pronged fork
with only two branches (Fig. 13). Although in all de-
tails (neighborhoods) this ﬁgure seems right, as a whole
it represents an impossible object.

Fig. 13. Triple-pronged fork with only two branches.

Similar difﬁculties arise when the visual system is
confronted with unusual projections which do not allow
quick reconstruction of the unprojected image. Erhard
Sch¨on’s anamorphosis (Fig. 15 [next page]) seems to pic-
ture a somewhat peculiar landscape, but “actually” it por-
trays the three Emperors, Charles V, Ferdinand I, Francis
I, and Pope Paul III. Faces of these personalities, includ-
ing their names, can easily be recovered by looking at
this engraving under a gazing angle from the left.8

Since all sensory modalities translate stimuli into
the universal language of electric pulse activity, invari-
ants computed by different senses may be compared on
higher levels of neural activity. Since it is on this level
where we have to search for the origin of symbolization,
this point may be illustrated by an example.

A hypothetical anthropologist visits a ﬁctitious tribe
whose members use symbolic representations, two of
which are shown in Fig. 14. One is referred to as “Oo-
boo,” the other one as “Itratzky.” It is signiﬁcant that no
further information is required to identify these symbols.

Fig. 14. “Ooboo” and “Itratzky.”

In the light of the preceding discussion it may indeed
be argued that in this case the pattern of neural activity,
which represents the visual stimulus conﬁguration, is ho-
mologous to that generated by conﬁgurations of the audi-
tory stimulus. This argument is going in the right direc-
tion, but it fails to cope with a strange situation, namely,
that earlier experience and learning is not involved in this
spontaneous identiﬁcation process.

Since associations gained from experience are ex-
cluded, one must assume that this audio-visual corre-
spondence rests upon the fabric without which experi-
ence cannot be gained. The structure of this fabric must
permit some cross-talk between the senses, not only in
terms of associations, but also in terms of integration. If
this structure permits the ear to witness what the eye sees
and the eye to witness what the ear hears then there is
“together-knowledge,” there is con-scientia.

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

10

From Stimulus to Symbol

Fig. 15. Anamorphosis by Erhard Sch¨on, 1535.

Fig. 16. Nature Teaching Nature, Allegory from Scrutinum Chymicum of Michael Maier, 1587.

Symbolization: A Synthesis

To survive is to anticipate correctly environmental
events. The logical canon of anticipation is inductive in-
ference, that is, the method of ﬁnding, under given evi-
dence E, the hypothesis H which is highly conﬁrmed by
E and is suitable for a certain purpose. This is compu-
tation of invariants within the limits of insufﬁcient infor-
mation, and follows the principles of invariant computa-
tions as before, only on a higher level. Knowledge is the
sum total of these hypotheses (invariants, laws, regula-
tions) and is accumulated on three levels. First, on the
molecular level in the genetic structure which tests the
viability of its hypotheses, the mutations, through the ve-
hicle of the developed organism; second, on the level of
the individual organism through adaptation and learning:
and third, on the social level through symbolic commu-
nication which cumulatively passes information on from
generation to generation.

Since these are evolutionary processes, and hence
irreversible, error would accumulate with knowledge,
were it not for a preventative mechanism: death. With
death, all registers are cleared and untaught offspring can
freshly go on learning. This mechanism works on the
ﬁrst and second levels, but not on the third.

To cumulatively acquire knowledge by passing it
on through generations, it must be communicated in
symbols and not in signs. This separates man from
beast. Communication among social insects is carried
out through unalterable signs which are linked to the ge-
netic make-up of the species. While signs refer to objects
and percepts, and serve to modify actions and manipula-
tions, symbols refer to concepts and ideas and serve to
initiate and facilitate computation.

Since the ultimate relation between symbols and en-
vironmental entities is cascaded over the relations sym-
bol/concept and concept/environment, it is in its logical
structure very complicated indeed. This gives rise to
breakdowns that manifest themselves on various levels
of semantic morbidity.

Symbols share with concepts and ideas the property
that they do not possess the properties of the entities they
represent. The concept of roses “smells” as much, or as
little, as the concept of jumping “jumps.” The concept of
a square is not quadratic. If this point is missed, a num-
ber would be just so many ﬁngers and a square with area
2 would have non-existing sides.

Since symbols refer to concepts and ideas, they too
may not have the properties they represent. The symbol
of a square may not be quadratic, as can be clearly seen
by the string of peculiarly shaped little marks on this pa-
per that have just been used to refer to this geometrical
ﬁgure. This was, of course, well understood when mys-
tical experience was to be coded into symbols. Michael
Maier’s allegory, entitled Nature Teaching Nature, from

the ﬁfty allegories of his Scrutinum Chymicum of 15879
is here presented for contemplation (Fig. 16). It may be
noted that no commentary — except the title — accom-
panies these pictures.

What, then, determines the form of a symbol; is it an
arbitrary convention, or does it convey its meaning by its
shape? Again, ontologically this question cannot be re-
solved. One has to look into the ontogenesis of symbolic
presentations.

We here repeat the diagram seen earlier which rep-
resents the information ﬂow between a single organism
and its environment:

E

N

V

R

I

C

O

o

N

n

s

E

N

n

i

M

t

r

a

T

s

t

S

t

r

e

S

u

t

c

t

e

t

u

r

u

m

r

c

e

t

i

u

n

D

r

a

a

t

l

o

i

n

Since symbolization requires at least two interact-
ing subjects who are immersed in an environment that is
common to both, we must extend this diagram to admit a
second subject. This is done here below:

R

G

A

N

I

S

M

O

i

n

r

a

B

r

1
2

S
S

E

E

1

E

2

Subjects S1 and S2 are coupled to their common en-
vironment E. In contrast to the ﬁrst diagram in which the
organism is faced only with an environment with given
constraints, now each of these subjects is confronted with
the additional complication of seeing his environment
populated with at least one other subject that generates
events in the environment E. Hence S2 sees, in addi-
tion to the events generated by E, those generated by S1,
and since these take place in E, they shall be labeled E1;
conversely, subject S1 sees in addition to events gener-
ated by E those generated by S2 which will be called
E2. Thus, in spite of the fact that both S1 and S2 are im-
mersed in the same environment E, each of these subjects
sees a different environment, namely, S1 has to cope with
(E ,E2) and S2 with (E ,E1). In other words, this situation

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

12

From Stimulus to Symbol

is asymmetrical regarding the two subjects, with E being
the only symmetrical part.

Assume that E1 and E2 are initial attempts by S1 and
S2 to communicate environmental features to each other.
It is clear that these attempts will fail unless — and this
is the decisive point — both subjects succeed in eventu-
ally converging to like representation for like universal
features. This process may be expressed symbolically:

E1

E2

E0

The arrows indicate the convergence process, and E0

stands for the ﬁnal universal “language” spoken by both
subjects. At this point the initial asymmetry ceases to ex-
ist and both subjects see the same environment (E ,E0).
As in all evolutionary systems, the outcome of this
process cannot be predicted in the usual sense, because
the goal which establishes equilibrium is not directly vis-
ible in the ﬁnal equilibrial state which is a communicable
symbol, while the goal is communicability.

Symbols must not necessarily have the shape of the
objects they ultimately refer to, yet within that freedom
there are constraints working in the evolution of sym-
bolic representation which conﬁne their development
within reasonable limits. One of these constraints is dic-
tated by the tools with which these symbols are gener-
ated, the other one is their syntactical structure.

Fig. 17. Formalization of pictograms through constraints imposed by writing tools. This development is estimated to

have taken place in Mesopotamia during a period from the fourth to the second millennium B.C.

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

13

From Stimulus to Symbol

An example of the ﬁrst kind of constraints operating
on the development of written symbols is given in Fig.
17, which shows the development of highly stylized sym-
bolic forms from initially representational pictograms.10
This transition is believed to have taken place in the two
millennia of Sumerian cultural activity between 4000 and
2000 B.C. As one goes down the rows it is clearly seen
how the constraints imposed by the writing tools — a
stylus with triangular cross-section pressed into soft clay
— strongly modify the early pictograms given in the top
row. It may be interesting to note that simultaneously
with this departure from structural representation goes
an increase in the possibility to add modiﬁers to the orig-
inal meaning. While the pictogram at the top of the
right-hand column indeed says “foot,” after two thou-
sand years of stylization (bottom row) it may stand for
“walking,” “running,” “delivering a message,” or other
“foot-connected” actions if associated with appropriate
modiﬁers. Nevertheless, in some instances it seems to
be possible to see behind the form of later symbols the
shape of earlier pictorial representations.

The other kind of constraint is a structural one and
does not show itself in an obvious way, for symbols carry
rules of connectivity and not so much rules of entity.
Symbols may be compared to atoms which react to par-
ticular atoms only to form the molecular compounds, but
are inert to all others. Take, for instance, these “molecu-
lar” sentences:

“Socrates is identical.”
“4 + 4 = purple.”

The disturbing thing about these is that they are nei-
ther true nor false; they are nonsensical. The connection
rules of the symbols have been violated in these exam-
ples. “Identical” sets up a relation between two entities.
“Socrates is identical with Plato” is a sentence that makes
sense although it happens to be a false proposition. The
compound “4 + 4 = ” requires a number to follow. Putting
“6” at the end is a good guess, but “purple” is an operator
with an entirely different structure. This indicates that
somehow structure is still preserved in symbolical dis-
course, but in a syntactical and not in a representational
sense. The language of symbols has, so to speak, its own
logical grammar.11 Uniqueness in symbolic expressions
is established in a way similar to that of a jigsaw puzzle
in which pieces can be put together in one, and only one
way. It is the sometime far-extending neighborhood re-
lationship among the pieces — the symbols — that puts
them into place,

It is clear that the constraints expressed in the neigh-
borhood relationships of symbols reﬂect constraints in
the environment. For instance, a sentence that refers to
two particular persons must employ two proper names.
To establish connection rules among symbols of speech

is the linguistic problem. One of the most primitive con-
nectivities among words is the probability of their suc-
cession. With the following two examples the emergence
of order by tightening the constraints of succession will
be demonstrated. These examples are random sequences
of words generated by a chance device which, however,
takes into account the various probabilities by which a
particular English word follows a number of precursors.
In the ﬁrst example the number of precursor words is
two:

. . . THE HEAD AND IN FRONTAL AT-
TACK ON AN ENGLISH WRITER THAT
THE CHARACTER OF THIS POINT IS
THEREFORE ANOTHER METHOD FOR
THE LETTERS THAT THE TIME OF
WHO EVER TOLD THE PROBLEM FOR
AN UNEXPECTED . . .

In the second example the constraints are tightened
by extending the neighborhood relationship up to four
words:

. . . HOUSE TO ASK FOR IS TO EARN
OUR LIVING BY WORKING TOWARDS
A GOAL FOR HIS TEAM IN OLD NEW
YORK WAS A WONDERFUL PLACE
WASN’T IT EVEN PLEASANT TO TALK
ABOUT AND LAUGH HARD WHEN HE
TELLS LIES HE SHOULD NOT TELL
ME THE REASON WHY YOU ARE IS
EVIDENT . . .

Symbols are no proxy for their objects.12 There are
two morbid states of the mind, magical thinking and
schizophrenia, in which this distinction is erased. In both
cases symbol and object become indistinguishable.
In
purpose-oriented Jou Jou and in Voodoo the identity of
symbol with object is used to manipulate the world by
manipulating the symbol. In schizophrenia symbol and
object are freely interchanged to produce peculiar hierar-
chies of identities. In order to comprehend in depth the
modality of this afﬂiction, a short passage of the exten-
sive description of the case of a six-year-old boy by the
name of Walter ( = water) is given here:13

Late in November, 1936, presumably because he had
heard a rumor about a child killed in an accident in an el-
evator there, he became terriﬁed when taken to a depart-
ment store. He trembled, cried, vomited and remained
“hysterical” for two days during which time he made lit-
tle jerking movements of his body and shoulders and said
scarcely a word. The following day, Dr. Hamill was for
the ﬁrst time able to make out that he failed to distin-
guish between himself (Walter) and water. Walter shifted
to water, thence to Deanna Durbin who played in “Rain-
bow on the River” and so to water again. Being water,
he felt he could not be drowned, but might be imprisoned

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

14

From Stimulus to Symbol

in the radiator. On hearing the knocking of water in the
radiator, he said, “elevator just came up and gave the
kid a knock” and again, “they are killing the kid,” which
terriﬁed him because he was the kid. Then followed “the
telephone burnt and got water after Suzy burnt.”

phisticated electronics. In comparison, the retina’s ex-
tensions are 2 square inches by 4/1000 of an inch, and
it weighs approximately 100 milligrams. This may be
taken as an indication of the economy of biological com-
putation.

(Dr.: “Where does water come from?”) “I come from
the show.” (Dr.: “You thought water and Walter were
the same thing.”) “My father used to take me across the
river.” (Dr.: “And he called you Walter?”) “And got
drowned. I do not live on Springﬁeld. Bad boys drink
water. They do not drink milk. Good boys live on Spring-
ﬁeld. I used to live on Springﬁeld-Mississippi River.”

It may be speculated that evolution did not weed out
mental diseases that afﬂict proper use of symbols be-
cause the survival value of the ability to symbolize is
so enormous that occasional morbid deviations of this
ability in individuals and in whole cultures could still be
tolerated. The enormous advantage of organisms that are
able to manipulate symbols over those who can only re-
act to signs is that all logical operations have not to be
acted out, they can be computed. It is obvious that this
saves considerable amounts of energy. But the really cru-
cial point here is that errors in reasoning are not neces-
sarily lethal.

The recognition of the fact that information is a pre-
cious commodity and can be processed by manipulating
symbols gave rise to the quick emergence of the fast and
large electronic computer systems. These systems ma-
nipulate symbols only and do not know objects. The laws
of algebra and logic are incorporated in their structure.
Hence, they cannot err by confusing modality as does
a schizophrenic, nor can they err in syntax and generate
nonsense. The only error they can make is confusing true
with false and false with true.

The human retina with its associated, genetically
structured networks may be compared to these computer
systems from a purely quantitative point of view, namely,
by the sheer amount of information that is processed.
The retina, with its 180 million sensors which operate in
parallel at millisecond intervals, performs equivalently
to a modem digital computer system that occupies 800
square feet of ﬂoor space and uses 4 tons of highly so-

Notes

1Structure in Art and in Science (Gyorgy Kepes, editor), New York,

George Braziller (1965).

2Self-Organizing Systems and Their Environments,” in Self-
Organizing Systems (M. C. Yovits and Scott Cameron, editors), New
York, Pergamon Press (1960), pp. 31–50.

3R. Held, “Object and Efﬁgy,” in Structure in Art and in Science. . . ,

p. 42–54.

4S. L. Polyak, The Vertebrate Visual System, Chicago, The Univer-

sity of Chicago Press (1957).

5W. Pitts and W. S. McCulloch, “How We Know Universals: The
Perceptions of Auditory and Visual Form,” in Bulletin of Mathematical
Biophysics, vol. 9 (1947), pp. 127–147; H. Von Foerster, “Structural
Models of Functional Interaction,” in Information Processing in the
Nervous System (R. W. Gerard and J. W. Duyff, editors), Amsterdam,
Excerpta Medica Foundation (1963). pp. 370–383.

6J. Y. Lettvin, H. R. Maturana, W. S. McCulloch, and W. Pitts,
“What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain,” in Proceedings of the
Institute of Radio Engineers, vol. 47 (1959) pp. 1940–1951; H. R. Mat-
urana, “Functional Organization of the Pigeon Retina,” in Information
Processing. . . , pp. 170–178.

7F. A. Mettler, Neuroanatomy, St. Louis, The C. V. Mosby Co.

(1958), p. 432.

8J. Baltrusaitis, Anamorphoses, Paris, Oliver Perrin (1955).
9R. Caillois, Au Coeur du Fantastique, Paris, Gallimard (1965).
10O. Neugebauer, Vorgriechische Mathematik, Berlin, Springer

(!934), pp. 40–78.

11L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico Philosophicus, New York, Hu-

manities Publications (1961).

12S. Langer, Philosophy in a New Key, New York, The New Ameri-

can Library (1962), p. 61.

13L. J. Mednna and W. S. McCulloch, “The Modern Concept of
Schizophrenia,” in Symposium on Neuropsychiatric Diseases, Philadel-
phia, W. B. Saunders CO. (1945), pp. 147–164.

This article is in part based on work sponsored by the
Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research under Grant 7-
64 and by the National Institute of Health under Grant
GM-10718.

HEINZ VON FOERSTER

15

From Stimulus to Symbol

