 

Short term wind power forecasting using hybrid 

intelligent systems 

M. Negnevitsky, Member, IEEE, P. Johnson, Student Member, IEE  and S. Santoso, Senior Member, IEEE 

  

Abstract—This panel paper summarizes the current trends in 
wind power development and describes a proposed approach for 
short  term  wind  power  forecasting  using  a  hybrid  intelligent 
system.   
 

Index Terms—wind power, short term forecasting, intelligent 

systems. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

The  publication  of  the  Stern  Review  on  the  economics  of 
climate  change  [1]  on  30  October  2006  re-energized  the 
public and political debate regarding the need for low carbon 
technologies  for  electricity  power  generation.  The  Review 
represented the most comprehensive study ever carried out on 
the economics of climate change and estimated that the global 
cost of a “business as usual” approach would be equivalent to 
at least 5% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and could be as 
high as 20% of GDP each year. In contrast, the costs of action 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to avoid the worst impacts 
of  climate  change  can  be  limited  to  around  1%  of GDP and 
the  global  benefits  over  time  could  be  in  the  order  of  $2.5 
trillion each year. 

Power  generation  accounted  for  24%  of  greenhouse  gas 
(CO2) emissions in 2000. The Stern Review highlights that for 
electricity generation, where new technologies can struggle to 
gain  a  foothold,  support  policies  for  early  stage,  low  carbon 
technologies will be critical.  

Wind  power 

is  now  a  maturing  renewable  energy 
technology  for  electricity  generation  with  various  high 
efficiency, 
configurations 
commercially  available  to  use  as  building  blocks  for  utility 
scale wind farm installations. 

multi-megawatt 

turbine 

 Global installed wind power capacity continues to grow at 
around 25% per year. This growth is expected to increase with 
continued political efforts and support policies for renewable 
energy. Figures compiled by the Global Wind Energy Council 
indicate that at the end of 2005 the total installed wind power 
capacity was 59,084MW worldwide [2]. 

 While the European Union still leads the market with over 
40,500MW  installed  at  the  end  of  2005  (69%  of  the  global 
total),  nearly  a quarter of the new capacity installed in 2005 
was in North America with the United States leading the way 
with over 2,400MW installed for the year. This growth in the 
US was due largely to the current window of stability in the 
federal  incentive  for  wind  energy,  the  production  tax  credit 
                                                           

M.  Negnevitsky  and  P.L.  Johnson  are  with  the  University  of  Tasmania, 

Hobart, Australia. 

S.  Santoso 

is  with 

the  Department  of  Electrical  and  Computer 

Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA 

(PTC). Other emerging markets include India with 1,430MW 
installed in 2005 and China with 496MW installed in 2005 in 
anticipation  of  that  country’s  new  Renewable  Energy  Law 
which came into force on 1 January 2006. 

These  current  trends  confirm  that  wind  power  is  a 
significant and growing sector of renewable power generation 
and one which will continue to rise in profile, particularly as 
the global political will to address the worst impacts of climate 
change gains momentum. 

With  the  growth  in  the  popularity  of  wind  power  as  a 
commercially viable, renewable energy resource, a number of 
problems arise with integration of that resource into existing 
power systems and electricity markets. This paper summarizes 
some of these problems and highlights the need for accurate 
short term forecasting of wind power generation. An overview 
of  wind  power  forecasting  techniques  is  provided  and  some 
issues  related  to  prediction  parameter  choices  are  discussed. 
Finally  the  application  of  hybrid  intelligent  systems  to  short 
term  wind  power  forecasting  is  discussed  and  a  proposed 
research direction is outlined. 

II.  WIND POWER AND ELECTRICITY MARKETS 

A.  The Nature of Wind Power  

is 

Wind  and  the  resulting  power  produced  by  wind  turbines 
are neither constant nor schedulable. One of the fundamental 
difficulties 
the 
unpredictability and variability of wind farm generation. This 
has  both  technical  and  commercial  implications  for  the 
efficient planning and operation of power systems[3].  

faced  by  power  system  operators 

The  increasing  penetration  of  wind  generation  into  power 
systems  gives  rise  to  the  need  for  greater  forecasting 
predictability to maintain system security and enable assets to 
be operated in the most economical manner. Consequently the 
need  exists  for  wind  power  prediction  tools  which  offer  the 
best possible accuracy over a number of time scales. 

Wind  farms  are  often  located  in  remote  areas  which  are 
serviced by “stringy” and constrained transmission networks. 
In such cases, the need for accurate forecasting of wind farm 
outputs  is  required  to  ensure  appropriate  loading  and  secure 
operation  of  the  constrained  transmission  networks servicing 
them. 

Data  time  series  representing  wind  parameters  and  wind 
power  are  chaotic  or  stochastic  in  nature  and  this  presents 
challenges  for  accurate  prediction,  particularly  in  the  short-
term time frame. However, accurate wind power forecasting is 
necessary to enable successful integration of wind generation 
into power systems and electricity markets. 

statistical methods and methods based on the use of Artificial 
Neural Networks (ANNs). 

The time frames used for traditional wind forecasting range 
from the planetary scale for extremely large weather patterns 
over the long term (months to years), to synoptic predictions 
for  large  weather  patterns  over  the  medium  term  (days  to 
weeks)  down  to  “mesoscale”  forecasting  for  smaller  areas 
with the following sub time scales defined: 

 

B.  Electricity Markets and Wind Power 

Many  electricity  markets  around  the  world  have  moved 
from  a  regulated  market  supplied  via  vertically  integrated 
power  generation,  transmission  and  distribution  monopoly 
models  to  de-regulated  (or  ‘re-regulated’)  models  with  dis-
aggregation of generators and distributors.  

Deregulated  electricity  markets  generally  operate  using 
either  a  bilateral  contract  arrangement  and  a  nett  wholesale 
electricity  pool  such  as 
the  New  Electricity  Trading 
Agreement (NETA) in the United Kingdom or using a gross 
wholesale electricity pool arrangement such as is employed in 
the  Australian  National  Electricity  Market  (NEM).  In  each 
type  of  system  there  are  mechanisms  for  energy  sales  on 
different  time  scales  and  a  system  to  control  dispatching  to 
meet the technical system requirements. 

The  acceptance  of  non-schedulable  power  such  as  wind 
power into electricity markets is also handled in a variety of 
ways. In some cases, government regulated feed-in pricing is 
set  for  variable,  renewable  sources.  In  other  markets,  all 
participants must compete on equal terms.  

In  Australia,  the  wholesale  electricity  market  operator 
responsible for system security and operation of the NEM is 
the  National  Electricity  Market  Management  Company 
(NEMMCO). A large proportion of power is hedged via long 
term  financial  contracts  between  generators  and  retailers. 
NEMMCO sets the wholesale pool price for each five minute 
dispatch  interval  based  on  generator  bidding  and  settlement 
takes place on a thirty minute trading interval basis. 

 Wind  power  is  currently  non-scheduled  and  accepted 
straight  into  the  NEM  with  wind  power  generators  able  to 
receive  the  market  pool  price.  In  addition,  wind  farm 
developers  can  currently  sell  Renewable  Energy  Certificates 
(RECs) which retailers are required to buy under Australia’s 
Mandatory  Renewable  Energy  Target  (MRET)  scheme.  The 
value  of  RECs  also  varies  based  on  a  supply  and  demand 
market.   

the  purposes  of  ensuring  system  security  and 
dispatching generation capacity to match demand, NEMMCO 
treats  wind  power  as  a  ‘negative  demand’.  This  stochastic 
‘negative demand’ subtracts from the actual peak load profile 
resulting  in  a  modified  peak  demand.  This  approach  links 
demand 
forecasting  and 
consequently  the  importance  of  accurate  short  term  wind 
power forecasting becomes more significant as the penetration 
of wind power increases. 

to  wind  power 

forecasting 

In  August  2006,  NEMMCO  published  a  set  of  functional 
requirements  for  the  development  of  an  Australian  Wind 
Energy  Forecasting  System  (AWEFS)  [4].  These  functional 
requirements highlight the importance of accurate short term 
wind power forecasting for the 5 minute dispatch interval and 
also  call  up  short 
term  forecast  requirements  for  11 
subsequent 5 minute pre dispatch intervals out to 60 minutes 
ahead. 

For 

III.  WIND POWER FORECASTING 

A.  Overview of Forecasting Techniques and Time Scales 

Wind  and  wind  power  forecasting  techniques  available 
(NWP)  methods, 

include  numeric  weather  prediction 

 

 

 

The 

mesoscale alpha (intermediate term: 6 hours – 2 days) 
mesoscale beta (short term: 30minutes – 6 hours) 
mesoscale gamma (very short term - less than 30 minutes) 
NWP  methods  are  well  established  for  wind  forecasting 
with  a  prediction  horizon  of  several  hours  or  more. 
Specifically  tuned  NWP  models  using  accurate  Digital 
Elevation  Models  (DEMs)  and  Model  Output  Statistics 
(MOS)  corrections  have  been  applied  to  short  term  wind 
forecasting  applications  with  some  success  but  they  have 
proven to be unsuitable for the very short term time frame. 

local  observations  as  model 

The  available  wind  and  wind  power prediction techniques 
for the very short term (or mesoscale gamma) time frame rely 
on  current 
inputs.  These 
techniques  range  from  the  “industry  benchmark”  persistence 
approach to statistical models and the application of Artificial 
Neural Networks. 
concept 

by 
meteorologists 
forecasting 
approximation  to  augment  NWP  methods.  Persistence  relies 
on  the  high  correlation  between  the  current  value  of  a  wind 
parameter  and  the  value  in  the  immediate  future  and  simply 
equates  the  next  forecast  value  to  the  current  value.  This 
approach becomes less valid as the forecast interval increases 
but persistence has proven to be a useful first approximation 
for  short  term  forecasting  and provides  a  benchmark  against 
which to gauge the accuracy of alternative techniques.  

persistence  was 
simple 

developed 

of 
a 

Some  work  has  been  undertaken  on  the  application  of 
neural networks to model and estimate wind turbine output [5, 
6]. However the specific tuning required and lack of general 
portability of these approaches can be restrictive. To date no 
single  approach  has  gained  widespread  industry  acceptance 
and  the  simple  persistence  model  is  often  used  even  though 
more accurate predictions can be achieved. 
B.  Forecast Parameter Choices 

short 

term 

as 

When considering short term wind power forecasting there 
are  a  number  of  choices  in  relation  to  which  parameters  to 
forecast  and  what  level  of  aggregation  to  consider.  The  first 
choice  relates  to  whether  to  forecast  wind  parameters  and 
infer  or  calculate  wind  power  from  those  predictions  or 
alternatively to forecast wind power directly using a suitable 
model. 

Forecasting  wind  parameters  (e.g.  wind  speed  or  wind 
vector  magnitude)  is  a  more  fundamental  approach  and  the 
intermediate  results  of  predicted  wind  parameter  values  will 
be  independent  of  turbine  type  and  performance.  However, 
where the goal is to forecast wind power output, conversion of 
forecast wind parameters into power output is required. 

The general relationship between wind speed and the output 

power of a wind turbine is given by: 

1
⋅=
2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

p

⋅

C

ρ
⋅

vA
⋅

P
where P is the output power (W); Cp is the rotor coefficient of 
performance; ρ is the air mass density (kg/m3); A is the swept 
blade area (m2); v is the speed of the wind perpendicular to the 
turbine(m/s). 

   (1) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in 

time 

term 

there 

For a particular turbine, the coefficient of performance (Cp) 
varies  non  linearly  with  wind  speed  and  the  overall  turbine 
output performance is usually represented using a rating curve 
of power output vs. wind speed provided by the manufacturer. 
However a single rating curve does not adequately represent 
the  dynamic  response  of  a  turbine  output  to  varying  wind 
speed  and  direction 
frame. 
Consequently if wind parameters for a turbine are accurately 
forecast  using  a  particular  model, 
is  no  simple 
relationship  to  obtain  accurate  power  output  from  these 
parameters  and  a  second  non  linear  model  will  be  required. 
This suggests that where short term wind power forecasting is 
required, a single model providing direct prediction of power 
output is the best approach. 

the  short 

Another forecasting parameter choice relates to the level of 
aggregation to be considered. The most flexible approach is to 
consider short term wind power forecasting on a per turbine 
basis. By producing a forecasting model for each turbine, the 
output  for  a  wind  farm  can  be  easily  scaled  and  adjusted 
depending on turbine availability and wind farm configuration 
changes  over  time.  In  addition,  inputs  which  are  local  and 
specific  to  each  turbine  such  as  wind  speed  at  the  hub  and 
current  turbine  orientation  in  relation  to  the  wind  direction 
(yaw angle) could be considered in the model.   

aggregated 

Alternatively, 

term  wind  power 
forecasting  for  a  group  of  wind  turbines  may  be  easier  to 
manage  and  may  provide  some  inherent  error  cancellation. 
Aggregation  could  be  considered  for  a  sub-circuit  of a wind 
farm  or  for  an  entire  wind  farm.  While  aggregation  of  a 
number  of  wind  farms  in  a  region  could  also be considered, 
this  is  expected  to  be  less  useful  for  short  term  forecasting 
where  local  effects  will  dominate  for  the  time  frames  being 
considered.  

short 

IV.  PROPOSED APPLICATION OF HYBRID INTELLIGENT 

SYSTEMS  

A.  Intelligent Systems Overview 

The  field  of  Artificial  Intelligence  has  found  many 
applications  in  the  operation  of  power  systems.  These 
applications range from Expert Systems to assist with network 
fault diagnosis and rectification to Artificial Neural Networks 
and  Fuzzy  Logic  to  provide  models  for  complex  non-linear 
control problems. Combinations of different intelligent system 
approaches to form hybrid intelligent systems continue to find 
new applications.  
 
B.  Proposed Approach for Short Term Wind Power 
Forecasting 

Recent  research  has  demonstrated  the  use  of  a  novel 
technique to forecast wind vectors 2.5 minutes ahead [7]. An 

extension  of  this  technique  to  predict  single  turbine  power 
output  and  aggregated  wind  power  output  has  also  been 
successfully demonstrated over this time frame [8]. 

This  innovative  approach  applies  the  combination  of  two 
Artificial  Intelligence  techniques,  Fuzzy  Logic  and  Artificial 
Neural  Networks  in  the  form  of  a  hybrid  model  called  an 
Adaptive Neural Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) to predict 
wind parameter and wind power output in the very short term 
time frame (currently out to 2.5 minutes ahead). 

Building  on  this  work,  investigations  are  in  progress  to 
determine  which  model  configurations  provide  the  best 
accuracy  for  the  forecasting  of  wind  power  over  a  5  to  15 
minute  time  frame.  The  intent  is  to  develop  a  portable 
intelligent  system  capable  of  being  employed  for  any  wind 
farm  (without  the  need  for  expert  input)  which  will  provide 
improved 
frame. 
Following  this,  intelligent  system  approaches  to  wind  power 
forecasting  out  to  30  minutes  will  be  investigated.  It  is 
intended that the approaches developed will be tested using a 
number  of  wind  farm  case  studies  with  a  variety  of  wind 
characteristics  and  turbine  configurations  to  confirm  the 
portability of the models developed.  

forecasting  accuracy  over 

One of the wind farms is in North America.  Fig. 1 below 
shows actual wind speed and wind power output measured at 
a  collector  bus.    The  data  length  shown  is  for  a consecutive 
three  day  period.    The  wind  speed  data  was  measured  at  a 
single  location  within  the  wind  farm  and  has  a  native 
resolution of 30 seconds.  The wind power data has a much 
higher resolution, i.e., 1 second. 
 

time 

this 

4000

6000
3000
data point, 30 sec resolution

5000

7000

8000

9000

7000

8000

9000

 

s
/
m
d
e
e
p
s
 

d
n
w

i

)

W
M

(
 

P

15

10

5

0

0

1000

2000

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

1000

2000

4000

3000
6000
data point, 30 sec resolution

5000

 
Fig.  1.  Wind  speed  (top)  and  wind  power  (bottom)  time-series.    Note  that 
valleys and hills in the time-series vary in nearly unison. 
 

The plotted wind power data in Fig. 1 has been smoothed to 
30  second  resolution  using  a  moving  window  approach  to 
match the resolution of the wind speed.  The total data length 
is  8640  data  points  (3  days).  For  this  particular  wind  speed 
and  power  pair,  wind  power  variation  remarkably  matches 
that  of  wind  speed.    One  can  easily  notice  that  valleys  and 
hills  in  the  time-series  correlate  rather  tightly.    Since  many 
wind  farms  can  extend  over  several  kilometers  wide,  wind 
speed  over  the  wind  farm  area  is  not  uniform.    It  is 
conceivable to have a strong gust at one end of the farm, with 

 

no  or  very  little  wind  at  the  other  end.    The  proposed 
forecasting  tool  will  develop  algorithms  to  deal  with  this 
phenomenon. 

V.  REFERENCES 

[1]  N.  Stern.  Stern  Review:  The  Economics  of  Climate 
Change.  2006    [cited  10  November  2006];  Available 
from: 
http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/stern_review_econ
omics_climate_change/stern_review_report.cfm. 

[2]  GWEC. Global Wind 2005 Report.  [cited 10 November 

2006]; Available from: http://www.gwec.net. 

[3]  G.  N.  Bathurst,  J.  Weatherill,  and  G.  Strbac,  "Trading 
wind  generation  in  short  term  energy  markets,"  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Power  Systems,  vol.  17,  pp.  782-789, 
2002. 

He has worked as a power electronics design engineer with Critec Pty. Ltd, a 
research and development engineer with Global Lightning Technologies Pty. 
Ltd. and as senior electrical engineer with Pitt & Sherry consulting engineers.  
Mr. Johnson is a Chartered Professional Engineer, a Member of the Institution 
of  Engineers,  Australia  and  a  member  of  Standards  Australia  Committee 
EL/24 for Lightning Protection. 
 
Surya  Santoso  (M'1996,  SM  2002)  earned  his  MSE  and  Ph.D.  degrees  in 
electrical and computer engineering from the University of Texas at Austin in 
1994 and 1996, respectively. He re-joined the University of Texas at Austin as 
an  assistant  professor  in  fall  2003  after  a  seven-year  stint  as  a  senior  and 
consulting  engineer  with  Electrotek  Concepts,  Inc  in  Knoxville,  TN.    His 
primary  research  interests  include  development  of  intelligent  systems  for 
analyzing raw power quality measurement data, power system modeling and 
studies, and wind power. He co-authored "Electric Power Systems Quality", 
published by McGraw-Hill Professional Series in 2002. 

[4]  Functional 

requirements 

for  AWEFS  and  NEM 
forecasting  processes. 
  National  Electricity  Market 
Management  Company  Limited.18  August  2006  [cited 
support 
October 
documentation]. 
from: 
http://www.nemmco.com.au/dispatchandpricing/awefs.ht
m. 

2006];  Version 

Available 

10 

1.0:[ROI 

[5]  S.  Kelouwani  and  K.  Agbossou,  "Nonlinear  model 
identification  of  wind  turbine  with  a  neural  network," 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Energy  Conversion,  vol.  19,  pp. 
607-612, 2004. 

[6]  L.  Shuhui,  D.  C.  Wunsch,  E.  A.  O'Hair,  and  M.  G. 
Giesselmann,  "Using  neural  networks  to  estimate  wind 
turbine  power  generation,"  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Energy Conversion, vol. 16, pp. 276-282, 2001. 

[7]  C. W. Potter and M. Negnevitsky, "Very short-term wind 
forecasting  for  Tasmanian  power  generation,"  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Power  Systems,  vol.  21,  pp.  965-972, 
2006. 

[8]  M. Negnevitsky, and Potter, C., “Innovative Short-Term 
Wind  Generation  Prediction  Techniques”,  Proceedings 
of  the  IEEE/PES  General  Meeting,  Montreal,  Canada, 
18-22  June  2006,  CD-ROM,  IEEE  Catalog  Number 
06CH37818C, ISBN 1-4244-0493-2. 

 
Michael Negnevitsky (M’95) received his B.S.E.E. (Hons), 1978, and Ph.D., 
1983, from Byelorussian University of Technology, Belarus. 
Currently, he is a Professor in the School of Engineering at the University of 
Tasmania,  Australia.  From  1984  to  1991,  he  was  a  Senior  Research  Fellow 
and Senior Lecturer in the Department of Electrical Engineering, Byelorussian 
University  of  Technology,  Belarus.  After  his  arrival  in  Australia,  Dr. 
Negnevitsky was with Monash University, Australia. His major interests are 
power system analysis, power quality, and intelligent systems applications in 
power  systems.    Dr.  Negnevitsky  is  a  Chartered  Professional  Engineer,  a 
Senior  Member  of  the  Institution  of  Engineers  Australia,  and  a  Member  of 
CIGRE  AP  C4  (System  Technical  Performance),  Australian  Technical 
Committee and a Member of CIGRE Australian Wind Energy Task Force. 
 
Peter  L.  Johnson  (StudM’06)  received  his  B.E.  (Hons)  1986,  and  M.Tech 
1997,  from  the  University  of  Tasmania,  Australia.  The  author  is  currently a 
Ph.D. candidate with research interests in wind power, intelligent systems and 
power system operations. 

