Journal of Organizational Behavior J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)
Why negative aectivity should not be controlled in job stress research: don't throw out the baby with the bath water
PAUL E. SPECTOR1*, DIETER ZAPF2, PETER Y. CHEN3 AND MICHAEL FRESE4
1Department of Psychology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, U.S.A. 2Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Mertonstr. 1, D-60054 Frankfurt, Germany 3Department of Psychology, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701-2979, U.S.A. 4University of Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 15, NL-1018 WB Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Introduction
In 1987 Watson, Pennebaker, and Folger wrote an in¯uential paper in which they noted the potential importance of negative aectivity (NA) in job stress research, going so far as to suggest the provocative hypothesis that NA biased self-reports of most job stressors (and other measures of work conditions) and job strains. A number of concerned researchers, noting correlations between NA and other variables, have recommended that we statistically control for NA bias in general stress (McCrae, 1990) and job stress (e.g., Brief et al., 1988; Payne, 1988) studies with some form of partialling. While we agree that aective dispositions are important, we disagree that it should become routine to treat them as bias factors to be statistically controlled. Although a number of researchers have noted possible non-bias or substantive roles for NA (e.g., Moyle, 1995; Schaubroeck, Ganster and Fox, 1992; Spector and O'Connell, 1994; Williams, Gavin and Williams, 1996), many researchers have started to routinely control for a NA bias in their studies. However, if indeed NA has a substantive role, one should not partial it as this can lead to removing the eects of the very variables one wishes to study. In this paper we will present arguments that partialling or related statistical techniques merely provide unrealistic hopes and illogical inferences in studying the potential biasing eect. Moreover, we will discuss the role played by NA in the job stress process and demonstrate that it should not just be considered a bias in need of statistical control. Rather NA can play a variety of substantive roles in the job stress process.

* Correspondence to: Paul E. Spector, Department of Psychology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, U.S.A. E-mail: spector@chuma.cas.usf.edu

CCC 0894±3796/2000/010079±17$17.50 Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Accepted 15 March 1997

80 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
The Nature of NA as a Bias

Research has established individual dierences in the tendency to experience negative emotions. The most frequently studied of these dispositions is trait anxiety, although anger and depression have also been given attention. Watson and colleagues (e.g., Watson and Clark, 1984; Watson and Pennebaker, 1989), noting that various measures of aective disorders were strongly intercorrelated, developed the negative aectivity construct, positing that certain individuals were predisposed to experience distress and negative emotions. Thus NA is a broader construct than trait anxiety or other aective dispositions. In the organizational domain researchers have tended to adopt the NA concept when studying aective dispositions, although measures of individual pervasive emotions (e.g., trait anxiety) are often used interchangeably with broader measures that assess a variety of negative emotions.
Watson et al. (1987) suggest that individuals who are high in NA tend to report high levels of distress and negative emotions, even in the absence of objective stressors. They suggested that this tendency produced a bias in the measurement of job stressors and job strains, as well as other organizational variables. Although Watson et al. (1987) focused mainly on a biasing eect, in other places Watson and colleagues have discussed the possibility of substantive eects, including the likelihood that NA itself can be aected by job strains (e.g., Watson and Slack, 1993). This distinction between bias and substantive is vital in determining the appropriate way in which personality variables in general and aective dispositions such as NA in particular are studied.
To be considered a bias, a variable such a NA must distort the assessment of a particular intended construct (Spector and Brannick, 1995). It cannot be causally interlinked with the true underlying construct as either cause or eect. For example, a response set (e.g., agreement) is the tendency to respond to items in a particular way, independent of the variable intended to be measured. When biases are common across measures, and have an in¯uence of the same direction on independent and dependent variables, they in¯ate the correlations. In other cases, biases may attenuate correlations (Cote and Buckley, 1988; Williams and Brown, 1994).
Note that bias must be interpreted in view of the intended construct. If a measure of a job stressor is intended to assess the objective work environment, any factor that is independent of that environment, yet in¯uences the measure, will serve as a bias. Hence from this perspective measures of job stressors and other work conditions are all biased because they are aected by many personal factors (Spector, 1992). Given the same objective environment, each individual likely perceives it somewhat dierently. However, if such measures are considered to re¯ect individual perceptions of the environment these personal factors are real causes of the underlying construct of interestÐperceptions. After all, it is by no means established that the objective environment can be successfully measured if we partial presumed biases, such as faking, NA, response sets, or social desirability, from self-report measures.
We note four issues that have relevance for the interpretation of biases in assessment of job stressors and job strains.
(1) NA might help explain why two variables are related without being a bias, i.e., it has a substantive role. For example, suppose individuals who are high in NA tend to perform poorly, resulting in punitive supervisor response. Furthermore, the constant negative behavior of the supervisor might produce job strains in the subordinate. We then might observe that NA correlates with incumbent reports of their supervisor's punitive behavior, as well as with job strains, but in this case NA's role is substantive. It helps explain why we have observed the relations between the incumbent measure of supervisor behavior and job strains. On the other hand, if supervisor behavior is unrelated to their subordinates' personality, a correlation between

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 81
incumbent reports and NA might re¯ect bias. If only incumbent report data are available, it is dicult and perhaps impossible, to distinguish bias from substantive roles.
(2) A further complication is that we cannot equate the NA construct with a particular measure of NA. Every measure re¯ects the in¯uence of multiple constructs (Spector and Brannick, 1995), although we hope that most of the variance in a measure re¯ects our intended construct. Overlap between a measure of NA and another variable might be due to constructs other than NA itself. For example, perhaps NA and other variables of interest are all aected by mood, making observed correlations due to mood rather than NA.
(3) If we conceptualize our NA measure as an indicator of a stable trait, anything that causes transitory ¯uctuations in the measure, but not the construct itself, would be a bias. However, in this case it is a bias in the assessment of NA that is at play.
(4) Even if the overlap in variance among NA, job stressors, and job strains can be attributable to bias, it is far from clear that the trait of NA is the cause. Judge, Erez and Martocchio (1995) discussed the opposing eects of NA and social desirability (SD) on measures of job stressors and job strains. Individuals high in NA tend to report high levels, while individuals high in SD tend to report low levels. Furthermore, measures of NA itself have long been known to be aected by social desirability (e.g., Chen et al., 1997). There are likely other biases that might act to attenuate or in¯ate relations among job stressors and job strains, making it dicult to know how biased an observed correlation might be.

Partialling out True Variance: Why the Partialling Method should not be Used

Some researchers, appropriately concerned about the possible biasing eects of NA, have advocated controlling its eects with partialling (e.g., Brief et al., 1988; Payne, 1988). We attempted to determine if researchers have adopted the partialling procedure in response to Brief et al. (1988), and their follow-up paper (Burke, Brief and George, 1993). We used Social Sciences Citation Index to identify articles that cited these two sources between 1989 and 1996. We were able to locate 111 such studies, of which 13 conducted some form of partialling to control NA bias. An additional 8 authors stated that NA bias was a serious potential shortcoming, although they did not control it.
We consider the use of partialling in this way to be a mistake, because it is not in any way clear that NA has only a biasing eect. Before one can reasonably remove the eects of a variable, it should be clear what that variable is doing. What is the inference researchers wish to make when NA is partialled? Perhaps it is that our self-report measure now re¯ects the eect of the objective work environment on job strains. However, we cannot magically turn self-report measures into objective measures of the work environment by partialling one possible bias. If one is trying to determine if perceptions of job stressors relate to job strains, then why should NA be statistically controlled? Do we believe that high NA people lie about their perceptions, and they really don't see the job as stressful? Perhaps it is the low NA individuals who lie and don't want to admit to anything negative? There is evidence that people in negative emotional states are more rather than less accurate in their perceptions of the environment (e.g., Sacco, 1985; Sinclair, 1988). Certainly lying is possible, but NA is most likely not the reason for lying. Thus what are we actually doing by partialling?

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

82 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
We are not the ®rst to raise concerns with partialling biases from correlations among variables in cross-sectional designs. Paul Meehl (1971) discussed at length the logical and statistical issues that render this practice `the commonest methodological vice in contemporary social science research' ( p. 146). In a dierent domain he notes how this established practice, taken for granted by most social scientists, likely leads to more erroneous inference than merely interpreting zeroorder correlations. He notes `. . . statistical manipulations cannot provide an automatic ``inference-machine'', but the tendency in social science is to treat control of nuisance variables in that way' ( p. 147). What is required, according to Meehl, before we can partial is knowledge that the variable is biasing the assessment of what we are trying to measure. Epstein and Katz (1992) also recommended against partialling measures of negative emotions in studies of stress.
The problem with the partialling procedure is that it removes variance shared with NA, regardless of why NA correlates with other variables. If NA plays a substantive role, removing it will not necessarily eliminate bias, but distort eects of variables that are causally related. These methods carry the risk that true variance is removed, and lead to erroneous conclusions about the role of NA in self-report studies of stressors and strains. In other words we might well remove the eects of the variables of interest before we test for their relations with one another. This is not to say that partialling should not be used for other reasons, as in the case of establishing a mediator (e.g., James, Mulaik and Brett, 1982). Obviously, this is done because of the substantive role of the mediator in a causal process.

A Variance Partitioning Point of View

Any relation between variables can be conceived from a variance and co-variance partitioning point of view. This means that an NA measure can be divided into components attributable to dierent factors. One part can be assumed to re¯ect a stable trait of aective disposition. Others might be due to more transitory factors, such as mood of subjects (`I feel bad at the moment, therefore I am pessimistic'), or reactions to job stressors at work. For this reason, we are concerned about the problem that true variance shared by stressor and strain might be unintentionally removed when NA is partialled. This can happen even if one assumes that the pure NA trait part is completely stable. But in every measure of NA there is one part that has the function of a strain measure which can be in¯uenced by work stressors. From the viewpoint of trait NA, this is systematic error variance, from the viewpoint of traditional stress research this is the target variance. If this unstable part of the variance is shared by other strain measures, this would mean that partialling out NA from a correlation of job stressors, and job strains leads to a reduction of true variance. Unfortunately, it is impossible to dierentiate the trait NA part from its strain part in cross-sectional questionnaire studies. Therefore, partialling NA from stressor± strain relations means also partialling true variance from stressor±strain relations.
The shared variance among scales can be a function of item overlap in those scales. This is not just a sign of bad construction of these instruments, as often items overlap because constructs overlap. For example, depression has a theoretical connection to anxiety and psychosomatic complaints (cf. Beck, 1972). Consequently, most of the depression scales include items asking about anxious behavior and/or psychosomatic complaints (Mohr, 1986). A similar argument can be made for anxiety; for example, Zung's anxiety scale (in CIPS, 1977) contains several psychosomatic symptoms like headache or backache. In addition, the fact that many studies on job stress used general health measures such as the Langner scale (Langner, 1962) or the General

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 83
Health Questionnaire GHQ (Goldberg, 1972) as dependent variables underscores that strain indicators share some common variance with NA. If this shared variance is partialled out, then true and not artifactual variance is partialled. If the stressor is primarily related to the shared variance of the dependent variables then partialling leads to a breakdown of the stressor±strain correlation. If the stressor is primarily related to the variance of the strain variable which is not shared by the measure of NA then the stressor±strain correlation may even increase, as was the case in some of the partialled correlations in the Frese (1985) and Jex and Spector (1996) studies (to be discussed). A pure item based approach can in some cases solve the overlap problem (as suggested by Chen and Spector, 1991) but because of the true conceptual overlap, there is still a danger of throwing out important strain variance in the partialling procedure even if items that refer to another construct are eliminated.
It follows from these considerations that the partialling eect of NA should be high for variables high in theoretical overlap with NA and low for variables low in theoretical overlap with NA. There is some support in the results we will discuss in a reanalysis of the study by Frese (1985) in that the social stressors and somatic symptoms show the greatest reduction in correlation when NA is partialled, and the lowest correlation reduction occurred for job satisfaction. Similarly, Schaubroeck et al. (1992) found the strongest attenuation eect of NA for depression, a medium eect for somatic symptoms, and no eect for job dissatisfaction. All of these reasons suggest that the partialling procedure should not be used. The major reason for this conclusion is the fact that true and interesting variance may be taken out from the correlations of stressors and strains.
The existing research on NA suggests that it has a complex role in the job stress process beyond its possible biasing eect on assessment. It has been shown to correlate signi®cantly with many measures of job stressors and job strains, but the reasons for these relations need to be clari®ed. We will continue our discussion by overviewing existing ®ndings concerning the bias mechanism. Following that will be a discussion of six substantive mechanisms which seem feasible, and the evidence in support of each. They are not intended to be mutually exclusive and it is possible that they all play a role. The mechanisms are: perception, hyper-responsivity, selection, stressor creation, mood, and causality mechanisms. We will then return to the issue of why partialling can lead to erroneous results.

Empirical Studies of the Bias Hypothesis

As we will show, there is plenty of evidence that NA correlates with a variety of job stressor and job strain variables, but there is very little evidence beyond this for a bias eect. Thus while bias is possible, many other explanations are feasible to explain such correlations. Brief et al. (1988) provided the strongest evidence claimed to support the NA bias hypothesis. They found that the correlations between stressful life events (both on and o the job) and aective strains were in many cases reduced considerably when NA was used as a partialled variable. They concluded that NA was a potential nuisance variable and might produce spurious relations between job stressors and strains. They noted the necessity for replicating their ®ndings with more commonly used measures of job stressors.
There have been several answers to the Brief et al. (1988) call to replicate their results with other measures and methods. Most of this evidence is based again on correlations between NA and other variables. As with Brief et al., these replicated studies cannot be taken as more than support

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

84 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
for a possibility of bias. Furthermore, these studies have found weaker NA eects than Brief et al. (1988). As a group these authors (e.g., Agho, Price and Mueller, 1992; Chen, O'Connell and Spector, 1993; Chen and Spector, 1991; Fortunato, Jex and Heinisch, 1997 (Fortunato, V. J., Jex, S. M. and Heinisch, D. A. (1997). `Construct validation of the strain-free negative aectivity scale: a comparison with the neuroticism scale of the Eysenck Personality Inventory'. Unpublished manuscript, University of Wisconsin, Oshkosh.); Jex and Spector, 1996; Moyle, 1995; Munz et al., 1996; Schaubroeck et al., 1992; Tombaugh and White, 1989; Williams and Anderson, 1994; Williams, Gavin and Williams, 1996) used both partial correlations and structural equation modeling to test for bias. None of the partialling studies found correlation reductions as large as Brief et al. (1988), and none of the structural equation modeling studies found evidence that NA was a serious biasing or confounding variable in measurement.
For example, Williams et al. (1996) compared structural models among job stressors and job strains both with and without NA to test for its biasing eect on relations among these variables. Although they found a signi®cant contribution of NA, it had minimal eects on the structural model. Furthermore, they estimated that on average 57 per cent of the variance in job stressors and job strains was attributable to substantive factors and only 5 per cent was attributable to NA. Their results suggest that even if NA is a bias, it does not necessarily in¯ate correlations among other variables.
One variable that has a strong relation with NA is somatic symptoms where most of the rather modest correlations with job stressors was eliminated after partialling NA in some studies (e.g., Chen and Spector, 1991). Moyle (1995) used multiple regression to test for the eects of NA on relations between job stressors and two job strainsÐjob satisfaction and somatic symptoms. She found a signi®cant eect only for somatic symptoms in that regression coecients for job stressors declined when NA was added hierarchically. However, she also found for three of four job stressors that NA had a moderator eect as well. High NA individuals showed a stronger reaction in somatic symptoms to job stressors than low NA individuals. It is here with somatic symptoms that we ®nd the greatest potential for bias, but as we will continue to show, we need stronger evidence for bias than has been provided from analyses based on correlations alone.
Moyle (1995) concluded that while NA related to job stressors and strains and accounted for some of the relations, it was not in a general sense the explanation, particularly for psychological strains such as job satisfaction. She noted that NA has a complex and substantive role, rather than just serving as a nuisance.

Evidence for NA as a bias and counterevidence
In a more recent article Burke et al. (1993) claimed to have more evidence for the NA bias eect. They compared incumbent reports with more objective sources of data, some of them from our own studies to argue for a bias eect. They again attempted to show that partialling NA led to a strong reduction in correlations between job stressors and job strains by reanalyzing data from these same published studies. Unfortunately, Burke et al. (1993) did not have access to the original data, limiting the analyses that they were able to conduct. A more complete reanalysis of our data done as a reaction to their paper leads to other conclusions.
Burke et al. (1993) used Frese's (1985) data to compare results of all incumbent measures with some `objective' measures. They estimated the eects of NA in this study by comparing incumbent reported job stressor versus job strain correlations with correlations between observer and peer job stressor measures and measures of strain. They suggested that dierences might well

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 85
re¯ect the biasing eect of NA. They also noted that a measure of NA would have been necessary to draw de®nitive conclusions.
First, a comparison of incumbents with objective measures is not a fair test of bias. In fact the objective measures are still based on people's subjective appraisal of the work environment. They are only objective in the sense of there being little or no in¯uence of the job incumbent's cognitive and emotional processing on the assessment (Frese and Zapf, 1988). Measures can be classi®ed along an objective versus subjective dimension according to the amount of in¯uence by the target of the study (Zapf, 1989). The more independent the data source, the more objective it is, according to our de®nition. However, these objective measures are not necessarily more accurate than incumbent measures, although they can still be useful (Frese and Zapf, 1988; Schonfeld, Rhee and Xia, 1995). For example, several authors have noted poor discriminant validity among objective measures of job conditions (e.g., Glick, Jenkins and Gupta, 1986; Spector, Fox and Van Katwyk, in press). Studies of Hackman and Lawler (1971) and Hackman and Oldham (1975) showed that incumbent±observer correlations were higher than incumbent±supervisor or observer±supervisor correlations. Using a structural equations approach, Zapf (1995) (Zapf, D. (1995). `Stressors at work: subjective versus objective measurement', unpublished manuscript, Justus-Liebig-UniversitaÈ t Giessen.) showed that incumbent reports overestimated, but observer reports in fact underestimated relations between job stressors and job strain.
Second, Burke et al. (1993) noted that an NA measure would be needed to draw de®nitive conclusions about bias from this study. Luckily, such measures were part of the research project upon which Frese (1985) was based. We reanalyzed the data from both Frese (1985) samples, using the same partialling procedure as Brief et al. (1988). We present here the results from additional analyses not reported in the original paper. In the Frese study, decision latitude, time pressure/concentration, uncertainty, organizational problems, and environmental stressors were assessed by self-report, expert observation and by using the mean assessment of colleagues working at the same workplace (reliability details of the scales can be found in Frese, 1985, and Semmer, Zapf and Dunckel, 1995). Frese (1985) used psychosomatic complaints as a dependent variable, but there were additional scales for job satisfaction, irritation, depression and anxiety available (details in Mohr, 1986). Trait measures of anxiety and depression were used as alternative indicators of NA as suggested by Watson and Clark (1984).
First, we analyzed the self-report measures of decision latitude and the job stressors using the partialling method suggested by Brief et al. (1988). In Sample I the mean reduction of the correlations was from 0.02 to 0.06 and in Sample II was from 0.02 to 0.03. Averaging across all dependent variables in both studies and weighing the correlations by sample sizes, the overall average mean reduction of the correlations is 0.02. As in the study of Chen and Spector (1991), the average reduction of the correlations on job satisfaction was most contradictory to the NA bias hypothesis (similarly, Chen et al., 1993). There were not only reductions but also suppressor eects (Cohen and Cohen, 1983) where the partial correlation was higher than the zero-order correlation. For example, there were 5 suppressors out of 15 cases in Sample II involving depression as the measure of NA.
The explanation suggested for these rather modest reductions of correlations is that the job stressors analyzed have been operationalized more descriptively or objectively than, for example, the life events analyzed in Brief et al. (1988). Several authors (e.g., Chen and Spector, 1991; Schaubroeck et al., 1992) argued that the biasing eect of NA is high when the items used are evaluative and aective in tone and low if the items are descriptive and non-aective. In how far one can construct items that are descriptive and little aective, depends on the theoretical construct which is to be measured. It is easier to develop descriptive non-aective measures for variables which refer to concrete environmental or organizational characteristics

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

86 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
(e.g., workload) than for more abstract social aspects of work (e.g., relationships with other people).
We investigated the hypothesis that stressors related to the social environment at work are more aected by NA than scales assessing more concrete aspects of the job. We compared the results discussed above with those using a scale measuring social stressors at work (Frese and Zapf, 1987) from Samples I and II contained in the research project on which the Frese (1985) article is based. This scale comprised items referring to the (bad) social climate in the work group, and con¯icts with colleagues and supervisors. The same analyses as for the more concrete job stressors discussed above were conducted. The eects were much stronger than for the job stressors. For irritation and psychosomatic complaints the reduction of correlation was between 0.08 and 0.17 in both samples compared to average reductions of between 0.01 and 0.06 for job stressors discussed earlier. These results suggest that NA is more strongly related to the more abstract and evaluative socially related job stressors than to the more environment and taskbased job stressors.
Burke et al. (1993) reanalyzed data from Spector, Dwyer and Jex (1988) to show the results of partialling a state, work anxiety measure from job stressors and job strains. They argued that since the instructions referred to the prior 30 days, it could be used as a trait measure, although they acknowledged limitations in using such a measure. Although one can certainly argue that a 30-day time span is too long for a state measure, the speci®c instructions that refer only to feelings at work make this a very poor measure of a trait. Fortunately, two NA trait measures not discussed in Spector et al. (1988) were included in this project (see Jex and Spector, 1996 sample 1 for details). Both the Life Orientation Test (LOT) as a measure of dispositional optimism (Scheier and Carver, 1985) and the trait anxiety scale of the State±Trait Personality Inventory (STPI; Spielberger, 1979) were partialled from correlations between four job stressor and six job strains. Contrary to Burke et al. (1993), reductions were quite small, with a mean of 0.0238 for the LOT, not counting the 3 of 24 increases in partial correlation, and 0.0365 for the STPI trait anxiety scale not counting 4 of 24 increases.

Longitudinal studies
Much stronger evidence against NA bias was revealed in two longitudinal studies. Chen et al. (1993) conducted a longitudinal study in which NA was assessed prior to job stressors and job strains. Trait anxiety was assessed in a cohort of college students several months before their graduation at Time 1, and approximately one year later those students who were working completed a second questionnaire containing job stressors, job strains, mood, and NA at Time 2. Mean correlation reductions with the Time 1 NA measure averaged across all job stressors and job strains, not counting those with nonsigni®cant zero-order correlations, was 0.04, but for Time 2 NA, the mean reduction was considerably larger at 0.10, and for Time 2 mood was 0.07. This included both state anxiety and somatic symptoms, which had greater reductions than other job strains. Similar results were found in a longitudinal study by Schonfeld (1994) (Schonfeld, I. S. (1994). `The relation of negative aectivity to self-report of job stressors and psychological distress', Unpublished paper, City College, New York.) in which partialling NA had small eects on correlations among subsequently measured job stressors and strains. Mean reductions were less than 0.01 for all but somatic symptoms which was 0.10.
If NA is a stable personality characteristic that in¯ates correlations between stressors and strains, why then didn't the initial measure of NA show the same amount of reduction as the Time 2 in Chen et al. (1993)? Since the initial NA measure occurred over a year prior to measures

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 87
of job stressors and job strains, and under very dierent life circumstances (college versus on-thejob), we might consider it to represent the stable trait part of the NA measure. Eects on the NA measure of transitory variables such as mood should have been all but eliminated. Yet this more pure assessment of the NA trait failed to yield much reduction at all. This contrasts with the larger reductions that occurred with the second NA measure and mood. This study provides stronger evidence for a mood eect than a trait eect and casts serious doubt on the bias hypothesis. We will return to this alternative explanation in our discussion of substantive mechanisms.
We reach two conclusions from the studies so far discussed. First, there is really very little evidence that has been provided to support a general bias eect cutting across all variables measured in the job stress and related domains, even if we could attribute all overlap to a bias eect of NA which we cannot. NA correlations are quite small for many popular variables, and partial correlation reductions also tend to be quite modest in most cases, unless the variables in question are very aective and evaluative. Second, even where we ®nd NA eects in the partials, we cannot on the basis of cross-sectional designs conclude that bias is the cause. It would be as correct to conclude that job stressors in¯uence the correlations between the measure of NA and strains, or conversely that job strains in¯uence the correlations between the measure of NA and job stressors based only on cross-sectional data.

Substantive Mechanisms to Explain Why NA Relates to Job Stressors and Job Strains
We will discuss six substantive mechanisms through which NA might aect job stressors and job strains. We chose these six mechanisms because they are all feasible based on available evidence. In point of fact, there is evidence for a stronger substantive eect than bias eect. Most, if not all, evidence for bias consists merely of observed correlations between measures of NA and measures of other variables. We will discuss evidence that goes beyond incumbent reports which supports at least some of these substantive mechanisms.

The perception mechanism
According to this mechanism NA re¯ects the person's tendency to see the world in a negative way. In other words high NA individuals tend to perceive their jobs as having high levels of stressors, which lead to high levels of job strains. These reports are presumed to accurately re¯ect people's perceptions and experiences. According to this mechanism, incumbent reports of job stressors are valid indicators of their perceptions, but those perceptions are in¯uenced by NA as well as objective job features. Watson and Pennebaker (1989) have discussed several variants of the symptom perception hypothesis which correspond to this mechanism.
Whether or not the perception mechanism is considered to produce bias depends upon one's perspective (Spector and Brannick, 1995). From the perspective that self-reported stressor±strain relations indicate the impact of the objective work environment on the person's health, this mechanism might be interpreted as re¯ecting that trait NA is artifactually biasing the relations among a measure of the objective job stressor and strains. However, as discussed previously, incumbent measures are generally considered to be measures of perceptions. To produce bias,

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

88 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
NA would have to aect the accuracy of reporting personal experiences, which at this point seems unlikely.

The hyper-responsivity mechanism
It is also possible that individuals high in NA are hyper-responsive to the environment so that they have an exaggerated strain response to stressors. It is likely that high NA people may feel job strains more readily than people with low NA under the same environmental conditions. They do not necessarily perceive stressors dierently than a low NA person. It is only their response or strain that diers. This mechanism suggests an interaction between NA and stressors on job strains. Relations of job stressors and strains will be stronger for high NA individuals than low NA individuals (see empirical ®ndings by Moyle, 1995 and Parkes, 1990). Judge and Hulin (1993) argued that aective disposition was the tendency to experience positive or negative emotions in response to the environment. Using structural equation modeling, they found support for their hypothesis that such dispositions were a causal factor in job satisfaction.

The selection mechanism
A third possibility is that high NA people are in more stressful jobs than low NA people. Two studies found that incumbent NA correlated with objective measures of potentially stressful job conditions. Spector, Jex and Chen (1995) found that high NA people were in jobs that were lower in autonomy and job scope, both of which have been considered as job stressors in at least some studies. The job conditions were assessed with job analysis techniques, and the analysts never met or saw the incumbents; thus it was impossible for the incumbents to have in¯uenced the job analysis data. Spector, Fox and Van Katwyk (in press) found signi®cant correlations of NA with job complexity assessed by job analysts and job scope assessed by supervisors. These studies do not give insights into why NA related to job conditions. Possibly, high NA people choose less complex jobs or they are less attractive job candidates for better jobs that tend to be more complex (cf. the drift hypothesis, Kohn and Schooler, 1983). Indirect support for the latter possibility comes from two studies reported by Cook, Vance and Spector (1995). In a laboratory simulation, high NA students performed more poorly in a simulated job interview than low NA students. In a ®eld study, NA signi®cantly predicted the outcome of a preliminary screening interview. High NA college students were less likely to successfully complete an interview for a job after graduation than their low NA counterparts.

The stressor creation mechanism
Depue and Monroe (1986) and Dohrenwend et al. (1984) suggested that high NA people by their behavior create or enact adverse circumstances (see also Brief et al., 1988). They may, therefore, create job stressors for themselves. For example, high NAs might get into con¯icts with others more often, do a worse job of managing their work¯ow, and perform worse on the job than low NAs. These behaviors would result in a higher level of job stressors for high NA people. In this case, NA produces higher objective job stressors (objective in the sense that the stressors could be observed by other people) and not biased perceptions, but these higher stressors would be

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 89
idiosyncratic. The stressor creation mechanism is particularly plausible with regard to social stressors because of neurotic behaviors leading to negative reactions from others. Thus, the strong bias that NA has in the area of social stressors may be partly due to this stressor creation mechanism. The results of Kohn and Schooler (1982), who found a causal eect of anxiety on time pressure in a longitudinal study, are compatible with this mechanism. In addition there is a large literature showing that people have negative responses to depressed individuals (e.g., Sacco, Dumont and Dow, 1993).

The mood mechanism
Mood can also have an impact on people's reports of job stressors, job strains, and even NA. In their longitudinal study, Chen et al. (1993) found partial correlation reductions when either mood or NA were assessed concurrently that were both larger than when NA was assessed prior to the other variables. This suggested that the transitory mood had a larger impact than the stable trait on the observed correlations among job stressors and job strains. Dormann, Zapf and Speier (1996) (Dormann, C., Zapf, D. and Speier, C. (1996). `Social support, social stressors at work and depression: testing for main and moderating eects with structural equations in a 3wave longitudinal study', Manuscript: University of Konstanz, unpublished manuscript.) and Marcelissen et al. (1988) using a structural equations approach found that cross-sectional stressor±strain correlations were biased by so-called occasion factors that could be interpreted as mood factors (Dwyer, 1983). These results raise also the possibility that the assessment of NA itself is aected by mood. Thus, it may be mood rather than trait NA that reduces stressor± strain relationships with mood in¯uencing stressors, strain, and NA alike.
It also seems quite likely that job conditions aect mood which aects the assessment of NA (Spector, 1992). Perhaps high levels of stressors lead people to frequently feel anxious and upset, and this leads them to score higher on NA, whether or not the underlying NA trait level has changed. If mood is aected by job conditions, and mood aects the measurement of NA, then the correlation between NA and job stressors might well re¯ect the indirect in¯uence of the job stressors on the report of NA rather than NA on reports of job stressors.
Although we are arguing that mood is a likely bias, we are not arguing that researchers should partial mood rather than trait NA automatically from studies to control its eects. Again this is a dangerous procedure because mood can have a substantive role. If it acts as a job strain, then removing its relation with other job strains would be discarding the true variance of interest. Furthermore, in some cases mood might be an explanation for an individual's perception of job stressors, which can be transitory. A person might perceive job stressors to be higher when they are experiencing negative moods than when they experience positive moods, but their reports of those perceptions might still be accurate. Mood in such a case would not be a bias if assessment of individual perception is of interest.

The causality mechanism
The last possibility is that exposure to high levels of job stressors tends to make people higher in NA. Thus the job aects the trait itself, at least the empirical indicators of NA. This was the case in the studies of Dormann et al. (1996), Leitner (1993), and Schonfeld (1992). Watson and Slack (1993) concluded that NA was caused in part by job satisfaction. Individuals who hated their jobs were likely to become higher in NA.

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

90 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
Although NA is conceptualized as a stable trait across time (Watson and Clark, 1984; Watson and Pennebaker, 1989), the variables suggested to be indicators for NA, notably anxiety and depression, have been shown to be likely in¯uenced by job related stressors in three longitudinal studies (Dormann et al., 1996; Leitner, 1993; Schonfeld, 1992) and by stress management intervention in another (Schroeder, 1983). Dormann et al. (1996) demonstrated a causal eect of social stressors on depression using a linear structural equations approach in a three-wave longitudinal study. Leitner's (1993) cross-lagged panel study showed a similar eect of work stressors (observed by trained experts) on depression. In Schroeder's (1983) study, NA measures (i.e., Spielberger's trait anxiety scale and the Taylor manifest anxiety scale) were signi®cantly decreased among nurses who participated in a cognitive restructuring intervention. Further, longitudinal research has demonstrated that depression is changed as a consequence of unemployment (e.g., Balz et al., 1985; Frese and Mohr, 1987; Mohr, 1993; O'Brien and Feather, 1990). The above ®ndings suggest that the empirical indicators for NA react to stressors similarly as other strain variables.

Conclusions

Our conclusion is that observed relations of NA with job stressors and strains are due to several factors. We should not assume that correlations among work variables have been in¯ated by an NA bias. We discussed six plausible mechanisms that explain relations of NA with other variables. These mechanisms deserve research attention to help us understand the interplay of personality and job stressors on job strain.
Partialling is a dangerous procedure because of the potential to remove substantive eects rather than bias. We strongly recommend against partialling for the purpose of controlling nuisance variance. This is not to say that we are against using complex statistics for other purposes. In fact we consider the use of partialling by Brief et al. (1988) as a highly appropriate ®rst test of the bias hypothesis. Large dierences between zero-order and ®rst-order partials would be consistent with the bias hypothesis. However, taken alone this is insucient evidence, and certainly does not justify concluding that NA is a proven bias that should be statistically controlled in future studies. Only when a variable has been demonstrated conclusively to be a bias and only a bias should it be partialled.
Even more complex statistical control procedures, such as structural equation modeling, are not appropriate in this domain. As we have demonstrated, NA likely has a variety of roles in the job stress process, making simple bias models misspeci®ed. With our present state of knowledge, we should go beyond simple bias models in testing the eects of NA. Models containing substantive eects should be investigated in future studies. Again we consider eorts such as Williams et al. (1996) to be appropriate, because their purpose was to test potential NA bias hypotheses and models. However, automatically adding NA to models to control for measurement bias should not be done.
Establishing that a variable is a bias is not a simple procedure. One must show that it relates to one or more measured variables, but that it does not have substantive eects. Multiple methods to assess job stressors and job strains would be needed to help show that NA relates only to selfreports. This alone, however, is insucient as NA might relate only to perceptions and reactions that are unmeasurable with techniques other than self-report. In the NA domain we already have

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 91
evidence for a substantive role, so we are beyond a simple bias mechanism, although it is certainly possible that NA has this role as well.
The empirical results discussed in this article suggest that the potential biasing eect of NA is high, when both the stressors and strains have theoretical overlap with NA (which is the case for some life events, daily hassles or interpersonal con¯ict scales), and when measures have an aective tone. Job strain measures are more strongly correlated with NA than stressor measures in most cases, as we have shown. If stressor measures are used that are descriptive and nonaective, and are related to the objective work environment and, thus, have little theoretical overlap with NA then the partialling eect of NA leads seldom to a reduction of correlations higher than 0.06. If the strain variables show a strong overlap then the partial correlation is often higher than the zero-order correlation. If neither the stressor nor the strain variables are overlapping with NA, as in the case of work stressors and job satisfaction in the Frese (1985) data, then the partialling eect is, of course, approximately zero.
The research attention given recently to NA has been useful because it has contributed to a more careful consideration of stressor±strain relations. However, both the empirical results presented and literature reviewed in this paper indicate that assuming NA has only a biasing eect and partialling it from stressor±strain relations is `throwing out the baby with the bath water'. Therefore, we disagree with Brief et al.'s (1988), McCrae's (1990), and Payne's (1988) conclusion that partialling NA is a must in the assessment of stress at work, because there is the danger of actually subtracting true variance from the stressor±strain relations. In cross-sectional studies based on self-report data, there is no easy statistical way out of methodological problems (Meehl, 1970; 1971). Introducing a measure of NA and using the partialling method is not a useful strategy, and it is quite dangerous. We run the risk of erroneously concluding that job stressors and job strains are unrelated when they really are. Rather, it is better to follow suggestions (e.g., Burke et al., 1993; Ganster and Schaubroeck, 1991) to improve the general quality of the data in job stress research.
Several feasible approaches can be taken to collect more conclusive data about the role of NA in job stress research. (1) Try to optimize measures by reducing the aective tone of items. As discussed above, the potential biasing eect of NA is marginal in such cases. (2) Use objective measures (or measures that are more objective than a simple questionnaire, such as peer ratings of stress, observers, supervisors, codings of interview responses, etc.) to assess job stressors. (3) Use multiple measures for stressors, strains or both. A potential biasing eect of NA can be controlled for when dierent measurement methods are used for independent and dependent variables. (4) Use more sophisticated designs such as longitudinal or quasi-experimental studies. Most strategies to analyze longitudinal data such as hierarchical regression and structural equation approaches applied to longitudinal data focus on the relations between changes in variables. This is done by partialling the prior from the subsequent measure of a particular variable (e.g., Dwyer, 1983; Williams and Podsako, 1989). If the biasing hypothesis is true then trait NA should aect the measures of variables at dierent points in time similarly. Partialling the prior from the subsequent measure of a variable would automatically control for the eects of stable third variables such as NA. In addition, using structural equation modeling in longitudinal studies allows one to model so-called occasion factors (Dwyer, 1983; Zapf, Dormann and Frese, 1996). These factors represent eects of variables such as mood which are speci®c to a particular occasion and are uncorrelated with any variable not measured in the same situation. Occasion factors are a possibility to model the `mood mechanism' described above.
If non-aective measures for task-related and organizational stressors are used the partialling eect is minimal, and would be super¯uous in such cases. When social job stressors (interpersonal con¯icts or organization related critical life events) are used where the partialling eect

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

92 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
is typically higher and, in cases substantial, there is also a higher likelihood for the substantive NA mechanisms. Here, a high quality design is particularly necessary to distinguish between bias and substantive eects.
Part of future eorts should be directed at understanding the role in the job stress process of personality in general, and aective dispositions such as NA in particular. The complex role of personality makes it imperative that partialling is not done to control biases that either don't exist or are confounded with substantive eects.

References

Agho, A. O., Price, J. L. and Mueller, C. W. (1992). `Discriminant validity of measures of job satisfaction, positive aectivity and negative aectivity', Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 65, 185±196.
Beck, A. T. (1972). Depression. Causes and Treatment, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia. Brief, A. P., Burke, M. J., George, J. M., Robinson, B. and Webster, J. (1988). `Should negative aectivity
remain an unmeasured variable in the study of job stress?', Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 193±198. Burke, M. J., Brief, A. P. and George, J. M. (1993). `The role of negative aectivity in understanding
relations between self-reports of stressors and strains: a comment on the applied psychology literature', Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 402±412. Chen, P. Y., O'Connell, B. J. and Spector, P. E. (1993). `The impact of negative aectivity and negative mood on relationships between perceived job conditions and reactions: an extension and comparison', Paper presented at the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology convention, San Francisco, CA. Chen, P. Y., Dai, T., Spector, P. E. and Jex, S. M. (1997). `Relation of negative aectivity and positive aectivity: eects of judged desirability of scale items and respondents' social desirability', Journal of Personality Assessment, 69, 183±198. Chen, P. Y. and Spector, P. E. (1991). `Negative aectivity as the underlying cause of correlations between stressors and strains', Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 398±407. CIPS (Ed.). (1977). Internationale Skalen fuÈr Psychiatrie (International scales for psychiatry), Beltz, Weinheim. Cohen, J. and Cohen, P. (1983). Applied Multiple Regression/correlation for the Behavioral Sciences, Erlbaum, Hillsdale. Cook, K., Vance, C. A. and Spector, P. E. (1995, May). `The role of applicant personality in interview outcomes and performance', Paper presented at the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology convention, Lake Buena Vista, FL. Cote, J. A. and Buckley, M. R. (1988). `Measurement error and theory testing in consumer research: an illustrational of the importance of construct validation', Journal of Consumer Research, 14, 579±582. Depue, R. A. and Monroe, S. M. (1986). `Conceptualization and measurement of human disorder in life stress research: the problem of chronic disturbance', Psychological Bulletin, 99, 36±51. Dohrenwend, B. S., Dohrenwend, B. P., Dodson, M. and Shrout, P. E. (1984). `Symptoms, hassles, social supports, and life events: problems of confounded measures', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 93, 222±230. Dwyer, J. E. (1983). Statistical Models for the Social and Behavioral Sciences, Oxford University Press, New York. Epstein, S. and Katz, L. (1992). `Coping ability, stress, productive load, and symptoms', Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 813±825. Frese, M. (1985). `Stress at work and psychosomatic complaints: a causal interpretation', Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 314±328. Frese, M. and Mohr, G. (1987). `Prolonged unemployment and depression in older workers: a longitudinal study of intervening variables', Social Science Medicine, 25, 173±178.

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 93
Frese, M. and Zapf, D. (1987). `Eine Skala zur Erfassung von Sozialen Stressoren am Arbeitsplatz' (A scale measuring social stressors at work), Zeitschrift fuÈr Arbeitswissenschaft, 41, 134±141.
Frese, M. and Zapf, D. (1988). `Methodological issues in the study of work stress: objective versus subjective measurement of stress at work and the question of longitudinal studies', In: Cooper, C. L. and Payne, R. (Eds.), Causes, Coping, and Consequences of Stress at Work, pp. 375±411, Wiley, Chichester.
Ganster, D. C. and Schaubroeck, J. (1991). `Work stress and employee health', Journal of Management, 17, 235±271.
Glick, W. H., Jenkins, G. D., Jr. and Gupta, N. (1986). `Method versus substance: how strong are underlying relationships between job characteristics and attitudinal outcomes?', Academy of Management Journal, 29, 441±464.
Goldberg, D. P. (1972). The Detection of Psychiatric Illness by Questionnaire, Oxford University Press, London.
Hackman, J. R. and Lawler, E. E. (1971). `Employee reactions to job characteristics', Journal of Applied Psychology, 55, 259±286.
Hackman, J. R. and Oldham, G. R. (1975). `Development of the job diagnostic survey', Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 259±270.
James, L. R., Mulaik, S. A. and Brett, J. M. (1982). Causal Analysis: Assumptions, Models, and Data, Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Jex, S. M. and Spector, P. E. (1996). `The impact of negative aectivity on stressor±strain relations: a replication and extension', Work & Stress, 10, 36±45.
Judge, T. A., Erez, A. and Martocchio, J. J. (1995, May). `The eects of negative aectivity and selfdeception on the relationship between the reporting of stress and health complaints', Paper presented at the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology convention, Lake Buena Vista, FL.
Judge, T. A. and Hulin, C. L. (1993). `Job satisfaction as a re¯ection of disposition: a multiple source causal analysis', Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 56, 388±421.
Kohn, M. L. and Schooler, C. (1982). `Job conditions and personality: a longitudinal assessment of their reciprocal eects', American Journal of Sociology, 87, 1257±1286.
Kohn, M. L. and Schooler, C. (1983). Work and Personality: An Inquiry into the Impact of Social Strati®cation, Ablex, Norwood, NJ.
Langner, T. S. (1962). `A twenty-two item screening score of psychiatric symptoms indicating impairment', Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 3, 269±276.
Leitner, K. (1993). `Auswirkungen von Arbeitsbedingungen auf die psychosoziale Gesundheit' (Consequences of working conditions on psychosocial health), Zeitschrift fuÈr Arbeitswissenschaft, 47, 98±107.
Marcelissen, F. H. G., Winnubst, J. A. M., Buunk, B. and de Wol, C. J. (1988). `Social support and occupational stress: a causal analysis' (Special Issue: Stress and coping in relation to health and disease), Social Science and Medicine, 26, 365±373.
McCrae, R. R. (1990). `Controlling neuroticism in the measurement of stress', Stress Medicine, 6, 237±241.
Meehl, P. E. (1970). `Nuisance variables and the ex post facto design', In: Radner M. and Winokur S. (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. IV, Analyses of Theories and Methods of Physics and Psychology, pp. 373±402, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Meehl, P. E. (1971). `High school yearbooks: A reply to Schwartz', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 77, 143±148.
Mohr, G. (1986). Die Erfassung Psychischer Be®ndensbeeintraÈchtigungen bei Arbeitern (The measurement of psychological dysfunctioning of workers). Frankfurt a.M.: Perter Lang.
Mohr, G. (1993). `Industriearbeiterinnen sieben Jahre spaÈ ter: Arbeitssuchende Frauen im Vergleich mit wieder erwerbstaÈ tigen Frauen und Hausfrauen' (Female industry workers seven years later: job seeking women in comparison with reemployed women and housewives), In: Mohr, G. (Ed.), AusgezaÈhlt. Theoretische und empirische BeitraÈge zur Psychologie der Frauenerwerbslosigkeit, pp. 187±204, Deutscher Studien Verlag, Weinheim.
Moyle, P. (1995). `The role of negative aectivity in the stress process: tests of alternative methods', Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16, 647±668.
Munz, D. C., Huelsman, T. J., Konold, T. R. and McKinney, J. J. (1996). `Are there methodological and substantive roles for aectivity in Job Diagnostic Survey relationships?', Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 795±805.

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

94 P. E. SPECTOR ET AL.
O'Brien, G. E. and Feather, N. T. (1990). `The relative eects of unemployment and quality of employment on the aect, work values and personal control of adolescents', Journal of Occupational Psychology, 63, 151±165.
Parkes, J. (1990). `Coping, negative aectivity, and the work environment: additive and interactive predictors of mental health', Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 399±409.
Payne, R. (1988). `A longitudinal study of the psychological well-being of unemployed men and the mediating eect of neuroticism', Human Relations, 41, 119±138.
Sacco, W. P. (1985). `Depression and expectations of satisfaction', Psychological Reports, 57, 99±102. Sacco, W. P., Dumont, C. P. and Dow, M. G. (1993). `Attributional, perceptual, and aective responses to
depressed and nondepressed marital partners', Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 1076±1082. Schaubroeck, J., Ganster, D. C. and Fox, M. L. (1992). `Dispositional aect and work-related stress', Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 322±335. Scheier, M. F. and Carver, C. S. (1985). `Optimism, coping, and health: assessment and implications of generalized outcome expectancies', Health Psychology, 4, 219±247. Schonfeld, I. S. (1992). `A longitudinal study of occupational stressors and depressive symptoms in ®rstyear female teachers', Teaching and Teacher Education, 8, 151±158. Schonfeld, I. S., Rhee, J. and Xia, F. (1995). `Methodological issues in occupational-stress research: research in one occupational group and wider applications', In: Sauter, S. L. and Murphy, L. R. (Eds.), Organizational Risk Factors for Job Stress, pp. 323±339, APA, Washington, DC. Schroeder, P. J. (1983). Cognitive restructuring as a stress management technique among nurses. Doctoral dissertation. Northern Illinois University. Semmer, N. K., Zapf, D. and Dunckel, H. (1995). `Assessing stress at work: a framework and an instrument', In: Svane, O. and Johansen, C. (Eds.), Work and HealthÐScienti®c Basis of Progress in the Working Environment, pp. 105±113, Oce for Ocial Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg. Sinclair, R. C. (1988). `Mood, categorization breadth, and performance appraisal: the eects of order of information acquisition and aective state on halo, accuracy, information retrieval, and evaluations', Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 42, 22±46. Spector, P. E. (1992). `A consideration of the validity and meaning of self-report measures of job conditions', In: Cooper, C. L. and Robertson, I. T. (Eds.), International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology 1992, Vol. 7, pp. 123±151, Wiley, Chichester. Spector, P. E. and Brannick, M. T. (1995). `The nature and eects of method variance in organizational research', In: Cooper, C. L. and Robertson, I. T. (Eds.), International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Vol. 10, pp. 249±274, Wiley, New York. Spector, P. E., Dwyer, D. J. and Jex, S. M. (1988). `Relation of job stressors to aective, health, and performance outcomes: a comparison of multiple data sources', Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 11±19. Spector, P. E., Fox, S. and Van Katwyk, P. T. (2000). `The role of negative aectivity in employee reactions to jobs: nuisance eect or substantive eect?', Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, in press. Spector, P. E., Jex, S. M. and Chen, P. Y. (1995). `Personality traits as predictors of objective job characteristics', Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16, 59±65. Spector, P. E. and O'Connell, B. J. (1994). `The contribution of individual dispositions to the subsequent perceptions of job stressors and job strains', Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 67, 1±11. Spielberger, C. D. (1979). Preliminary Manual for the State±Trait Personality Inventory (STPI). Unpublished paper, University of South Florida, Tampa. Tombaugh, J. R. and White, L. P. (1989, April). `The eects of organizationally based social support on supervisors' perceived stress and work attitudes following downsizing', Paper presented at the Fourth Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Boston, MA. Watson, D. and Clark, L. A. (1984). `Negative aectivity: the disposition to experience aversive emotional states', Psychological Bulletin, 96, 465±490. Watson, D. and Pennebaker, J. W. (1989). `Health complaints, stress, and distress: exploring the central role of negative aectivity', Psychological Review, 96, 234±254.

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 95
Watson, D., Pennebaker, J. W. and Folger, R. (1987). `Beyond negative aectivity: measuring stress and satisfaction in the workplace', In: Ivancevich, J. M. and Ganster, D. C. (Eds.), Job Stress: From Theory to Suggestion, pp. 141±157, Haworth Press, New York.
Watson, D. and Slack, A. K. (1993). `General factors of aective temperament and their relation to job satisfaction over time', Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 54, 181±202.
Williams, L. J. and Anderson, S. E. (1994). `An alternative approach to method eects using latentvariable models: applications in organizational behavior research', Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 323±331.
Williams, L. J. and Brown, B. K. (1994). `Method variance in organizational behavior and human resources research: eects on correlations, path coecients, and hypothesis testing', Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 57, 185±209.
Williams, L. J., Gavin, M. B. and Williams, M. L. (1996). `Measurement and non-measurement processes with negative aectivity and employee attitudes', Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 88±101.
Williams, L. J. and Podsako, P. M. (1989). `Longitudinal ®eld methods for studying reciprocal relationships in organizational behavior research: toward improved causal analysis', In: Cummings L. L. and Staw, B. M. (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 11, pp. 247±292, JAI Press, Stamford, CT.
Zapf, D. (1989). Selbst- und Fremdbeobachtung in der psychologischen Arbeitsanalyse. Methodische Probleme bei der Erfassung von Stress am Arbeitsplatz (Self and expert observation in psychological job analysis. Methodological problems in the measurement of stressors at work), Hogrefe, GoÈ ttingen.
Zapf, D., Dormann, C. & Frese, M. (1996). `Longitudinal studies in organizational stress research: a review of the literature with reference to methodological issues', Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 1, 145±169.

Copyright # 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 79±95 (2000)

