What is natural language? Differences compared to artificial languages, and consequences for natural language processing
Diana Santos Linguateca www.linguateca.pt

Information and Communication Technologies

1

What is natural language?
 Natural language is the oldest and most successful knowledge representation language
 Used for communication, negotiation, and reason (->logic)
What is natural language processing?
 Use computers to do things with natural language that should be useful for humans

Information and Communication Technologies

2

How is natural language used?
 Most intelligent human tasks involve language
 as center (communicating, teaching/learning, converting)  as periphery (mathematics papers, medical diagnosis,
programming)
 Daily tasks
 writing (and creating or conveying information or affection)  reading (and finding information)  translating (and mediating)

Information and Communication Technologies

3

What are artificial languages?
 Languages consciously created by Man  with the purpose of
 reduce NL's expressivity  correct NL's problems  diminish NL's complexity
 by
 abolishing or restricting ambiguity  giving a precise meaning to the vocabulary  a priori restricting the kind of communication  preventing change or evolution
Information and Communication Technologies

4

What is a knowledge representation?
Five different roles: 1. a surrogate 2. a set of ontological commitments 3. a fragmentary theory of intelligent reasoning 4. a medium for efficient computation 5. a medium of human expression (!)
inevitable as long as we need to tell the machine about the world and as long as we do so by creating and communicating representations Davis, Randall, Howard Shrobe & Peter Szolovits. "What is a knowledge representation?". AI magazine 14, 1, 1993, pp. 17-33.

Information and Communication Technologies

5

Several natural languages
 There are different natural languages
 reflecting a different world view  containing different "glue" (syntax, discourse)  taking into account different implicit information
 A theory of natural language evolution and how NL works ought to explain this undeniable fact
 Huge political impact of "taking care" of one's language

Information and Communication Technologies

6

1

The rationale for Linguateca
 To do computational processing of Portuguese is not "just" do exactly the same applied to another language
 The lexicon is structured in a different way  The grammar is different  The culture(s) are different  The technological shortcuts do not need to be the same  One should apply reasoning and methodology appropriate to the
object of study instead of uncritically assume that what has been used for English is appropriate for Portuguese Santos, Diana. "Toward Language-specific Applications", Machine Translation 14 (2), June 1999, pp. 83-112.

Information and Communication Technologies

7

Linguateca, a project for Portuguese

 A distributed resource center for Portuguese language technology  POSI project with FCCN as main contractor (2000-2006)  First node at SINTEF ICT, Oslo, started in 2000 (work at SINTEF
started 1998 as the Computational Processing of Portuguese project)

IRE model  Information  Resources  Evaluation
www.linguateca.pt

Oslo (1998) Braga

Odense
Floresta (2000)

(2000)
Porto (2002)

Lisboa

Coimbra

XLDB (2004)
Lisboa

(2005)

COMPARA (2000)

Lisboa

LabEL (2001)

Information and Communication Technologies

8

Linguateca highlights, www.linguateca.pt
 > 1000 links More than 2,000,000 visits to the Web site  AC/DC, CETEMPúblico, COMPARA ... Considerable resources for
processing the Portuguese language  Morfolimpíadas The first evaluation contest for Portuguese, followed by
CLEF and HAREM

 Public resources

 One language, many cultures

 Foster research and collaboration  Cooperation using the Internet

 Formal measuring and comparison  Do not adapt applications from

English

Information and Communication Technologies

9

"General" view of natural language
 Natural language contains too many ambiguities to be used alone for precise communication. Furthermore, natural language changes too rapidly for unqualified confidence in it as a preservation foundation. (Gladney & Lorie, 2005:305).
Gladney, H. M. & R. A. Lorie. "Trustworthy 100-Year Digital Objects: Durable Encoding for When It's Too Late to Ask", ACM Transactions on Information Systems 23, 3, July 2005, pp. 299-324.
I will try to convince you of the opposite!

Information and Communication Technologies

10

Presentation map
 Present some properties of natural languages
 and their possible counterpart in other languages
 Touch upon the interrelationship of those properties  Discuss the issue of many natural languages  Tentatively conclude with some work that tries to deal with them

The list of properties
1. Metaphorical nature 2. Context dependency 3. Reference to implicit knowledge 4. Vagueness 5. Dynamic character (evolution and learnability)

Information and Communication Technologies

11

Information and Communication Technologies

12

2

1. Metaphor: constitutive property of NL
 Paradigm shift by Lakoff & Johnson (1980), Metaphors We Live By.  Most of our normal conceptual system is metaphorically structured,
that is, most concepts are partially understood in terms of other concepts. (...) Understanding takes place in terms of entire domains and not in terms of isolated concepts.  Meaning is not a question of truth values (conditions for a sentence be true). It is necessary to understand first, in order to assign a truth value afterwords:  The true statements that we make are based on the way we categorize things and, therefore, on what is highlighted by the natural dimensions of the categories.

Information and Communication Technologies

13

Meaning and truth
 Truth depends on categorization in the following four ways:
 a statement can only be true relative to some understanding of it.  understanding always involves human categorization  the truth of a statement is always relative to the properties that
are highlighted by the categories used  categories are neither fixed nor uniform
Relativity's theory was right at hand for Heisenberg

Information and Communication Technologies

14

Kinds of metaphors
 Conventional
 structural argumentation is war  orientational more is up  ontological love is a thing
 Imaginative or non-literal
 new  extends old  uses unused part
Information and Communication Technologies

Metaphor as culture
 Culture, our way of seeing the world, is embodied in metaphors  Problems
 as puzzles  as chemical precipitates
 Time
 is money  is place

15

Information and Communication Technologies

16

Artificial languages including metaphor?
 No, but understanding metaphor has already been useful for CS: Maglio, Paul P. & Teenie Matlock. "Metaphors We Surf the Web By",
Paper presented at the Workshop on Personalized and Social Navigation Information Space, 1998, Stockholm, Sweden.
 spatializing UIs...  the terminology in [...] user interface design is acknowledging the
central role of cognition in general and of metaphors in particular Kuhn, W. "7+/-2 Questions and Answers about Metaphors for GIS User
Interfaces", in Nyerges, T.L., et al. (eds.), Cognitive Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction for Geographic Information Systems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1995, pp. 113-122.

Information and Communication Technologies

17

2. Context dependency
 The meaning of words, sentences and utterances always depends on context (which is sometimes the co-text)
 deictics, quasi-deictics, anaphors, etc.  aqui, ali, lá (position), eu, tu, nós (speaker), hoje, agora (time)  depois, antes  outro, este, primeiro  presidente da República, presidente da mesa, o país, a assembleia,  pai, meu

Information and Communication Technologies

18

3

o livro: article noun or pronoun verb?

 o livro da  o livro da cadeia  o livro da cadeia em  que o livro da cadeia em chamas  disse que o livro da cadeia em chamas  me disse que o livro da cadeia em chamas  me disse que o livro da cadeia em chamas só  me disse que o livro da cadeia em chamas só se  me disse que o livro da cadeia em chamas só se chamar

1. ..."Ivanhoe" é devido a...

2. ...a polícia!

Information and Communication Technologies

19

Context dependency in programming languages
 Yes, also in artificial languages the "same" word means different things dependent on the context
 In a=5 and b=a, a in general means different things  a+3 and substr(a) and here also (coercion)  a="aaa"; print a and a="bbb"; print a, gives a different result  just like print "print" or even print PRINT "print $print"
 Dynamically typed languages and polimorphism (type-checking during evaluation), as well as ordinary scope rules.
 "Environments" in denotational semantics (symbol tables)

Information and Communication Technologies

20

Context dependency 2
 Exactly the same sentence may mean the opposite
 Está calor aqui  Gosto imenso da comida portuguesa
 Natural language presupposes an interlocutor  There is a dialogue, a game of understanding something, explain
better, change in the middle, leave things implicit  What's in a game: rules, cheating, negotiation, change, follow
strategy, have a goal  There's external grounding...

Information and Communication Technologies

21

Language is grounded in place and time
 Every act of communication takes place in a material situation that plays an essential role in that communication.
 Much of what is now called context are really acts of communication
Clark, Herbert H. "Pointing and placing". In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing. Where language, culture, and cognition meet. Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum, 2003, pp. 243-268.

Information and Communication Technologies

22

Context dependency 3
 Natural language is a language for human communication  Although IT is a wonderful facilitator of data and information
transmission and distribution, it can never substitute for the rich interactivity, communication and learning that is inherent in dialogue Fahey & Prusak. "The eleven deadliest sins of knowledge management", California Management Review 40 (3) 1998, 265-76.
 Conversations are the product of people engaging in joint activities Clark, Herbert. "Conversation, structure of". In L. Nadel (Ed.)
Enyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Basingstoke, England: Macmillan

Information and Communication Technologies

23

Dialogue
 Jet vet inte vad jag har sagt innan du har svarat och du vet inte vad du har sagt innan jeg har svarat. Du visar mig vad jag har sagt og jag visar dig vad du har sagt (Molander 1996)
 I don't know what I have said until you answer and you don't know what you have said until I answer. You show me what I said, and I show you what you said.
Molander, Bengt. Kunnskap i handling. Gøteborg: Daidalos, 1996.

Information and Communication Technologies

24

4

Coercion: a way of modelling the role of context
 If you apply an operator, or something that expects different company, you may force a new behaviour: Treatments of tense and aspect use the concept of coercion to explain aspectual shifts
 functions which "coerce" their inputs to the appropriate type, by a loose analogy with type-coercion in programming languages (AitKaci, 1984)
Moens, Marc & Mark Steedman. "Temporal Ontology and Temporal Reference", Computational Linguistics, Vol 14, Number 2, June 1988, pp. 15-28.

Information and Communication Technologies

25

Context dependency implies non-compositionality
 Language as a set of building blocks each with a meaning and with a set of building rules which compute the meaning in terms of their parts (and the structure): the compositional ideal
 Language where all building blocks are interdependent and receive part of their meaning from the context, from the knowledge of the speaker and of the hearer etc.: natural language
 the ANY-thesis and the methodology of linguistics (Hintikka, 1980)  any is grammatical when it has a meaning different from that of some
in the context

Information and Communication Technologies

26

An example of geographical IR
 Wishing to develop "non-geographic" topics restricted to a location in GeoCLEF, we found out that location was dependent on the topic
 "Europe" for UEFA and the international song contest  former "Eastern bloc" may or may not include Germany
 and geography is dependent on time as well (Spain vs. Iberian Peninsula; India vs. Pakistan)
 while time is dependent on geography (Bronze Age, ...)

Information and Communication Technologies

27

Everything is linked
 instead of ACTION in a PLACE in a TIME
 a more correct pseudo-formal way to put it would be action(time,place) & place(time, action) & time(place, action)
 And this is just to bring the traditional variables in, there are many other axes possible!
 Context is relevant to understanding of all parts

Information and Communication Technologies

28

3. Reference to implicit knowledge
 You never start from nothing (except with babies)  An interaction is embedded or couched in a set of knowledge pieces  If one does not know anything (has no background) one cannot
understand a text
 Machine translation works thanks to implicit knowledge Schubert, K. "Implicitness as a guiding principle in machine translation", Proceedings of COLING'88 (Budapest, 22-27 August 1988), pp.599-601.
 Translation is not possible without common knowledge Quine, Willard Van Orman. Word and Object, The MIT Press, 1960.

Information and Communication Technologies

29

Extract explicit knowledge?
 No matter how large our corpus, if it is domain specific, the major part of the domain ontology will not be specified because it is taken as given, or assumed to be part of the background knowledge the reader brings to the text.
Brewster, Ciravegna & Wilks. "Background and Foreground Knowledge in Dynamic Ontology Construction: Viewing Text as Knowledge Maintenance", in Ding et al. (eds.), Semantic Web Workshop SIGIR 2003 (Toronto, July 28-August 1, 2003).
 A text is an act of knowledge maintenance. (...) A primary purpose of a text at some level is to change the relationship between existing concepts, or change the instantiations of these concepts [...] or adding new concepts to the existing domain ontology
Brewster, Iria, Ciravegna & Wilks. "The Ontology: Chimaera or Pegasus", Dagstuhl workshop on Learning for the Semantic Web, 13-18 February 2005.

Information and Communication Technologies

30

5

Separation from natural language
 How separate are actually artificial languages from NL? How much implicit information from actual English, Italian or French (Nirenburg & Wilks, Santos, etc.) is attached to:
 programming code  mathematical formula  KR languages  musical notation, classical ballet
 specialized language texts: something in between?

Information and Communication Technologies

31

4. Vagueness: the most important property
 The same unit means more than one related thing, at the same time.  Crucially different from ambiguity:
 although both give more than one translation to one entity  the difference is in the relationship among the translations  vagueness is systematic, ambiguity is accidental
 Vagueness has been the subject of much linguistic-philosophical research (Quine, Dahl, Lakoff, Kempson, Lyons, Keenan, etc. etc.) but it is somehow considered a nuisance for NLP
Santos, Diana. "The relevance of vagueness for translation: Examples from English to Portuguese". TradTerm Vol. 5.1, 1998, pp. 41-98.

Information and Communication Technologies

32

Examples of vagueness in Portuguese
 João é amigo do Pedro (Is amigo N or ADJ?)  Apaixonado, recusou o convite (estar ou ser?)  Conhecer pessoas como ele é uma aventura (conhecer bem, ou
encontrar?)  Passando por casa dela, lembrei-me do irmão (temporal ou causal?)  Encontraram-se na praia (um ao outro, ou ambos lá?)  A porta abriu-se! (sozinha, ou alguém a abriu?)  Ele quer casar com uma rapariga bonita (que é, ou que seja?)  O homem que matou X é louco (de re ou de facto)?  ou exclusivo ou inclusivo

Information and Communication Technologies

33

Vagueness and relationship with context
 Ontem encontrei dois casais com o mesmo problema (juntos ou separados?)
 Todos nesta sala sabem duas línguas (as mesmas ou diferentes?) The context may select one interpretation, but may keep both  A construção levou muito tempo  A construção ficou muito bonita  A construção prejudicou-o imenso
 Conheço o JJ há cinco anos  Conheci o JJ há cinco anos  Viver no Rossio há cinco anos deu-me o direito de participar.

Information and Communication Technologies

34

Kinds of ambiguity and vagueness
 Syntactical ambiguity or vagueness: more than one syntactical analysis or classification
 Semantic ambiguity or vagueness: more than one sense/meaning Often both occur, but not necessarily:  same syntactical analysis, semantically ambiguos: sentei-me no banco.  same semantic analysis, syntactically ambiguous: sentei-me num
banco na cozinha  Lexical ambiguity or vagueness (a different thing: that is "located" in
the lexicon)  Contrastive ambiguity or vagueness: more than one translation

Information and Communication Technologies

35

Vagueness, polysemy and underspecification
 Vagueness is the general property: positively meaning related things  Polysemy is vagueness restricted to the lexicon (related word senses)  Underspecification is a more general name that includes vagueness:
one might say that e.g. table is unspecified wrt weather, but not vague about the weather
 Vagueness is essential for communication, learning and evolution...

Information and Communication Technologies

36

6

"Irreference"
The possibility of talking about non-existing things or intensions  O presidente dos Estados Unidos vai encontrar-se com o primeiro
ministro do Canadá em Março de 2007  Os leões são perigosos  tenho comido muitos queques ultimamente  eu como ao meio dia
 o fato de banho está algures no sótão  quem quer que venha será recebido a tiro  O João saiu antes de alguém chegar

Information and Communication Technologies

37

Vagueness in programming languages
 abstraction, encapsulation, lazy evaluation, loaded symbols
 polymorphism in Smalltalk -- you send the message print, and each receiver has its own version (implementation) of print: A message specifies which operation is designed, but not how that operation should be carried out (Goldberg & Robson, 1983)
Goldberg, Adele E. & David Robson. Smalltalk-80: the language and its implementation. Addison Wesley, 1983.

Information and Communication Technologies

38

5. Language evolution
 origins (of underlying mechanisms)  emergence (of specific features)  evolution proper Vogt, Paul, Bart de Boer & Tony Belpaeme. "Modelling language
origins and evolution", Tutorial, IJCAI 2005 (31 July 2005, Edinburgh, Scotland).
 evolution of communication  grounding (relating language to the world)  computational simulation, the emergence of compositionality

Information and Communication Technologies

39

Examples of language evolution
 viuvar -> enviuvar  conheço -> reconheço  costumar-se -> acostumar-se
 amar hei-de -> amarei  cases in Latin -> articles in Romance languages  amara -> tinha amado
 buscar -> ir buscar  jogar a -> jogar à  amar a -> amar
Information and Communication Technologies

40

Programming language evolution
 versioning  deprecated syntax  documentation  compilers' warning messages  upwards compatibility  solving errors in previous versions
 different language paradigms (imperative, functional, ...)  object orientation, extreme programming, ... Difference between language designers and speakers

Acquisition and learnability of language
 In order to learn language, one has to use it: thus the primacy of dialogue and of context
 Every generation learns it anew...  In order to learn, one has to actively extend it and see whether the
extensions are sanctioned or not by future dialogues (Sampson's little Popperian in Educating Eve)  Vagueness is a tool to help learning: not more than necessary needs to be decided/conveyed in an interaction, things can be refined, if needed, in dialogue

Information and Communication Technologies

41

Information and Communication Technologies

42

7

Representation and reasoning...
 ... are inextricably intertwined (Davis et al. 1993)  Intelligent reasoning must be mirrored by natural language  Appropriateness of inferences is more relevant than their validity  there is no reason to believe that systems for which notions like
deductive closure are important have any demonstrable relationship to NLP, either as an empirical, engineering task or as a model of human processing Nirenburg, Sergei & Yorick Wilks. "What's in a symbol: Ontology, representation, and language". Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 13 (1), pp. 9-23

Information and Communication Technologies

43

The list of properties: again
1. Metaphorical nature 2. Context dependency 3. Reference to implicit knowledge 4. Vagueness 5. Dynamic character (evolution and learnability)
Information and Communication Technologies

44

Connection among the several properties
 Vagueness and context dependence explain meaning shifts and therefore language evolution
 Dialogue explains how language can be learned, and how people can learn language by negotiating meaning
 Language builds upon implicit knowledge, and develops in the direction of the needs to communicate of a community: this explains divergence and convergence of languages
 Shared metaphors allow meaning shifts without trauma

Information and Communication Technologies

45

Different natural languages: causes
 different contexts; different speakers  different implicit information; creative use every single minute Is it surprising that languages diverge?
 it would surely be surprising, and a very strong empirical claim, that different languages using different means to express 'meanings' always arrived at exactly the same end
Keenan, Edward. "Some Logical Problems in Translation", in Guenthner & Guenthner-Reutter (eds.), Meaning and Translation: Philosophical and Linguistic Approaches, Duckworth, 1978, pp.157-89.

Information and Communication Technologies

46

Different natural languages: results
 different grammar  different lexical items  different implicit/explicit conventions  different rules for obligatoriness and optionality  different discourse strategies  different things we do with words  different conventionalized metaphors  different realities described/readily invoked  different sayings/culture
Information and Communication Technologies

Consequences to NLP
 Basically, it is essential to know how NL works in order to handle it  Extreme simplification or denial of NL's properties won't do:
 Deal with vagueness  Deal with metaphor  Deal with implicit knowledge  Deal with context
 To understand communication and dialogue is much more important than uncover the "right" syntax
 Many different factors work in tandem

47

Information and Communication Technologies

48

8

Attempts to deal with vagueness
 In annotation, leave room for more than one category: HAREM and COMPARA
 do not force a choice when it is not required
 Identify contrastively vague categories in tense and aspect
 not only coercion  also aspectual classes or grammatical operators that can simultaneously mean
more than one thing
 The translation network
 linking two systems with different vague categories  explaining and formalizing concrete translation issues

Information and Communication Technologies

49

Categorization of events and states

 Different categories as far as events and states are concerned  Different operators  Attention to different details

ENGLISH events

PORTUGUESE events

result

non-result

extended

extended punctual
accomplishments achievements activities

obras

Information and Communication Technologies

punctual ( = change)
mudanças

50

The translation network
state

 Many ways to translate the pluperfect  Transl. arcs are never meaning preserving

inceptive achiev.

acquisition

perfect

event

estado

Presente Imperfeito

aquisição

MQP

mudança

Perfeito

obra completa

MQP

Perfeito

obra

Santos, Diana. Translation-based corpus studies: Contrasting English and Portuguese tense and aspect systems. Amsterdam/New York, NY: Rodopi, 2004.

Information and Communication Technologies

51

Let us look at the translation sit ­ sentar
45 translationally relevant different senses of sit in COMPARA  sit up, sit through, sit with, sat on, sat forward, sitting up, sit out  sit in judgement, sit on the bench  sit to  there sit, still sit  sit things out, who should sit where, sits on the skyline, sat deep in
discussion, sat down to a meal, sitting round, sitting about all over...  sat Xing, sat opposite, behind, next, alone, attentively, bent... 70 different translations in COMPARA

Information and Communication Technologies

52

What gets translated by sit?
123 different expressions/contexts get translated by sit  ficar *ando  mesa  ficar  ter à frente, ter diante  de onde estava many of them with absolutely no evidence for a sitting position
 fiquei só de cueca, gostava de olhar, fiquei com eles à mostra, fodendo num motel, velava o corpo, ali o deixaram ficar, e é a calma personificada, as pessoas não trazem muita pressa, benigna e sossegadamente determinemos, deixa-te estar aí, folheávamos, a vossos pés...

Information and Communication Technologies

53

What can be concluded?
 The more language one sees, the larger number of "senses" and or cotexts relevant for understanding/translating. In a Zipfian way?
Kilgarriff, Adam. "How dominant is the commonest sense of a word?" In Sojka, Kopecek & Pala (eds.), Text, Speech, Dialogue. Springer, 2004, pp.103-12.
 Fixed inventory of senses (or translations) is never the whole story!  Huge amount of context and implicit information that also plays a
role, together with language habits and culture (metaphor, idioms, ...)

Information and Communication Technologies

54

9

Conclusion
 Natural language is fundamentally different from artificial languages, so far
 It has properties that developed and were refined through the whole history of mankind
 If we want computers to be efficient and helpful mediators for the human race, natural language processing has to deal with language and understand it
 It is possible that by studying NL we are also able to devise better artificial languages or improve reasoning capabilities of our current systems

Information and Communication Technologies

55

Three kinds of vagueness
1. monodimensional, fuzzy borders  how many hairs can you have and still be called bold? 2. set of properties in different axes  Swedish citizen: Swedish parents and born in Sweden  noun: inherent gender; no degree; countable, mass or abstract 3. set of related properties  acquisition class (to mean the state and its inception)  privative opposition
 gosto: bom gosto, mau gosto  sorte: boa sorte, má sorte
Information and Communication Technologies

56

10

