]92

S.-A. MEDIESE TYDSKRIF

3 Februarie 1973

Lymphocytic Infiltration in Bladder Cancer*

A PRELIMINARY REPORT

R. A. LEIGH, P. J. P. VAN BLERK AND B. K. P. HORN, Division of Urology and the Deparlmenr of Surgery, University of the Witwatersrand and Johannesburg General Hospital, Johannesburg
SUMMARY

A preliminary, random sample study has been made of 34 ·cases of carcinoma of the bladder, correlating the degree -{)f lymphoid reaction to the tumour, as seen in the original biopsy specimen before treatment, with the grading, staging and subsequent follow-up. These findings were ·consistent with those of Sarma, in that a significant ,statistical correlation could be demonstrated between a low-grade tumour and presence of lymphoid reaction (P = 0,005), and the absence of same in high-grade lesions (P = 0,005). This effect was not so obvious in tumour staging, but appeared significant in comparing stage Bl lesions, with or without lymphoid reaction. The influence on local recurrence and distant metastases also appeared significant with tumour control in the presence of lymphoid reaction (P = 0,07), and conversely recur-. rences and/or metastases in the absence thereof (P =' 0,07).

Fig. 1. Photomicrograph (X 40) of anaplastic tumour showing absence of lymphoid reaction (-).

S. Afr. Med. J., 47, 192 (1973).

Lymphocytic infiltration of various malignant neoplasms has long been recognized, and its significance was attributed to either infection or post-irradiation change, or both. Tumours in a hollow viscus such as the urinary 'bladder are especially prone to secondary infection, and are usually irradiated at some stage during their management. However, lymphocytic infiltration of malignant bladder neoplasms can exist purely on an immunological basis, due to the presence of tumour-specific antigens as shown by Bubenik et al. I,:
Sarma' demonstrated the presence of adventitious :Iymphoid tissues and classified the degree of lymphoid reaction, ranging from odd collections of cells to well-defined follicles crowding the tumour in 73 % of a large series of cases (Table I and Figs 1 - 4). He showed

TABLE I. SARMA'S CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID REACTION

1. Negative (-): Complete absence of collections of lymphoid

tissue (Fig. 1).

2. Slight (+): Odd collections of lymphoid cells, indefinite

follicles, or the inconstant appearance of a definite follicle

(Fig. 2).

3. Moderate (+ +): Appearance of definite follicles at regu-

lar intervals (Fig. 3).

(+ +-4. Marked

+): Extensive formation of well-organized

and giant follicles (Fig. 4).

"Date received: 7 August 1972.
.Reprint requests to: Prof. P. J. P. van Blerk, Division' of Urology. University of Witwatersrand Medical School, Esselen Street, Johannesburg

Fig. 2. Photomicrograph (x 40) of weU-differentiated tumour showing slight 1)'Dlphoid reaction (+).
a significant inverse correlation between the quantitative degree of lymphocytic "infiltration and the malignant nature, invasiveness and progression, and ultimate prognosis of the bladder lesion.
The following is a preliminary report of a similar study made in the Urological Division of the Johannesburg General Hospital.
MATERIAL AND METHOD
To date, 128 patients with bladder carcinoma are documented in the Bladder Cancer Clinic, during the period January 1958-october 1971.

3 February 1973

S.A. MEDICAL JOURNAL

193

TABLE Ill. CORRELATION OF STAGE OF TUMOUR INVASION WITH LYMPHOID REACTION

Lymphoid reaction
I
T
++ +++

Stage of invasion (Jewelt)

0 A 81 82 C

13 2

194

221

13

2

D 2

Totals
7 16
5 6

Totals

3 13 11 2 3 2

34

Fig. 3. Photomicrograph (x 40) of weU-differentiated tumour showing moderate lymphoid reaction with definite nodular lymphoid aggregation (+ +).

These patient were followed-up over a period extending from 6 months to 7 years, and reassessed for evidence of control of tumour, local recurrence, and lymphatic or distant metastases by clinical evaluation, histology of the biopsy specimens obtained by transurethral resection. and, in certain instance, laparotomy 'and postmortem examination. These findings are again compared with the degree of lymphoid reaction hown in the original tumour analysis (Tables IV and V).

TABLE IV. LOCAL RECURRENCES RELATED TO DEGREE OF LYMPHOID REACTION

Lymphoid reaction
+, ++,
+++

Local recurrence

Present 7

Absent 0

17 10

Totals 7
27

Totals

24

10 34

Fig. 4. Photomicrograph (x 40) of adenocarcinoma of

the fundus of the bladder with and regular nodular lymphoid

magagrkreegdatleysm(p+ho+id+r)e.action

A sample of 34 of these cases was selected at random from the Cardex of the clinic, and ubjected to a doubleblind histological reassessment of the original tumour material, with consideration as to cell type, Broder's grading, histological staging as regards depth of inva ion (Jewett's classification, 1952), and the presence and degree of lymphoid reaction, according to Sarrna's classification (Tables II and lID.

TABLE 11. GRADING DISTRIBUTION AT PRESENTATION, AND DEGREE OF LYMPHOID REACTION

Lymphoid reaction
+, ++, +++

Grade of lesion

and 11 0

III and IV 7

17 10

Totals 7
27

Totals

17

17

34

TABLE V. DISTANT METASTASES RELATED TO DEGREE OF LYMPHOID REACTION

Lymphoid reaction
+, ++, +++

Distant metastases

Present 5

Absent 2

9 18

Totals 7
27

Totals

14

20

34

RESULTS
The histological asse ments a to degree of lymphoid reaction and grade of differentiation of tumour, are compared in Table II. Seven tumours showed no lymphoid
reaction, and 27 varying degree from + to ++ +. Of
those with no lymphoid reaction, all 7 were high-grade lesions, whereas of those showing lymphoid reaction, 17 were low-grade tumours.
The histological assessments as to stage of tumour invasion and degree of lymphoid reaction, are compared in Table In. Three stage BI lesio'ls showed no lymphoid

194

S.-A. MEDIESE TYDSKRIF

3 Februarie 1973

reaction. All 3 died within 12 months. Two of these died from their disease, and the third from an intercurrent coronary thrombosis. These were all high-grade lesions (grades III and IV). This is compared with 3 stage B I lesions, which showed a marked lymphoid reaction
(+ + +). One died at 10 years, and a second at 1 year
from their disease, and the third is still alive at 2 years. All 3 were low-grade lesions (grade Il). Two patients with stage C lesion showed a marked lymphoid reaction (+ + +). Both died of disease within 12 months and both were high-grade lesions (grades III and IV).
Cystoscopic evidence of local recurrence is compared with degree of lymphoid reaction in the original biopsy specimen in Table IV. All 7 cases in which there was no lymphoid reaction demonstrated local recurrence. Of 27 cases showing lymphoid reaction, there was no demonstrable local recurrence in 10.
Clinical, operative or necropsy evidence of distant metastases is related to the degree of lymphoid reaction in the original biopsy in Table V. Of 7 cases showing no lymphoid reaction, distant metastases were present in 5. Of 27 cases showing lymphoid reaction, distant metastases were present in only 9.
DISCUSSION
Although the series here reported is considerably smaller, the findings of this preliminary study are consistent with those of Sarma,' and appear to be statistically significant. It is generally accepted that it is the inherent nature of the tumour that ultimately determines prognosis, irrespective of the treatment given.
Well-differentiated tumours appear to be associated with lymphoid reaction, and poorly-differentiated tumours with an absence of such reaction. There is a high correlation between the presence of a low-grade lesion (grades I and II) and lymphoid reaction (P = 0,005). Similarly. there is a high correlation between presence of a high-

grade lesion (grades III and IV) and absence of lymphoid reaction (P = 0,005) (Table H).
No apparent significant beneficial relationship is demonstrated between degree of lymphoid reaction, and stage of tumour invasion (Table HI). This is inherent in the small number of cases in the study. However, it may prove significant that all 3 stage BI lesions without lymphoid reaction were high-grade tumours with a poor prognosis, relative to the 3 stage BI lesions with marked lymphoid reaction which were low-grade tumours, carrying a seemingly better prognosis.
Lymphoid reaction appears to influence local recurrence (Table IV). Local recurrence is commoner in the absence of lymphoid reaction (P = 0,07). Similarly, freedom from local recurrence is correlated with lymphoid reaction (P = 0,07).
The occurrence of distant metastases is significantly affected by lymphoid reaction to the primary tumour (Table V), as distant metastases appear to be more common in the absence of a lymphoid reaction (P = 0,07). Similarly, absence of distant metastases is correlated with lymphoid reaction (P = 0,07).
Obviously, .in order to confirm the conclusions in Sarma's study of positive correlation between significant lymphoid reaction and low incidence of invasion, and over-all good prognosis and survival, a much more extensive series will have to be undertaken.
We should like to thank Dr J. J. Rippey and Mrs L. Massel, respectively of the Schools of Pathology and Statistics of the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, for valuable advice in the preparation of this article; and the Medical Superintendent of the Johannesburg General Hospital, for permission to publish.
REFERENCES
I. Bubenik. J., Perlrnann, P., Helmstein, K. and Moberger, G. (1970): 1nl. J. Cancer, 5, 39.
2. Idem (1970): Ibid., 5, 310. 3. Sarma, K. P. (1970): J. Uro!., 104, 843.

