International Journal of Human Factors In Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203.

Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling
Peter G. Higgins
School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering Swinburne University of Technology,
Hawthorn 3122, Australia

ABSTRACT

Hybrid  human-computer  intelligent  systems  for  scheduling  have  evolved  in  response  to  the  inability  of
algorithmic  methods  to  handle  the  complexity  of  production  in  real  manufacturing  environments.  They
combine the abilities of humans to recognize patterns in data and to make inferences with computer methods
for  decision  making.  The  paper  discusses  (1)  the  factors  influencing  scheduling  decisions  in  small-batch
manufacture  and  the  role  of  humans  in  the  scheduling  process,  (2)  the  position  of  the  human  scheduler  in
hybrid  intelligent  decision-making  processes,  and  (3)  the  inadequacy  of  using  Gantt  charts  as  the  standard
interface  for  human-computer  interaction  in  decision  making.  The  paper  proposes,  for  humans  to  be  active
partners in decision making, the primary interfaces should display detailed characteristics of jobs in a way that
reveals patterns in the data and helps inferential processing.

1. 

INTRODUCTION

Discussions on interactive scheduling have paid scant attention to the special characteristics
and particular needs of job shops in environments that are nowhere near the leading edge of
Automated Manufacturing Systems. Many small shops have the following characteristics:

•  small to medium lot sizes
•  operation times that are short
•  customers who place orders with short lead time.

Such  shops  have  little  scope  to  make  long-term  plans.  Systemic  complexities  also  force
scheduling activity to be directed to very short time-horizons. Because resources are limited,
they usually find it too expensive and difficult to develop a comprehensive data base that can
furnish all information used in making scheduling decisions.

In  this  article,  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  small  job  shops  that  make  schedule
construction  difficult  are  discussed.  Drawing  upon  a  case  study,  features  are  proposed  for
“hybrid” human-computer scheduling systems that meet the needs of small job shops.

2. 

REAL SCHEDULING ENVIRONMENTS

In recent years, researchers have sought ways to overcome the shortcomings of the classical
operations research approach to job-shop scheduling. The algorithms and scheduling systems
developed  for  the  classical  n/m  problem  are  of  little  practical  value  (Jackson  and  Browne,
1989). Simplifying assumptions, intended to remove the computational complexity, also make
the  problem  less  relevant  to  actual  practice.  Shops  are  perceived  as  deterministic.
Manufacturing  processes  are  assumed  to  be  simple,  stable  and  well  understood  with
predictable  and  reliable  set-up  and  processing  times,  known  delivery  quantities,  times,  and
qualities.  This  characterization  is  far  from  the  shop-floor  reality  for  most  cases  (McKay,

1

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

Safayeni  and  Buzacott,  1988).  In  scheduling,  theoretical  methods  are  the  antitheses  of  the
praxis: their goals differ; they use different information; and they observe different practices.

Schedulers  cannot  ignore  the  predicaments  of  the  real  world.  Work  environments  are
generally  unpredictable.  Unplanned  events  occur  frequently  during  the  scheduled  period.
People often have to schedule in circumstances where procedures are ad hoc, records are kept
on  paper,  and  decisions  are  made  that  are  almost  arbitrary  and  outside  the  control  of  the
scheduler  (Solberg,  1989).  Schedulers  often  do  not  adhere  to  classical  assumptions  in  the
strategies they pursue. They:
•  assign priorities to jobs
•  change the size of batches
•  split operations between machines and overlap operations to speed up work
•  interrupt operations to run more urgent jobs
•  renegotiate due dates with customers to spread the work load, and
•  use machines in non-standard ways to increase short-term capacity.

New  jobs  usually  arrive  before  previously  scheduled  jobs  in  the  system  have  been
processed.  The  new  arrivals  may  make  the  prevailing  plan  irrelevant.  The  state  of  the  shop
may restrict choices available for amending the schedule. For example it may be impractical to
alter the place of some jobs in a queue. Often those jobs for which processing is imminent have
already placed calls on resources and materials. Reversing these calls may be difficult. Also,
frequent changes to the processing order of jobs that are currently on the shop floor may cause
chaos and confusion. To limit these effects, a scheduler may decide to restrict changes.

Multiple goals, frequently in conflict, beset schedulers. The conventional OR (Operations
Research) approach is to construct a single aggregated function for measuring performance.
Each  goal  is  assigned  a  weight  based  on  its  relative  importance.  Then,  a  linear  function,
formed by summing the weighted  goals,  is  pursued.  However,  schedulers  often  apply  goals
that may be neither clear nor explicit. They can follow goals without having to articulate them.
They  pursue  practices  they  believe  to  be  good  based  on  years  of  experience  with  the
production process.

In his field study McKay (1987) found that only a few per cent of constraints and issues
used  by  schedulers  in  decision  making  are  normally  supplied  facts.  The  remainder  were
semantic  relationships  requiring  inference  and  induction.  A  key  factor  in  scheduling  is
uncertainty. It dominates scheduling activity. Uncertainty extends beyond the usually accepted
sources  (i.e.,  arrival  times,  scrap  rates  and  machine  breakdowns).  McKay,  Buzacott  and
Safayeni  (1989)  found  that  these  other  issues,  which  are  myriad,  are  more  important.
Furthermore,  “Almost  any  factor,  constraint,  or  goal  can  have  variety  and  certain
combinations  of  variety  may  or  may  not  have  effects  on  other  constraints  or  goals.”
Constraints may include environmental and seasonal conditions, transportation, raw material,
type of work, labor force, and labor rates. They stress that not all constraints and goals are
active simultaneously. Goals depend upon the hour or the day, and constraints change: “what
is a ‘good’  schedule generated Monday morning may be considered to be a ‘bad’  schedule if
generated Monday afternoon.”

These  practices  often  depend  upon  schedulers  having  deep  knowledge  of  the  working
environment.  In  seeking  to  advance  scheduling  practice  this  tacit  knowledge  should  not  be
disregarded. One way to harness this knowledge is through AI (artificial intelligence). First, a
knowledge engineer needs to collect all the rules a scheduler has in his/her repertoire. Then, a

2

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

constraint-based reasoning system applies these rules to produce feasible schedules (Fox and
Smith, 1984). For the system to be effective —  that is, to operate without human intervention
—  it  has  to  cater  for  all  factors  and  circumstances  that  could  ever  arise.  Alas,  this  is  its
Achilles heel. To be fully automated, the system has to cater for all circumstances that could
ever arise. It may have to cater for the presence of multiple resources and routings, operation
precedence, job priorities, random failure, availability of material, changes in production goals,
and calls to expedite some jobs. While rules can be written for many of these factors, their
capture is usually costly.

Companies,  especially  those  that  are  small,  are  reluctant  to  expend  sufficient  time  and
money on creating rule bases that are comprehensive enough to make well-formed decisions.
Problems  arise  even  for  systems  that  initially  perform  well.  What  happens  to  the  rule  base
when  resources  change,  products  change,  and  new  methods  and  materials  are  introduced?
Does someone think about upgrading it, or, is nothing done and the subsequent errant advice
acted  upon  without  question?  Has  the  company  retained  employees  who  have  a  detailed
understanding of scheduling? Has the company access to persons with intimate knowledge of
the  rule  base?  This  is  particularly  problematic.  Maintaining  this  knowledge  within  the
organization is expensive. Alternatively, by purchasing outside expertise the company becomes
reliant on another enterprise. This agency may not maintain its knowledge of the scheduling
system as personnel, business interests and activities change.

An alternative approach is for humans and computers to make decisions interactively. In
recent years interactive scheduling systems have been presented as a way forward. Human and
computer  intelligence  combine  to  solve  the  scheduling  problem  (Nakamura  and  Salvendy,
1994).  The  human  handles  the  unstructured  part  of  a  scheduling  problem.  For  the  more
structured parts of the problem the computer supports the human. For example, the computer
can apply procedures for scheduling jobs from a set of standard heuristics —  First Come First
Served (FCFS), jobs with shortest processing time first (SPT), etc. In the interactive process
the  user  exercises  local  knowledge.  This  knowledge  is  not  restricted  to  quantitative
information  (e.g.  order  size,  due  dates).  It  also  includes  subjective  information  about
customers,  operators  and  management  priorities.  Furthermore,  humans  can  cope  with
information  that  is  incomplete,  ambiguous,  biased,  outdated,  and  erroneous  (McKay  et  al.,
1988).

3. 

INTERACTIVE SCHEDULING

The form interactive scheduling may take is wide ranging. Sheridan (1980) offers ten variants
in the sharing of responsibility between humans and computers. At one extreme, the human
acts as the principal controller, taking advice from the computer. The opposite bound has the
computer as the principal controller with the human performing corrections and adjustments
(Sanderson, 1989). Nakamura and Salvendy (1994) locate hybrid intelligent systems between
these extremes. In their definition of hybrid intelligent systems, both computer and human put
forward  solutions.  Computers  also  carry  out  data  processing,  displaying  results  graphically.
Importantly, proposed schedules are evaluated and modified by humans. They see the primary
role for humans as achieving total-system performance objectives.

The components of Nakamura and Salvendy’s decision-aiding system for an FMS (Flexible
Manufacturing System) are a human performance model, an interface, a human scheduler, a
schedule generator, and an FMS model. The human performance model captures scheduling

3

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

behavior of the human scheduler using a variety of knowledge sources that include heuristic
algorithms,  optimizing  procedures,  and  rule-based  procedures.  Another  formulation  of  a
hybrid system is the integrated approach of McKay et al. (1989). Their system consists of a
knowledge  base,  an  expert  system,  a  schedule  generator,  a  domain  manager,  a  schedule
modification system and a human scheduler. As the human scheduler enhances and tunes the
schedule, the schedule modification system “learns”. The human scheduler refines the schedule
and provides feedback about the current situation to the schedule modification system. Both
models include the means for the computer system to capture human scheduling behavior: for
McKay et al. it is the schedule modification system and for Nakamura and Salvendy it is the
human  performance  model.  Both  these  research  groups  present  the  gamut  of  abilities  that
humans bring to the scheduling task. Of these, the identification of patterns and clues, and the
provision of supplementary direction for constraint relaxation, are important to the following
discussion.

Interactive  scheduling  systems  generally  use  Gantt  charts  as  their  primary  interface.  The
computer  first  builds  a  schedule  and  then  displays  it  as  a  Gantt  chart.  Depending  upon  the
system, the user may select from several choices or the user may modify a chart by moving
jobs  on  the  screen  (Bauer,  et  al.,  1994).  Moves  violating  hard  scheduling  constraints  (e.g.
operation precedence) are normally barred. Frequently, a rebuild-algorithm then reschedules
activities  that  temporally  follow  these  manual  changes.  The  interplay  between  human  and
computer continues until some satisfactory schedule evolves. In this formulation of interactive
scheduling  humans  are  subsidiary.  This  may  lead  to  decision  making  being  biased
inappropriately  towards  the  computer’s  determination.  Interactive  systems  that  apply  OR
heuristics normally consider only a few, at most, of the available job attributes that may have
some  bearing  on  the  schedule’s  performance  (Nakamura  and  Salvendy  1987;  Hwang  and
Salvendy 1983, 1988; Tabe and Salvendy 1988; Tabe, Yamamuro and Salvendy 1988). Hybrid
intelligent scheduling systems make use of knowledge bases to redress these deficiencies. As
the system learns from the activities of the human scheduler, some problems in establishing a
rule  base,  described  above,  are  sidestepped.  Because  computers  and  humans  put  forward
solutions in partnership, unlike automated systems, it is not critical for the knowledge base to
be fully comprehensive.

For  humans  to  be  actively  involved  in  decision  making,  the  computer  system  needs  to
support their decision-making processes. Humans reflect upon the characteristics, that is, the
attributes, of jobs and the calls that these make upon the shop. The job attributes, and patterns
among attributes across jobs, act as stimuli. They relate the characteristics of the job to the
state  of  the  working  environment.  Using  their  deep  knowledge  of  the  domain,  they  draw
inferences  about  possible  scheduling  strategies.  In  this  reflection  they  may  consider,  for
example, the following issues (McKay, et al., 1989): What goals currently have high priorities
for  management?  Which  jobs  need  immediate  attention?  Which  jobs  may  be  left  to  later?
Which  jobs  are  likely  to  cause  problems?  What  processes  are  difficult  to  repeat  or  set  up?
What material or quality issues will arise?

How  can  the  special  competencies  of  humans  in  pattern  recognition  and  inference  be
supported? Humans need to be at the core of the decision-making process, instead of being
only  involved  in  the  alteration  of  a  schedule  a  computer  has  built.  As  the  sources  of
uncertainty  are  many,  and  scheduling  factors  in  real  manufacture  are  myriad,  much  of  the
decision making has to be left to humans.

A Gantt chart is a display of output. It is the product (a plan for running the shop) of a
decision-making  process.  Gantt  charts  only  show  partial  information  about  the  jobs:

4

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

commonly, job numbers, customer names, processing times and sometimes due dates. Humans
taking  responsibility  for  the  production  schedule  need  to  make  well-informed  decisions.
Displaying results is quite a different activity to using a display to search for inferences. The
difference is communication as against discovery. A Gantt chart’s purpose is to communicate
the plan of work to people who have to use it. The imperative is simplicity (Bertin, 1981).
Whereas, a display for decision making must comprehensively show all data a scheduler may
use to discover relationships. It has to reveal all the relationships formed by the interplay of the
data. Therefore, a Gantt chart should not be the principal means for humans and computers to
interact.

Some advanced systems provide graphic representation of the plant as an additional aid for
the scheduler. A user can scan the state of the shop in real or simulated time. While showing
the state of the shop is advantageous, schedulers still need a display in which they can observe
the characteristics of the jobs that may affect their scheduling decisions.

Human schedulers tend to approach their task in an opportunistic way (Woods and Roth,
1988). This requires an interactive system in which the interface elements, and their location,
are not tightly bound to a restrictive perspective of the problem. The architecture of a hybrid
intelligent system developed by the author is shown in Figure 1. Two types of display —  the
Jobs Screens and the Gantt Chart —  allow the human scheduler to interact with the computing
system. There is a separate Jobs Screen for each machine and one for jobs yet to be allocated
to  a  machine.  During  decision  making,  the  human  scheduler  focuses  primarily  on  the  Jobs
Screens. Meanwhile, the scheduler keeps an eye on the current state of the Gantt chart to see
when jobs are expected to be loaded and completed.

A  scheduler  can  see  the  values  of  the  job  attributes  in  the  Jobs  Screens.  If  all  the  job
attributes  that  may  affect  a  schedule  can  be  display,  the  scheduler  could  regard  all
dependencies  and  conceivable  interactions.  While  many  attributes  may  be  in  the  plant’s
database, schedulers may also use other factors —  especially those that are unstructured. If the
system allows them to annotate the record with comments, it could remind them of these other
significant characteristics of the job: the importance of the customer and expected difficulties
with the job. In allocating jobs to machines, and arranging the processing sequence, the human
interacts  with  the  computer’s  knowledge-based  adviser.  The  scheduler  may  select  jobs  and
arrange them according to one or more rules from the computer-supplied OR heuristics. By
grouping and observing jobs, the human infers what factors are important for the current set of
jobs. Unstructured factors such as experience, knowledge and intelligence of the person using
the system may be important (Bauer,  et al., 1994). The scheduler allocates jobs to machines
and sets the order of processing by moving them about the screen. Eventually an acceptable
Gantt chart issues from this interplay between the computer and human.

Having  the  human  central  to  the  decision-making  process  allows  development  of  a  truly
generic  system.  In  its  most  basic  form,  the  human  makes  all  the  decisions.  The  computer
provides tools for ordering jobs to standard OR scheduling rules. Either through the system
learning  the  rules  the  human  applies,  or,  by  production  rules  being  directly  entered,  the
knowledge-based adviser, or equivalent, may in time be able to offer meaningful advice.

4. 

CASE STUDY

A  tangible  example  may  help  make  the  issues,  raised  about  practical  aspects  of  job-shop
scheduling, more lucid. The behavior of a scheduler at a printing company, Melameds for the

5

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

sake of discussion, has been intensively studied. Melameds prints forms on continuous fan-fold
paper  for  such  uses  as  checks  and  invoices.  The  scheduling  environment  is  typical  of  many
small shops:

•  Some-of-the-machines are the state of the art, but they are not in the realm of Advanced

Manufacturing Technology

•  There is no on-line monitoring of processes
•  The details of jobs are maintained on a plant-wide computerised database.

Currently, the scheduler only has a machine-loading board to aid him. It has the names of
the  machines  written  across  its  top.  Cards,  listing  the  details  of  jobs,  slide  in  vertically  laid
tracks.  He  places  each  card  under  the  machine  needed  for  its  next  operation.  Cards  are
arranged vertically in the order that they are to be processed. At the beginning of a shift the
scheduler tries to project a schedule across two shifts. As the shift progresses, the scheduler
regularly modifies the plan in response to unplanned events.

The  machine-loading  board  is  an  inadequate  aid.  In  observing  the  board,  the  scheduler
cannot see: when a machine will be idle; how long a job requires for processing; nor when it
will leave the shop. The board is not just an ordered list of job operations waiting to go onto
each  machine.  It  is  therefore  unlike  the  boards  Gibson  and  Laios  (1978)  used  in  their
comparison of board displays for job-shop scheduling. Each card displays the characteristics of
the job that could influence scheduling decisions. The cards are color coded to highlight the
size of the printing cylinder: the item that takes the longest time to change on a press.

To keep the case-study simple, we shall only consider the presses, the primary machines,
and  will  ignore  the  downstream  processes.  The  problem  thereby  reduces  to  scheduling  jobs
that have a single operation.

The presses are the same, except the number of colors (one, two, four and six) they can
print and the ancillary attachments, providing extra functionality, differ. The ancillaries place
additional constraints on the allocation of jobs to presses. For instance, all jobs using ink that
needs ultraviolet fixing must go to the six-color press. This manufacturing environment, while
not  being  extraordinary,  is  a  member  of  the  difficult  class  of  an  identical  parallel-machine
problem  (French,  1982).  The  number  of  parallel  machines  a  job  “sees”  depends  upon  the
number of colors used in its production (see Table 1). Over recent years there have been some
theoretical  advances  in  allocating  and  sequencing  jobs  on  parallel  machines  with  major  and
minor set-ups (Tang, 1990; So, 1990; Rajgopal and Bidanda, 1991; Wittrock, 1990). While
these  advances  move  forward  the  understanding  of  this  class  of  problem,  they  apply  to
situations that are far simpler than this case-study (in which the level of difficulty is nothing
unusual).

To satisfy his primary strategy to maximize machine utilization, the scheduler at Melameds
tries to keep the four presses operating productively. The principal way to achieve this is to
minimize  time  wasted  in  setting  up  machines  (Higgins, 1992).  At  Melameds  three  job
attributes, depth, color, and width, affect the set-up time:

Depth: The size of the printing cylinders must be an exact multiple of the depth of the form.

Cylinders take 40 min to change.

Width:  The  perforations  between  sheets  cannot  extend  to  the  paper’s  edge.  Where  the
width reduces between jobs, the operator can quickly break teeth off the perforating

6

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

tool to stop holes being punched. For increasing width, the operator must first replace
the perforating tool and then remove teeth near the edge. This takes about 7 min.

Color: Washing out and replacing a color takes 10 min.

The  processing  time  for  most  jobs  is  between  20  min  and  4  h.  For  small  jobs,  all  these
factors  contribute  significantly  to  lost  time.  At  the  upper  end  of  the  range,  wash-ups  and
changes  to  the  perforating  tool  only  make  a  minor  contribution  to  the  total  time  for  an
operation.  Hence,  in  scheduling  large  jobs,  the  scheduler  may  willingly  accept  otherwise
avoidable changeovers so that he may meet other objectives.

The  scheduler’s  strategy  is  more  complex  than  ordering  jobs  merely  to  minimize  set-up
time. In choosing a schedule, he deliberates upon other aspects of the job and the environment.
His goal is composite. It includes, but not solely, the maximization of machine utilization and
the minimization of tardiness. Of course, these can be expressed as a weighted linear function.
However, this is not the scheduler’s practice.

At  Melameds,  among  other  objectives,  the  scheduler’s  desire  is  to  maximize  machine
utilization and minimize tardiness. If the problem somehow was reducible to these quantifiable
goals, a single indicator made up of their  weighted sum could be formed. Each goal places a
different demand on the shop. These demands conflict. For example, minimization of tardiness
requires  ready  availability  of  machines.  This  implies  machine  utilization  is  not  maximum.
Therefore, the performance indicator is highly sensitive to the value of the weights. Being a
real shop the relative importance of each goal is not immutable. It may vary with the time of
the year, month, or week, the shift, the value of the current jobs, customer goodwill, and the
practice of competitors. The more sophisticated hybrid intelligent systems attempt to capture
the complex behavior of humans in scheduling in such circumstances. The computer system
then can anticipate what the human would consider as an appropriate action.

The scheduler also has to consider other, less tangible, elements of the goal, for example
satisfying customers. Satisfaction is difficult to express. It does not have a singular meaning.
For some customers the meeting of the date agreed upon is most important. For others, the
primary interest is for the turnaround to be fast, while other customers are concerned about
the  quality  of  the  job.  At  Melameds  the  highest  quality  is  only  achievable  on  the  six-color
machine running at less than normal speed. These restrictions contravene the conditions for
maximizing machine utilization and reducing average turnaround time.

Colors  affect  scheduling  in  two  ways.  If  colors  change  between  jobs,  washing  the  color
applicators may be necessary. A scheduler’s choice of what to do is complex. As an example,
consider a three-color job printed on a six-color press. The job that follows has completely
different colors. Time will not be lost to cleaning if the three unused applicators are clean or
have in them inks of the required colors. This action delays cleaning. The four-color machine
can also produce the three-color job, leaving the six-color machine available for jobs requiring
five or six colors. The scheduler’s choice will depend, inter alia, on the current sequences on
both machines, the possible sequences on each, the set up costs on each when the job is loaded
and the total set up cost for each over a selected period.

As the company’s strategic niche in the market is the provision of quick turnaround, the
scheduler tries to have cylinders for the most common depths immediately available. He can
then process a premium job without waiting 40 min to change over cylinders. This rule is not
simple. The obvious configuration is for the cylinder size with the greatest demand from such
jobs being on the six-color press to allow processing of all jobs of that size. This may also
decrease the time to wash the applicators. When the likelihood of “quick-turnaround”  jobs for

7

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

the other cylinder sizes is considered, along with some estimate of the number of colors to be
printed, the allocation of cylinders to machines becomes more problematic. The obligation to
process existing jobs, efficiently and on time, tempers the scheduler’s desire to provide quick
turnaround for jobs that may never exist.

Correctly reading the meaning for some factors depends upon context. For some customers
the due date is rigid. Others may not be too concerned if they receive their orders a day or two
late. Yet again, these very same customers may have jobs in the system with due dates that are
atypically firm. The attitude towards the customer also influences the significance placed on a
due  date.  The  disposition  of  the  scheduler,  manager,  or  sales  representative  towards  a
customer  who  is  regular,  new,  slow  to  pay,  belligerent  when  jobs  are  late,  etc.,  may  affect
what delivery date Melameds consider acceptable. Different departments or persons may see
particular constraints quite differently. A sales representative, a production supervisor and a
customer may hold quite different views on the firmness of a due date. While a customer may
not be unduly concerned about a late delivery, a sales representative may see a late delivery as
a threat to his or her reputation. The value placed on any particular factor is an outcome of the
interplay between interested persons and groups.

There  may  be  contextual  factors  relating  to  the  working  environment.  For  example,  in
scanning  available  jobs,  the  customer’s  name  sometimes  signifies  that  the  customer  expects
exceptional quality. To achieve such quality, the scheduler may need to allocate the job to a
particular machine with an especially good operator. As operators find producing work of very
high  quality,  stressful,  the  scheduler  tries  not  to  overload  an  operator  with  exacting  work.
While AI approaches can, to some extent, deal with context, they suffer from an inability to
decipher  qualitative  differences  in  meaning  without  having  them  being  explicitly  stated
(Papantonopoulos,  1990).  This  requires  teasing  out  all  possible  contexts  and  associated
meanings for circumstances that may have not  yet arisen, and, then formulation of appropriate
rules to place in a knowledge-base.

Under special circumstances (e.g., when machines break down, or the characteristics of the
job are abnormal) the scheduler may make changes to the machines. Schedulers can often find
creative  solutions  through  a  deep-seated  understanding  of  the  resources  that  are  available.
They may transfer parts of one machine to another. During the study, three blankets used for
transferring ink on the six-color press operating with 279-mm cylinders became damaged. The
scheduler, who also manages production, had to act. He replaced them with two blankets used
for  the  two-color  press  and  one  from  the  single-color  press.  To  do  this,  he  had  to  have
functional  knowledge  of  the  machines.  Removal  of  the  blanket  for  the  single-color  press
required some deliberation. For most of the shift this press was to use a 186-mm cylinder. The
scheduler estimated when a job needing a 279-mm blanket was to be loaded. Confirming that
spare  blankets  would  be  available  by  then  he  decided  to  take  the  blanket.  There  was  no
problem with the two-color press as the awaiting jobs did not require them.

From  this  brief  description,  we  can  see  that  the  environment  at  Melameds  is  complex,
though  not  atypically  so.  A  quite  simple  process  of  printing  becomes  a  difficult  parallel-
machine  problem  when  the  machines  differ  in  the  number  of  colors  they  can  produce.
Sequence-dependent  set-ups  compound  the  problem.  These  difficulties  occur  although  the
problem has been severely reduced. Functions of processing time, set-up time and arrival time
are only considered. Performance measures are restricted to simple functions such as machine
utilization and tardiness. At Melameds the factors influencing scheduling extend beyond these
few.  They  may  be  qualitative,  subjective,  and  depend  on  context.  These  make  the  classical

8

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

means  for  ordering  jobs,  such  as  increasing  processing  time  and  first-in  first-out,  less
significant and arguably irrelevant.

Let  us  now  consider  how  the  scheduler  produces  a  schedule  using  the  machine-loading
board.  He  places  new  jobs  to  the  left  of  the  board.  Some  jobs  have  yet  to  complete  the
previous  operation:  the  production  of  printing  plates.  Only  critical  jobs  are  so  treated;  for
example,  jobs  with  impending  due  dates,  unusually  long  processing  times,  or  those  that
severely disturb press allocation. He looks at the current allocation and ordering of jobs at the
presses. Then, he may take some unassigned cards and slot them among cards already under
the chosen press heading. He often collects jobs in the unassigned space, and orders them in a
desired processing sequence. He then places the group under the desired press heading, not
necessarily appended to the end of the current list. As he builds a new sequence for a press,
jobs previously allocated may no longer fit the current strategy. They may be shifted back to
the unassigned section of the board or be allocated to another press.

5. 

INTERFACE FOR HYBRID INTELLIGENT SCHEDULING

Consider  the  desirable  features  of  an  interface  for  a  hybrid-intelligent  scheduling  system  for
Melameds.  The  scheduling  system  must  support  the  scheduler’s  use  of  job  attributes.  The
machine-loading board provides a good starting point. It records the order jobs will load on
the presses, and it allows the scheduler to observe job attributes. The system should allow the
scheduler  to  follow  practices  that  he  has  found  to  produce  at  least  acceptable  schedules,
especially since there is no other singularly successful scheduling technique. What is being put
forward  is  not  an  ethnographic  design  methodology  in  which  the  current  practices  of  the
scheduler are replicated in the new system without question. A new system should discourage
practices that are obviously detrimental to the production of a good schedule and to encourage
new proficient practices. Nevertheless, a system interface that feels somehow familiar avoids a
major hurdle, user resistance. The value offered by the technology has to be great enough for
schedulers to reconfigure themselves and their work to take advantage of it (Miller, Sullivan
and Tyler, 1991). It should extend users so they may restructure their view of the problem. To
enhance the scheduler’s ability the system has to be flexible so the scheduler can cope with
unanticipated variability (Woods and Roth, 1988). The aim therefore is to allow schedulers to
build upon their current practices.

Figure 2 shows the job details, but not their form, that are displayed in the Job Screens. All
attributes  that  may  influence  the  scheduler  in  making  decisions  must  be  accessible.  At
Melameds, there are more attributes than these on a card, and they are also present in the Job
Screens.  For  readability  of  the  figures  in  this  paper,  and,  to  ensure  the  reader  is  not
overwhelmed, these additional attributes have not been included.

One  has  to  be  careful  to  separate  function  from  implementation.  Instead  of  merely
replicating the details displayed on the job cards, one needs to consider how the scheduler uses
each  attribute.  The  manual  system  lists  the  number  of  sheets  in  a  multipart  form  and  the
number  of  forms  in  the  job.  He  uses  these  to  determine  the  processing  time.  Usually  the
scheduler calculates the approximate time to manufacture in his head. Displaying processing
time  is  more  useful,  especially  since  for  difficult  and  critical  cases  he  uses  a  calculator  to
determine the processing time:

9

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

T

proc

=

N

c

D N

p

N

f

+

t

s

v

where Nc is the number passes to transfer all the colors, D is the depth of the form, Np is the
number of parts in a form Nf is the number of forms, ts is the set-up time for the press, which
depends upon cylinder size, colors, width and depth and v  is  average  machine  speed  of  the
press.

In the display processing time has replaced the number of forms and the number of parts, as
neither of them affects scheduling decisions. Processing time is neither an attribute of a job nor
of a machine. It is a property of the entity-relationship between job and machine. Therefore,
the  screen  shows  eight  job  attributes  and  four  attributes  derived  from  entity-relationships
between  job  and  machine.  The  job  attributes  are  job  number,  customer,  due  date,  depth,
number  of  colors,  width,  and  the  colors  on  the  front  and  back  of  the  bill.  The  job-machine
attributes are cylinder size, processing time, permissible presses and chosen press. For ease of
discussion both job attributes and job-machine attributes are called job attributes.

The  Jobs  Screens  display  the  attributes  of  the  jobs.  The  values  of  attributes  are  abstract
signs  signifying  the  characteristics  of  the  printed  forms  (Morris,  1946;  Polanyi,  1962).  The
significance  of  attributes  and  patterns  among  attributes  is  highly  dependent  upon  the
scheduler’s experiential knowledge of the working environment.

Let us look at scheduling as it is broadly practiced. At the time a schedule is constructed,
the jobs do not have a physical presence. Schedulers only have before them signs signifying job
attributes.  Their  disposition  to  respond  to  the  signs  depends  upon  their  experiential
knowledge.  In  creating  schedules,  schedulers  tend  to  invoke  mental  images  of  jobs  being
processed (Eberts and Eberts, 1989). By manipulating and comparing representational images,
they  draw  out  relationships.  Sometimes  they  resort  to  constructing  physical  symbols  to
represent signs in a form that helps perceptual inference. For example, in comparing jobs with
different  values  of  a  particular  attribute  they  may  represent  the  different  values  as  lines
sketched  on  paper.  The  degree  of  mental  imagery,  and  the  form  and  extent  of  mental
modeling, are currently at the level of conjecture. Nevertheless, it is a reasonable presumption
to  say  that  in  scheduling  practice,  abstract  signs  (usually  displayed  as  alphanumeric
characters), with representational images produced in the schedulers’  minds, prevail.

There  is  not  a  one-to-one  relationship  between  an  attribute  and  its  signification.
Signification is revealed from the interaction of the search process (i.e., the revelation of the
complete state of the set of jobs being scheduled) and experiential knowledge. This process is
mentally demanding. There is much mental effort required to manipulate mental images of jobs
and their attributes.

The  aim  is  to  find  signs  that  support  schedulers  exercising  experiential  knowledge  and

mental imagery. For the signs to be effective they need to:

1.  clearly and distinctively show the job attributes;
2.  clearly display, unambiguously, the values of the attributes;
3.  support the scanning of jobs to locate those jobs having a particular attribute value; and
4.  clearly display patterns in attributes across jobs.

10

·
·
·
Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

6. 

REPRESENTATION OF ATTRIBUTES

Figure 3 shows a simplified version of the “Jobs Screen”  for one press. The signs, signifying
jobs,  are  of  a  composite  form.  Through  a  job’s  sign  a  scheduler  accesses all  the  job’s
attributes.  Attributes  map  to  spatial  locations  within  the  composite  sign  and  either
alphanumeric characters or graphical shapes signify their values. Each part of the composite
sign  is  quite  distinctive.  In  those  parts  of  the  composite  sign  that  have  insufficient  retrieval
cues, when the Job Screen is in full-window display a heading reminds the scheduler of the
referent attribute. A horizontal line links all the components of the sign into a unified image
characterising the job.

As the signs used in figure 3 are abstract, users have to learn what they denote. Also there
is  not  a  one-to-one  relationship  between  an  attribute  and  its  signification.  Signification  is
revealed from the interaction of the search process (that is, the revelation of the complete state
of  the  set  of  jobs  being  scheduled)  and  experiential  knowledge.  Higgins  (1994a)  discusses
these issues in detail.

Where  it  is  possible,  graphics  are  chosen  for  displaying  attributes  over  alphanumeric
characters for three reasons. First, small graphical objects can be still be visually conspicuous
(Higgins, 1994a). By using small objects to depict attributes, more jobs can reside on a single
screen.  The  user  can  compare  in  a  scan  the  attributes  for  a  larger  set  of  jobs.  The  screen
displays six tiled windows when the scheduler wants to see the schedule for the entire shop
(Figure 4). When the number of jobs in the display is  maximum, data density is a maximum.
By maximizing data density a greater proportion of the data to be perused by the scheduler —
the  attributes  for  all  available  jobs  —  simultaneously  on  a  screen.  Leung  and  Apperley
(1993)formalized this as the maximization of efficiency.

A second, and most important, reason for graphics is to support inferential processing. It is
easier  to  make  perceptual  inferences  using  distance,  size,  spatial  coincidence,  and  color
comparisons,  than  it  is  to  make  logical  inferences  using  mental  arithmetic  and  numerical
comparison (Casner, 1991; Larkin and Simon, 1987). The computer brings “visibility”  to those
attributes experienced schedulers use to schedule jobs on the shop floor. From the patterns in
the  values  of  the  attributes,  schedulers  can  see  interactions  and  dependencies  between  jobs.
Through inference they decide which factors are important for the current set of jobs. They
reorder the jobs on the screen to obtain more desirable patterns. This involves changing the
order within a Job Screen and moving jobs to other Job Screens, either singly or en bloc.

Scanning available jobs, a scheduler has to distinguish between objects depicting different
attributes.  The  scheduler  has  to  also  discriminate  one  attribute’s  value  from  another.  All
objects  depicting  the  same  attribute  must  have  some  features  in  common.  However,  their
values may differ. Hence there must be some features that can change. These objects therefore
need  to  be  two  dimensional.  This  can  be  realized  through  separable  “global”  and  “local”
features. The user recognizes an attribute by its global features, while the local features display
its  value.  Global  features  such  as  shape,  color,  size,  closure  may  make  objects  signifying
different  attributes  quite  distinct.  Users  can  search  global  features  quickly  and,  with  some
qualification,  the  time  to  search  is  independent  of  search  size  (Arend,  Muthig,  and
Wandmacher,  1987).  Local  features  must  vary  in  such  a  way  that  they  do  not  mar  global
integrity. For each attribute in Figure 4 the global features are obvious despite differences in
the  local  features.  Across  attributes  the  global  features  are  distinctly  different  and  therefore
unambiguous.  Across  attributes  the  global  features  are  distinctly  different  and  therefore
unambiguous.

11

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

A sign’s form depends on the way its referent attribute affects scheduling decisions. The
choice between alphanumeric and graphical signs depends upon scheduling needs. Graphical
signs may have local features with either substitutive or additive scales (Norman, 1991).

An alphanumeric sign has a clear advantage over graphical representation in unambiguously
showing  the  value  of  an  attribute.  Indeed,  for  customer  and  job-number  attributes  it  is
preferred. A job number is a candidate key that uniquely identifies the job. As it acts as a label,
its  character  is  nominal  and  is  not  the  subject  of  quantitative  comparisons.  If,  instead,  the
display for the job number was graphical, a user would have to decode the graphic to obtain
its value. The ability of a user to read the characters clearly and distinctly sets the lower limit
on size for alphanumeric displays.

Substitutive scales are used to signify the values for a job’s depth, width and colors, and for
the press choices and press allocation. These attributes only have discrete values. The depth
that a job may take is constrained by the size of the printing cylinder. The circumference of the
cylinder has to be an exact multiple of the depth. Five cylinder sizes are available. As changing
a cylinder takes a long time, the scheduler is primarily interested in cylinder size, not depth. It
is  preferable  to  maintain  the  same  values  of  these  attributes  between  jobs  as  a  time  penalty
occurs  where  there  is  difference.  Within  the  elements  signifying  cylinder  size  and  color,  the
values  of  the  attributes  map  to  spatial  location.  For  the  printing  cylinder,  the  horizontal
location of the bar shows its size, and the bar’s height expresses the depth as a fraction of the
cylinder’s size; for example, forms of 93-mm depth and 62-mm depth would appear as a half
and third height bars, respectively, on a 186-mm cylinder. In Figure 3 the five cylinder sizes
are shown as vertical dashed lines. The local feature in the cylinder’s sign for job 16356 is an
unbroken vertical line that is a third of the total height. The leftmost line represents a cylinder
of 186-mm circumference. Hence, the depth of the job is 62 mm as is produced on an 186-mm
cylinder.  A  change  in  depth  while  maintaining  the  cylinder  size  is  but  a  minor  set-up.  It
requires only a perforating tool to be added or removed.

For colors, the horizontal location of vertical bars shows commonly occurring colors. To
print the same color on the front and back of a form requires two modules. Where this occurs,
the bar has twice the height. In the sign representing the press allocation, a large vertical line
shows  the  machine  to  which  the  job  has  been  allocated.  The  short,  vertical  lines  indicate
alternative machines that can produce the number of colors required.

In  the  Jobs  Screens  the  local  features  for  attributes  using  substitutive  scales  are  vertical
lines.  The  horizontal  location  of  these  lines  signifies  value.  Why?  Decision  making  in
scheduling  is  heavily  reliant  on  matching  jobs  with  the  same  attribute  values.  This
representation  strongly  supports  such  matching.  The  scheduler  scans  along  a  vertical  line
within an elemental part of the composite sign. To obtain a match, the scheduler seeks vertical
alignment. He/she only has to decide whether a mark is present or not. The author contends
that  this  process  has  superiority  over  scanning  vertically  for  a  change  in  the  shape  of  a
component  (e.g.,  Kleiner-Hartigan  tree,  star  symbol  plot,  and  Chernoff  faces)  (Higgins,
1994a).  Where  values  affect  the  shape  of  the  graphic,  the  user  would  have  to  discriminate
between shapes.

Mapping dimensional size to an attribute’s value is useful for the comparison of continuous
variables.  The  number  and  spacing  of  the  tick  marks  representing  hours,  the  presence  of  a
horizontal bar in the sign and the sign’s horizontal location together define the sign’s global
features. Its local feature is the length of the horizontal bar signifying the processing time. An
additive scale makes it easy for the human scheduler to compare processing times by scanning
vertically. For example, the scheduler may seek a job to fill the time that remains before the

12

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

shift ends, say 2 h. To find a suitable job, The author believes that the scheduler’s eye fixates
on  the  2-h  interval  and  then  scans  vertically.  Experimental  evidence  for  this  seemingly
reasonable  hypothesis  is  being  sought  in  the  next  stage  of  the  research  programme.  Jobs  in
which the horizontal line terminates to the left can be processed in the required time. These
activities  do  not  rely  on  the  observer  accurately  reading  the  value  of  the  attribute  but  on
comparison. The misreading of the relative order of values that are close together does not
affect scheduling performance, as the margin of error between predicted and actual values of
processing  time  is  greater.  This  graphic  therefore  meets  the  requirements  for  effectiveness
(Higgins, 1994a; 1994b).

While additive scales generally suit size comparison, for cases requiring an exact numerical
value,  Arabic  notation  is  clearly  superior.  For  our  example,  arranging  jobs  so  that  width
decreases between jobs saves time in setting up. In seeking a job to follow one with a width of
229  mm,  the  scheduler  would  scan  the  width  of  other  jobs.  If  the  scale  was  additive,  the
scheduler would find difficulty in deciding whether a width was 228 mm, which would incur
no  set-up  penalty,  or  230  mm,  which  would  do  so.  Therefore,  the  object  displays  width  in
Arabic notation, a substitutive scale. Because the display is numeric, one would expect pattern
matching to suffer as it does not support perceptual inference. A graphic image as shown in
the  bottom  right-hand  corner  of  Figure  3  helps  alleviate  this  problem.  Where  the  width
increases  between  jobs,  while  the  cylinder  size  remains  the  same,  there  is  a  time  penalty  in
changing  jobs.  The  perforating  tool  has  to  be  changed.  The  graphic  draws  attention  to
situations in which the widths increase.

For  those  attributes  not  in  the  plant’s  database,  the  system  allows  them  to  annotate  the
record  with  comments.  Where  such  factors  are  infrequent,  the  system  may  incorporate  a
simple  visual  cue  to  remind  schedulers  to  include  them  in  their  decision  making.  In  the
Melameds example a large red dot next to the job number acts as the reminder. When a job
that  is  displaying  this  dot  is  being  considered  in  a  scheduling  strategy,  the  scheduler  may
access the reminder notes by clicking on the dot. Where many of the jobs display such a simple
cue may not be useful.

7. 

THE SCHEDULER’S ACTIVITY

The interface has six windows. Five of the windows are Job Screens in which the scheduler
can see the values of the job attributes. Of these five, one window is for unallocated jobs, and
the others display jobs queued at machines, ranked in order of processing. A Gantt chart is in
the  sixth  window.  It  shows  the  times  when  jobs  are  planned  to  be  processed.  The  primary
screen allows the scheduler to examine all jobs. It consists of six, nearly equal, tiled windows
as shown in Figure 4. It provides the scheduler a  vantage point for assessing the state of the
schedule across the shop.

A hybrid intelligent scheduling system has to allow the scheduler to work in a familiar way.
When  scheduling  manually,  the  scheduler  at  Melameds  places  new  jobs  to  the  left  of  the
machine-loading board. On observing the current state of the schedule and the characteristics
of available jobs he assigns and reassigns jobs. Frequently, he collects jobs in the unassigned
space, and orders them in a desired processing sequence, before placing them as a group under
the  desired  press  heading.  The  new  system  allows  him  to  act  in  a  similar  way.  When  the
display  is  in  the  overview  mode,  all  the  jobs  assigned  and  unassigned  can  be  surveyed.  By
displaying all the job attributes that may affect a schedule in the Job Screens, the scheduler

13

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

may regard all dependencies and conceivable interactions. He may move jobs about in a Job
Screen to obtain desired patterns. For example, to keep the same cylinder set up for a group of
jobs,  the  scheduler  arranges  the  jobs  so  a  single  vertical  line  passes  through  the  selected
cylinders. To minimize the time lost in changing colors, the scheduler would arrange the jobs
in this group to minimize wash ups. The system does not only support the behavior of this
scheduler.  As  jobs  may  be  moved  at  will,  the  system  would  support  the  behavior  of  any
scheduler who had previously worked with the machine-loading board.

The  scheduler  can  select  groups  of  jobs  and  reorder  them  using  computer-supplied
scheduling  rules.  The  system  could  offer  various  levels  of  heuristics.  At  the  basic  level,  the
scheduler could group jobs that require the same cylinder. This would avoid a major set up
within  the  sequence.  These  jobs  could  then  be  reordered  using  SPT  or  FCFS.  The  most
advanced heuristic, if a suitable one could be found, would allocate jobs to parallel machines
and sequence them. Its applicability to Melameds depends upon two other conditions. It must
accommodate one major and some minor set ups, and the number of machines being different
between  jobs.  If  the  environment  at  Melameds  is  typical,  which  the  work  of  McKay  et  al.
(1989)  seems  to  confirm,  factors  other  than  those  used  by  OR  scheduling  rules  dominate  a
scheduler’s  behavior.  When  schedulers  direct  the  decision-making  process,  they  can  give
adequate  consideration  to  these  factors.  Schedulers  may  find  groups  of  jobs  that  they  may
treat as equal after considering all factors except those used in OR methods. They could then
apply an appropriate scheduling rule to the jobs in such a group.

As  the  scheduler  moves  the  jobs  on  the  screen,  the  knowledge-based  adviser  provides
advice in a non-intrusive way. At Melameds, the factors used in deciding the order of jobs to
minimize  set-up  time  could  be  expressed  as  rules  that  suit  constraint  satisfaction.  When  a
sequence arises that results in a set-up penalty, through the firing of production rules a graphic
object appears to warn the user. The graphic object that warns of increasing width requires ten
rules,  as  it  does  not  appear  just  because  the  width  increases  between  successive  jobs.  The
adviser only displays the warning if there is a significant penalty. If, for example, the width
increases while the cylinder size changes, as the change in width is immaterial, the no warning
will  appear.  The  adviser  informs  the  human  of  hard  constraints,  through  graphics.  For
example, for each job the permissible presses are shown as small vertical lines. As a scheduler
gathers jobs to allocate to a machine, the permissible machines to which they can be moved en
bloc is indicated by shading of the signs for suitable presses (these signs are on the right below
the  menu  in  each  window  in  Fig.  4).  Schedulers  can  therefore  perceive  and  interpret  the
consequence  of  hard  constraints  at  a  time  of  their  choosing.  If  the  scheduler  attempts  to
violate  a  hard  constraint,  for  example  placing  a  job  on  an  incapable  press,  then  the  adviser
intervenes. It disallows the move, and explains why to the scheduler.

8. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Human schedulers are central to the decision-making process in hybrid intelligent scheduling.
They should  actively participate in the process, and not merely alter schedules produced by a
computer.  The  interaction  process  should  allow  schedulers  to  apply  methods  that  they
naturally use, but find hard to represent as algorithms (Kempf et  al.,  1991).  For  humans  to
play an active and coherent role in decision making, all readily accessible data that may affect a
scheduler’s  decisions  should  be  displayed. The  data  should  be  signified  by  signs  that  help

14

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

reveal  patterns  in  the  data  and  help  schedulers  draw  inferences  about  possible  scheduling
strategies.

To  allow  schedulers  to  compare  jobs  without  having  to  remember  details  on  another
screen, the proportion of all data on available jobs that a scheduler can see in a single screen
should be maximized. As graphical signs provide high data density, where possible they should
be  applied.  For  signs  to  be  effective  they  need  to  (1)  clearly  and  distinctively  show  the  job
attributes,  (2)  clearly  display,  unambiguously,  the  values  of  the  attributes,  (3)  support  the
scanning of jobs to locate those jobs having a particular attribute value (4) and clearly display
patterns  in  attributes  across  jobs.  It  is  extremely  important  to  satisfy  these  criteria  to  avoid
screens cluttered with poorly designed tiny graphical objects.

The following features for the interface seem plausible from the hypotheses articulated. A
graphical  sign  needs  two  dimensions  to  signify,  unambiguously,  an  attribute  and  its  value.
“Global” and “local” features provide the means for separating an attribute and its value. Signs
with  such  features  need  to  be  designed  to  allow  schedulers  to  scan  for  patterns  across
attributes. Where an attribute has discrete values, using the horizontal placement of vertical
lines as the local feature offers an effective means for scanning its value across jobs. Similarly,
for attributes that are continuous variables, a scheduler can easily scan the length of horizontal
lines. The author plans to test these features experimentally. Some questions providing a focus
for the experimental design are:

•  How  hard  or  easy  can  humans  identify  differences  and  similarities  in  the  graphical

•  How does an object’s graphical form affect the human scheduler’s search strategy?
•  How many visually-depicted attributes can a human reasonably manage?
•  What  is  the  upper  bound  on  the  number  of  jobs  that  a  human  can  search  and

symbols?

manipulate?

It has been argued in this paper that problem complexity results in a need for humans to be
at  the  core  of  the  decision-making  process.  However,  there  is  another,  and  most  crucial
reason. Moving the problem’s locus to the needs of persons who have to take responsibility
for the planning of production is the critical issue in production scheduling. The emphasis is on
“responsibility”.  Ultimate  responsibility  lies  with  a  person,  not  a  machine.  Persons,  who  are
responsible for production, will not wholeheartedly follow a schedule, unless they believe that
it will perform to their satisfaction.

9. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author would like to thank Romesh Nagarajah of Swinburne University of Technology for
his comments on this manuscript, and Andrew Wirth and Malcolm Good of the University of
Melbourne for their interest in, and encouragement of, this work.

15

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

10.  REFERENCES

Arend, U., Muthig, K.-P. and Wandmacher, J., 1987, Evidence for global feature superiority in menu selection

by icons, Behaviour & Information Technology, 6, 411-426.

Bauer, A., Bowden, R., Browne, J, Duggan, J. and Lyons, J., 1994. Shop Floor Control Systems: From Design

to Implementation, 2nd ed. (Chapman & Hall).

Bertin, J., 1981, Graphics and Graphic Information-Processing (De Gruyter).
Casner,  S.  M.,  1991,  A  Task-Analytic  Approach  to  the  Automated  Design  of  Graphic  Presentations.  ACM

Transactions on Graphics, 10(2).

Eberts,  R.  E.  and  Eberts,  C.  G.,  1989,  Four  Approaches  to  Human  Computer  Interaction.  In  Intelligent
Interfaces:  Theory,  Research  and  Design  P.  A.  Hancock  and  M.  H.  Chignell  (eds.)  (Elsevier  Science
Publishers).

Fox, M. S., and Smith, S. F., 1984, ISIS: A knowledge-based system for factory scheduling, Expert Systems, 1,

French,  S.,  1982,  Sequencing  and  Scheduling:  An  Introduction  to  the  Mathematics  of  the  Job-Shop  (Ellis

Gibson, R., and Laios, L., 1978, The Presentation of Information to the Job-Shop Scheduler. Human Factors,

25-49.

Horwood, Chichester).

20(6), 725-732.

Higgins,  P.  G.,  1992,  Human-Computer  Production  Scheduling:  Contribution  to  the  Hybrid  Automation
Paradigm.  In  Ergonomics  Of  Hybrid  Automated  Systems  -  III:  Proceedings  of  the  Third  International
Conference  on  Human  Aspects  of  Advanced  Manufacturing  and  Hybrid  Automation,  Gelsenkirchen,
August  26-28  1992,  Germany,  P.  Brödner  and  W.  Karwowski  (eds.)  (Elsevier  Science  Publishers,
Amsterdam), pp. 211-216.

Higgins, P. G., 1994a, Graphical features for aiding decision-making in production scheduling. In  Harmony
through  Working  Together:  OZCHI  94  Proceedings,  Melbourne,  28  November  -  1  September  1994,  S.
Howard and Y. K. Leung (eds.) (Ergonomics Society of Australia), pp. 261-265.

Higgins,  P.  G.,  1994b,  A  graphical  display  to  support  human-computer  decision-making  in  production
scheduling. In  Advances in Agile Manufacturing: Fourth International Conference on Human Aspects of
Advanced  Manufacturing  and  Hybrid  Automation,  July  6-8  1994,  Manchester,  P.  T.  Kidd  and  W.
Karwowski (Eds.) (IOS Press), pp. 317-320.

Hwang, S.-L., and Salvendy, G., 1983, Human supervisory performance and subjective responses in flexible
manufacturing systems  Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 28th Annual Meeting,(Santa  Monica,
Human Factors Society) pp. 664-669.

Hwang, S.-L.,  and  Salvendy,  G.,  1988,  Operator  performance  and  subjective  response  in  control  of  flexible

manufacturing systems, Work and Stress, 2, 27-39.

Jackson,  S.  and  Browne,  J.,  1989,  An  Interactive  Scheduler  for  Production  Activity  Control.  International

Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 2(1), 2-15.

Kempf, K., Le Pape, C., Smith, S. F., and Fox, B. R., 1991, Issues in the Design if AI-Based Schedulers: A

Workshop Report, AI Magazine, Jan 11-5, 37-46.

Larkin, J., and Simon, H., 1987, Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth 10,000 words, Cognitive Science 11,

65-99.

Leung, Y., and Apperley, M. D., 1993, E3: Towards the Metrication of Graphical Techniques for Large Data
Sets. In Selected papers of the third international conference on Human-Computer Interaction (EWHCI'93)
Moscow, August 1993, L. J. Bass, J. Gornostaev, and C. Unger (eds.) (Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

McKay,  K.  N.,  1987,  Conceptual  Framework  for  Job  Shop  Scheduling,  MASc  Dissertation,  Department  of

Management Science, University of Waterloo.

McKay, K. N., Safayeni, F. R., and Buzacott, J. A., 1988, Job-Shop Scheduling Theory: What is Relevant?,

Interfaces, 18(4), 84-90.

McKay,  K.  N.,  Buzacott,  J.  A.,  and  Safayeni,  F.  R.,  1989,  The  Scheduler's  Knowledge  of  Uncertainty:  The
Missing  Link.  In  Knowledge  Based  Production  Management  Systems,  J.  Browne  (ed.)  (North-Holland,
Amsterdam), 171-189.

Miller,  J.  R.,  Sullivan,  J.  W.  and  Tyler,  S.  W.,  1991,  Introduction.  In  Intelligent  User  Interfaces,  J.  W.

Sullivan and S. W. Tyler (eds.) (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.), pp. 1-10.

Morris, C. W., 1946, Signs Language and Behavior (G. Braziller, New York).

16

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

Nakamura,  N.  and  Salvendy,  G.,  1987,  Human  Decision  Making  in  Computer-Based  Scheduling  within  a
Flexible Manufacturing System: An Experimental Study. In G. Salvendy (ed.) Cognitive Engineering in the
Design of Human-Computer Interaction and Expert Systems (Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam) pp.
257-264.

Nakamura, N. and Salvendy, G., 1994, Human Planner and Scheduler. In,  Design of Work and Development
of Personnel in Advanced Manufacturing, G. Salvendy and W. Karwowski (eds.) (John Wiley & Sons, New
York), pp. 331-354.

Norman,  D.  A.,  1991,  Cognitive  Artifacts.  In  Designing  interaction:  Psychology  at  the  human-computer

interface, by J. M. Carroll (ed.) (Cambridge University Press, New York), pp. 17- 38.

Papantonopoulos,  S.,  1990,  A  Decision  Model  for  Cognitive  Task  Allocation,  Doctoral  thesis,  Purdue

Polanyi,  M.,  1962,  Personal  Knowledge:  Towards  a  Post-Critical  Philosophy  (The  University  of  Chicago

University.

Press).

Rajgopal,  J.,  and  Bidanda,  B.,  1991,  On  scheduling  parallel  machines  with  two  setup  classes,  International

Journal of Production Research, 29(12), 2443-2458.

Sanderson,  P.,  1989,  The  human  planning  and  scheduling  roles  in  advanced  manufacturing  systems:  an

emerging human factors domain, Human Factors, 31(6), 635-666.

Sheridan,  T.  B.,  1980,  Theory  of  man-machine  interaction  as  related  to  computerized  automation.  In  Man-
machine interfaces for industrial control, by E. J. Kompass and T. J. Williams (eds.) (Control Engineering,
Barrington, IL), pp. 35-50.

So, K. C., 1990, Some heuristics for scheduling jobs on parallel machines with setups,  Management Science,

36(4), 467-475.

Solberg,  J.  J.,  1989,  Production  Planning  and  Scheduling  in  CIM.  In  G.  X.  Ritter  (Ed.),  Information

Processing '89 (Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., North Holland), pp. 919-925.

Tabe, T. and Salvendy, G., 1988, Toward a hybrid intelligent system for scheduling and rescheduling of FMS,

International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 1(3), 154-164.

Tabe, T., Yamamuro, S., and Salvendy, G., 1988, An approach to knowledge elicitation in scheduling FMS:
Toward a hybrid intelligent system. In Ergonomics of Hybrid Automated Systems I, by W. Karwowski, H.
R. Parsaei and W. R. Wilhem (eds.) (Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam), pp. 259-266.

Tang, C. S., 1990, Scheduling batches on parallel machines with major and minor set-ups  European Journal

of Operational Research 46, 28-37.

Wittrock,  R.  J.,  1990,  Scheduling  Parallel  Machines  with  major  and  minor  setup  times,  The  International

Journal of Flexible Manufacturing Systems, 2, 329-341.

Woods,  D.  D,  and  Roth,  E.  M.,  1988,  Cognitive  Systems  Engineering.  In  Handbook  of  Human-Computer

Interaction, M. Helander (ed.) (Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam), pp. 3-43.

17

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

TABLE  1.  The  relationship  between  number  of  colors  and  the  number  of  parallel
machines.
Colors
1
2
3
4
5
6

Machines
4
3
2
2
1
1

18

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

Scheduling Rules

Knowledge-Based

Adviser

GANTT
CHART
Timing at
resources
Performance
prediction

JOBS

SCREENS

Unassigned
Sequence
Job attributes

Machine 1
Sequence
Job attributes

Machine n
Sequence
Job attributes

HUMAN DECISION MAKING

Context Setting

Pattern Recognition

Figure 1 Interface elements and their location in a hybrid intelligent scheduling system

19

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

i
l
y
C

r
e
d
n

h
t
p
e
D

s
r
u
o
o
C

e
t
a
D
 
e
u
D
6/5 279 279 2 blue
25/5 186 186 1 black
30/4 186 186 2 red
27/5 216 216 2 blue
62 186 1 blue

black

black
grey

30/6 186 186 1 brown

186 186 3 blue

black

blue

16504 Gillette
16667 TDCar
16498 Triad
16748 Jarvis
16356 Triad
16537 Option
16656 KPMG

l

Front of Bill Back of Bill P

i

e
m
T
 
g
n

i
s
s
e
c
o
r

s
e
s
s
e
r
P
 
e
l

b

i
s
s
i
m
r
e
P

n
e
s
o
h
c
 
s
s
e
r
P

i

h
t
d
W
229 2,3,4
3
345 1,2,3,4 3
3
244 2,3,4
49 305 2,3,4
3
149 246 1,2,3,4 3
229 1,2,3,4 3
3

84 254 3,4

Figure 2 Job Details observable in the Job Screens

20

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

Figure 3 Jobs Screen for Press 3: Jobs and their characteristics

A partial display of objects representing job attributes

21

Higgins, P.G. (1996) Interaction in Hybrid Intelligent Scheduling. International Journal of Human Factors In
Manufacturing, 6(3), 185-203

22

