828 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 1972

south pole of Mars," Icarus, in press.

[7] R. H. Selzer, "Digital computer processing of X-ray photographs,"

in Proc. Rochester Conf. on Data Acquisition and Processing in Biol-

ogyandMedicine (Rochester, N. Y., July 27,1966), vol. 5. New

York: Pergamon, 1968, pp. 309-325.

[8] R.H.Flzer,"Use

of computers to improvebiomedicailmage

quality,in 1968 Fall JointComputerConf.,AFIPSConf.Proc.,

vol. 33, Pt. I . Washington, D. C.: Thompson, 1968, pp. 817-834.

[9] R. H. Selzer, `Recent progress in computer processing of X-ray and

radioisotopescannerimages," Biomed.Sci.Instrum., vol. 6, pp.

225-234, 1969.

[lo] S. D. Rockoff and R. H. Selzer, "Radiographic trabecular quantita-

tion of human lumbar vertebrae in situ, in Proc. Conf. on Progress

i n Methods of Bone MineralMeasurements (Bethesda,Md., 1968,

NIH, NIAMS), pp. 331-351.

[ll] S.H. Brooks, R. H. Selzer, D. W. Crawford, and D. H. Blankenhorn,

'Computer image processing of peripheral vascular angiograms," in

preparation.

[12] B. CB. ridges, PracticaFl ingerprinting. New YorkF: unkand

Wagnalls, 1912, 374 pp.

[13] H.Cumminsand M. Charles, Fingerprints,Palms and Soles. New

York: Dover,1961, pp. 319.

[14] R. J. Bltckwell,"Fingerprintimageenhancement

by computer

methodsp,resented

a t 1970 Carnahan ConEf.lectronC.rime

Countermeasures (Lexington, Ky.,Apr. 17, 1970).

[15] I . S. Bowen, "The 200 inchHaletelescope,"in Telescopes, vol. I ,

Stars and Stellar Systems, G.P.Kuiperand

B. M. Middlehurst,

Eds. Chicago,Ill.:Univ.Chicago, 1960, pp. 1-15.

[16] E. L. O'Niell, Introduction to Statistical Optics. New York: Addison-

Wesley, 1963, pp. 86, 99.

imageProcessingin the Context of a Visual M o d e l
THOMAS G. STOCKHAM, JR., MEMBER, IEEE

Absfracf-A specificrelationshipbetweensome of thecurrent knowledge andthought concerning humanvision and the problemof controlling subjective distortion in processed images are reviewed.
I. INTRODUCTION MAGE QUALITY isbecominganincreasingconcern throughout the field of imageprocessing. Thegrowing awareness is due in part to the availability of sophisticateddigitalmethodswhichtendtohighlighttheneedfor precision. Also there is a developing realization that the lack of standards for reading images into and writing images out of digital form can bias the apparent effectivenesosf a process and can make uncertain the comparisonof results obtained a t differentinstallations.Greaterawarenessandthedesireto respond to it are partially frustrated, because subjective distortionmeasureswhichwork well are difficult to find. P a r t of the difficulty stems from the fact that physical and subjective distortions are necessarily different.
Manuscript received January 31,1972; revisedApril 20,1972. This researchwassupportedin partbytheUniversity of UtahComputer ScienceDivisionmonitored by Rome Air Development Center, Griffiss
Air Force Base, N. Y. 13440, under Contract F30602-70-C-0300, ARPX
order number 829. The author is with the Computer Science Division, College of Engi-
neering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah84112.

The ideas presented here spring from our reevaluation of

the relationship between the structure of images and 1) the

problem of quantitativerepresentation, 2) theeffect of de-

sired processing and/or unwanted distortion, and 3) the inter-

action of images with the human observer. They provide a

framework in which we think about and perform our image

processing tasks. By adding to our understanding of what is

to be measured when dealing with images and by strengthen-

ing the bridge between the objective (physical) and the sub-

jective(visual)aspects

of manyimageprocessingissues,

these ideas have clarified the meaning of image quality and

thus have `enhanced our ability to obtain it. [Ye offer them

with the hope that they may aid otherswealsl.

In the course of the discussion i t is noted that image pro-

cessors which obey superposition multiplicatively instead of

additivelyb,eaarinnterestinrgesemblancbeotohpera-

tionally and structurally to early portionosf the human visual

system. Based on this resemblance a visual model is hypothe-

sized, and the results of an experiment which lends some sup-

port to and providesa calibration for the model are described.

Thistentativevisualmodel

isoffered onlyforitsspecial

abilitytopredictapproximate visualprocessingcharacter-

istics. (See footnote 11.)

In recent years there has beena large amount of quantita-

tive work done by engineers and scientists from many

fields

STOCKHAM: IMAGE PROCESSING I N CONTEXT OF VISUAL MODEL

829

in support of a model for human vision. While many of these works are not referenced explicitly here, we have attempted to reference papers and texts which doa good job of collecting these references in a small number of places while providing a unifying interpretation [1]-[5].

111. THESTRUCTUORFEIMAGES
As an energy, signal light must be positive and nonzero. This situation is expressed in (1)

11. SOMEPHILOSOPHAYBOUT IMAGEPROCESSING

where I representsenergy,orintensity as itiscommonly called, and x and y represent the spatial domainof the image.

T h e notion of processing an image involves the transformation of that image from one form into another. Generally speaking,twodistinctkindsofprocessingarepossible.One kind involves a form of transformation for which the results appear as a new image which is different from the original in some desirable way. The other involves a result which is not an image but may take the formof a decision, an abstraction, or a parameterization.Thefollowingdiscussionlimitsitself

Furthermore,sinceimagesarecommonlyformed

of light

reflected from objects. the structure of images divides physi-

callyintotwobasicparts.Onepartistheamount

of light

available for illuminating the objects; the otheris the ability

of those objects to reflect light.

Thesebasicpartsarethemselvesspatialpatterns,and

like the imageitself must be positive and nonzeroas indicated

in (2) and (3)'

primarily to the first kind of processing. T h e selection of a processing method for any particular

> > 0CQ G , ,

(2)

situationismadeeasierwhentheavailableprocesseshave

somekind of mathematicalstructureuponwhich a characterization of performance can be based. For example, the bulwark for most of the design technology in the field of signal processing is the theory of linear systems. The fact that the ability to characterize and utilize these systemassiasdvanced

Theseimageparts,calledtheilluminationcomponentand the reflectancecomponent,respectively,combineaccording to the law of reflection toformtheimageSincethatlaw is a product law,(2) and (3) combine as in (4)

as itis, stems directly from the fact that the defining proper-

ties of these systems guarantee that they can be analyzed.

These analyses, based on the principle of superposition, lead

directly to the conceptosf scanning, sampling, filtering, wave-

shaping,modulation,stochasticmeasurement,etc.

Equally important, however, is the idea that the mathe-

maticasltructure of theinformationbeingprocessedbe

compatible with the structure of the processes to which it is

exposed. For example, it would be impossible to separate one

radiotransmissionfromanother if i t werenotforthefact

that the linear filters used are compatible with the additive

structure of the composite received signal.

In the case of images the selection of processing methods

has often been based upon tradition rather than upon a con-

sideration of the ideas given above. fIinelds such as television

and digital image processing where electrical technology is a

dominating influence, the tradition has centered around the

use of linear systems.

This situation is a very natural one since the heritage of

electricailmageprocessingstemsfromthosebranches

of

classicalphysicswhichemploylinearmathematics

as their

which is in agreement with (1).

I t follows from (4) that two basic kindsof information are
conveyed by an image. The first is carried by &,laInd,has to

doprimarilywiththelighting of the scene. T h e secondis

carriedby Y ~ , a~n,d concerns itself entirely with the nature

of the objects in the scene. Although they are delivered in

combination,thesecomponentsarequiteseparateinterms

of the nature of the message conveyed by each.

So far i t hasbeenassumedthattheprocess of forming

an image is carried out perfectly. Since ideal image forming

methods do not exist and can only be approachead,practical

image will only approximate that given in (4). Because most

imageformingmethodsinvolvelinearmechanismssuch

as

those which characterize optics, a practical image can be re-

garded as anadditivesuperposition of idealimages.This

fact is expressed in (5)

s-:CQ > lz,u= ~ ~ , Y h ~ , x : ~ , Y>d x0d Y (5)

foundation. Specifically,it is interestingto follow the develop-

ment from electromagnetic field theory to electricmeasure- where lz,yrepresents a practical image andhr,x;,,y represents

ments, circuit theory, electronics, signal theory, communica-

the so-called point spread function of the linear image form-

tions theory, and eventually to digital signal processing. The ing mechanism. In other words h z , ~ ; u ,isy the practical image

situationissimilarwhenconsideringtherole

of opticsin thatanidealimageconsisting of a unitintensitypoint of

image processing, the laws of image formation and degrada- light located a t x = X and y = Y would produce. Obviously h

tion being primarily those determined from linear diffraction must be nonnegative.

theory.

If the point spread function is the same shfoarpeall points

The question that arises is whether this tradition of appolfy-lightintheidealimage,thenthesuperpositionintegral

ing linear processing to images is in harmony with the ideas

(5) becomes a convolution integral (6)

given above. The major pointat issue cannot be whether the processorspossessenoughstructure,becauselinearsystems certainlydo.Theissueisthenwhetherthatstructureis

cc > I=,,= J->x.Y >~ , - x ; , - Y d X d Y 0

(6)

compatible with the structure of the images themselves. T o

clarifythisissuethequestion elaborated upon.

of imagestructuremustbe

1 I t is almostimpossible to find a material thatreflects less than about 1 percent of the incident light.

830

which is conventionally expressed using a compact notation as in (7)

* > f,.,= I,,, * h,,, > 0.

(7)

Combining (4) and (7) we obtain (8)

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, JULY 1972

whichundertheassumption

of apositioninvariantpoint

spread function summarizes the essential structure of practi-

cal images as they are considered in most current efforts. T h e expression (8) places in evidence the three essential

Fig. 1. An intensityimage I=.v as reproduced bythe transmission of light through a volume concentratioonf amorphous silverCz,v,z.

components of a practical image. If h,," is sufficiently small in

its spatial extent, the practical image can be taken as an ade- is a relatively new practice in image technology. The process

quate approximation to the ideal. If h,,, fails in this respect, of photography, now over a century old, does not use it. I t

the practical image can be processed by any one of a variety has only been with the advent of electrical imaging methods

of methods in an attempt to remedy the situation.'

that it harseceived attention.

Since the objective of the present discussion focuses pri-

In order to clarify' this point, imagine a black and white

marily on the structure of an ideal image, it will be assumed photographitcransparencwy hicphortrayssomoeptical

inthe following thatthe effect of h,,, canbeneglected.'

image. In order to see the reproduction one must illuminate

Primary concern here is thus redirected to (4).

the transparency uniformly with some intensity io and some-

We now return to the issueposed at the endof Section I1 how view the transmitted pattern of light intensity I,,". The

as to whether or notthemathematicalstructure of linear quantities of light which are transmitted are determined by

processorsiscompatiblewiththestructure

of theimages thevolumeconcentrations of amorphoussilversuspended

themselves. Since (4) indicates that the image components arein a gelatinous emulsion. Thus it is these concentrations which

multipliedtoformthecomposite,andfurthersincelinear

represent the image in its stored form. Let these concentra-

systems are compatible with signaplsossessing additive struc- tions be expressed a s Cz,,,r.

ture, it follows that there exists basic incompatibility. How-

Physically the situation is as depicted in Fig1.. In order to

ever, this incompatibility depends in a basic way upon some derivetherelationshipbetweenthereproducedimage

I,,,

implicitassumptionswhichhavebeenimposeduponthe

and Cz,,,r we must consider the transmission of light through

structure as described in (4).

materials. The physics of the situation is given in (9)

An essential ingredient to the structure of images as expressed in (4) is the assumption that an image is an energy signal. This assumption really amounts tao choice of a repre-

_di -- - kC,,,,Zi
dz

sentation for an image. The nature of t h a t choice can be ex-

tremelyimportant.Toclarifythisconceptthequestion

of

representation must be elaborated upon.

where i is the intensityof the light at any point in the trans-
mitting material and K is a constant representing the attenu-
atingability of a unitconcentration of amorphoussilver.

IV. THEREPRESENTATIOONF IMAGES

Integration of (9) according to standard methods yields(IO)

A key question in the transmission, storage, or processing of any information is thatof representation. The reason that the choice of representation is important is that the problems

1r.v di

Zt

s,, -
i

=

-

k

s

,

CZ.U,&

(10)

of transmission, storage, and processing can be substantially where st represents the thickness of the emulsion. Since the

effected by it.

integralintheright-handside of (10) representsthetotal

If a n idealphysicalimageisconsideredasacarrier

of quantity of silverperunitarea

of thetransparencyinde-

information,it follows thatnaturehasalreadychosen

a pendent of how t h a t silver is distributed in the z dimension,

representation. .It takes the form of lightenergy.Further-

(10) can be rewritten as in (11)

more, if onetakesnatureliterallywhensensinganoptical image,one will continue that representation by creating a

In U Z , , / i ~=) - kd,,,.

(11)

signalproportional to theintensity of thatlightenergy.

A solution of (11) for I,,, yields (12)

Indeed this representation seems likea very natural one, and

in fact as already indicated, it is commonluysed in television

and digital image processing.

Strangely enough representation by light intensity analogy From (11)it can be seen t h a t in the case of a photographic

transparency,thephysicalrepresentation

of theimageis

actually d,,, whichisproportionaltothelogarithm

of the

*For an excellentandrecentsummary,bibliography,and

set of

referencesrepresentative of themanyinterestingefforts
aee Section I1 of a recent article by Huang et ai. [l 1.

inthis area,

a There is still much to be learned both practically and theoretically

about restoring practical images to the point where this is possible. Such

restoration methods are very important; and since they attempt in part

to compensate for distortions caused by linear mechanismsl,inear process-

ing is used extensively and often with great success.

reproducedintensityimage. I n turn (12) revealsthatthe

physical representation d,,, is exponentiated during its con-

version to light intensity. Further, it follows t h a t if I,,uis a

faithfulreproduction of theoriginalintensityimagefrom

whichthetransparencywasmade,thenthequantities

of

silverused toformtherepresentation d,,, musthavebeen

STOCKHAM: IMAGE PROCESSING IN CONTEXT OF VISUAL MODEL

831

-
ORIGINAL INTENSITY ~

log
2

-
REPRESENTATION

exp

-
REPRODUCED INTENSITY

Fig. 2. In photography an imageisrepresented by the total quantity of amorphous silverper unit image area. For faithful reproduction
dZ,#must be proportional to the logarithmof the image intensities.

-

Fig. 3. A density image as processed by a linear system. Note that the basic structure of the image is preserved. The output is a processed illumination plusa processed reflectance regardlessof what theprocess
may be.

deposited in the emulsion by a process which was logarithmically sensitive to light energy.
This situation is summarized in Fig. 2 where the logarithmic andexponentialtransformationswhichmechanizethe formation of a photographicimageareplacedinevidence. The variables io and R whichappearin (11) and (12) have beenomittedforconveniencesincetheyareonlyscaling constants.'
Therelationship of (12) is well knowninphotography but is usually presented ian somewhat altered form as in(13).

Herethequantity D,,,,called density,isproportionalto A,, but related directly to the common logarithm in a man-
ner similar t o t h a t used in the definition of the decibel.Be-
cause d,,, and D,,,are both related to the popular notion of
density it is reasonable tocall any logarithmic representation of an image a density representation. As indicated above, all
such representations are the same except for the choiceof the two constant parameters.
Taking this into account(11) and (12) may be generalized to (14) and (15)

and

where &, and ?,, represent illumination' and reflection den-

sities, respectively.

I t is obvious from these equations thata change from an

energy representation to a density representation has intro-

duced some interesting changes in the apparent structure of

images. There is no longer a restriction upon the range of the

representation. T o see this fact compare (1) with (16). The

mannerinwhichthebasiccomponents

of thesceneare

combined' has been changed from multiplication to addition

(compare (4) and (19)). Finally, the scene components them-

selveshavebeenchangedfromanenergyrepresentationto

a density representation.

I n the case of the reflection component the transformation

to a density representation is a very satisfactory one. This is

so, becauseto a greatextentthephysicalproperties of an

objectwhichdetermineitsabilityto

reflectlightarethe

densities of thelightblockingmaterialsfromwhichitis

formed. The situation is similar to that of the photographic

transparencyasdescribedin (9)-(12). Thusbyusing (19)

thephysicalproperties of anobjectarerepresentedmore

directly than in (4).

The single most important effect of using a density repre-

sentation is that it makes the structureof images compatible

with the mathematical structure of linear processing systems.

This fact is true, because linear systems obey additive super-

position and from (19) we see that the basis for the structure

of a densityrepresentation of animageisadditivesuper-

position.

To build upon this observation consider Fig. 3 in which a

density image is being processed by a linear system. The in-

put of thesystemisgivenasin

(19). I t follows fromthe

property of superposition in linear systems that the output

must be given in (20)

where the primes indicate processed quantities. But (21) is in

the same form as (19). W h a t (20) says is that the basic strucwhere the hatted variables represent density and the unhattedture of a density image is preserved by any linear processor. variables represent intensity. All density representations are More specifically the illumination componentof the processed the same except for a scale factor and an additive constant. image is theprocessedilluminationcomponentandthere-

V. RELATIONSHIPSBETWEENPROCESSING, STRUCTURE,-ARENPDRESENTATION

flectioncomponent of theprocessedimage is theprocessed

reflection component.

Forcomparisonconsidertheeffect

of a linearsystem

A study of the use of a density representation for images upon an intensity image. The input is given in (4). I t is clear

leads to a chain of interesting observations. These observa- thatthenotion of structurepreservationcannot be main-

tions begin with the introduction of density representations tained in this case. What is even more embarrassing is the

into the previous discussion concerning the structure of ideal fact that there is little guarantee that the outpuwt ill be posi-

images. This introduction change(1s )-(4)s

tive and nonzero which it must if it is to be regarded as an

image a t all.

Becauseanimagecarriesinformation,andbecausein-

formationcanbemeasuredusingconcepts

of probability,

4 Actually i o is just a constant of proportionality on the image intensity and can beneglected if oneconsidersnormalizedimagesonly. Also k can be absorbed into the logarithmic and exponential transformations by adjusting the base being used.
The minimum reflection density using the common logarithm would almost never exceed 2.0. See footnote 1.

it is interesting to consider the probability density functions
6 The concept of a n illuminationdensitymay seem strange at the outset but provesto be an important mathematical concept even though it maybe difficult to assign it anyphysical significance.

832 3 0 0 0 0.0

2 0 0 00.0

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, JULY 1972

0.0

INTENSITY

1.0

0.0

INTENSITY

I .o

( 4 (b)

Fig. 4. Intensity histograms of 100 bins each obtained from high quality images carefully digitized to 340 by 340 samples using
12 bit/sample. (a) Three wide dynamic range scenes. (b) Two Scenes of less dynamic range (approx. 30:1).

15000.0

10000.0

2.0 1.0

0.0

2.0 1.0

DENSITY (a)

DENSITY (b)

Fig. 5 . Density histogramsof 1 0 0 bins each obtained from thesameimages as in Fig. 4.

0 .o

Fig. 6. An intensityimageas processed by amultiplicative system. Again the basic structureof the image is preserved and the output is a p r d illumination times a processed reflectance.

The nearly symmetric distributions of Fig. 5 imply a more efficient use of the information carrying capacitoyf the binary code, a rectangulardistributionbeingidealinthisrespect. In addition,thesymmetricdistributionsaremorenearly alignedwiththeconventionalassumptionsassociatedwith signals in many theoretical studies.

whichareassociatedwithbothforms

of representation. T o

this end Fig. 4 shows histograms for images which were repre-

VI. MULTIPLICATIVSEUPERPOSITION IN IMAGEPROCESSORS

sented by intensities and F5igs.hows histograms for the same For some purposes it is important to be able to tohfinakn

images as represented by densities. These images were ob-

image as represented by intensities. I t is absolutely essential

tainedusingverycarefulmethodsfromveryhighquality

to do so when sensing an image to begin with or when repro-

digital images.

ducing an image for observation. In these cases it is possible

I t isinstructivetocomparethehighlyskeweddistribu-

to retain the match between the structure of images and the

tions of Fig. 4 with the more nearly symmetric ones of Fig. 5. structure of processors by combining :he concepts embodied

The fact that a density representation of an image tends to in Figs. 2 and 3. This situation is depicted in Fig6.. The input

fill the representation space more uniformly than an intensity is given as in (4). I t follows from (20) and (15) t h a t

representationimpliessomeimportantadvantagesforthe former. For example, consider the problem of digitizing either

+03 > I,,,' = exp (f,,,') = exp (f,,; P,.,') > 0 (21)

representation by means of a quantizer using a binary code. which by the properties of the exponential function becomes

STOCKHAM:IMAGEPROCESSING IN CONTEXT OF VISUAL MODEL

833

tems. The basic obstacles have been a lack of understanding of thehumanmechanismisntermds escribablebythe availabletheoryandthedifficultyinstudyingthehuman mechanisms which are involved.
The philosophy that any communications system, whether man-made or natural, has structure and that that structure shouldbematched to thecommunicationstask a t hand, seemstoprovide a steppingstoneforunderstandingthe operation of some of these systems. In this regard we would like to take the concept of a multiplicative image processor and explore its possible relationship to the known properties of early portions of the human visual system.
I n manyrespectsthemultiplicativeimageprocessors previously described and their canonic form as represented in Fig. 6 bearaninterestingresemblancetomanyoperational characteristics of the human retina.' The presence of a n a p proximately logarithmic sensitivity in vision has been known for some time [3]. Even more readily evident, and mechanized throughtheprocess of neuralinteraction, is the means for linear filtering [SI, [4].

A . Logarithmic Sensitivity

Fig. 7. Two grayscales.8 (a)Linearintensitysteps. (b) Linear density steps.

The fact that light sensitive neurofnirse a t rates which are proportionaltothelogarithm of thelightenergyincident upon them has been measured for simple animal eyes [3, pp.

> >m IZlu='e x p (&I) . e x p (t'l,u') 0.

246-2533. Similarexperimentswithhumanbeingsarein-
(22) convenienttosaytheleast,buttherearesomeinteresting

But in analogy with (21) we have

experiments that serve asa partial substitute. The most convincing of these is the so called "just noticeable difference"

iz,; = exp (&,')

(234 experiment[SI. In thisexperimentanobserverisaskedto adjust a controllablelightpatchuntilitisjustnoticably

and brighter or darker than a reference light patch. The experi-

Y ~ , ~=' e x p (t'z,,').

(23b) menter then steps his way through the gamut of light inten-
sities from very bright to very dark. The step numbers are

So substituting (23) into (22) we get

then plotted as a function of the intensity of the reference

light.Theresultingcurve is very close tologarithmicover

several orders of magnitude of intensity.

which is in the same form as (4). Again the basic structure of the image is preserved. How-
ever,thistimethemultiplicativesuperpositionwhichcharacterizesthestructure of anintensityimageiscompatible with the mathematical structure of the processor of Fig. 6. I t follows that Fig. 6 depicts a class of systems which obey multiplicativesuperposition[2].Besidesdemonstratingthe preservation of structureforintensityimages (24) also re-

For a direct but less objective demonstration of this relationship consider the gray-scale stepss presented in Fig. 7. I n Fig. 7(a) the scale consists of equally spaced intensity steps. I n Fig. 7(b) the scale consistosf exponentially spaced intensity steps which is the same as equally spaced density steps. The scaleinFig.7(b)appears as a morenearlyequallyspaced scale than that of Fig. 7(a) so that the eye appears to respond more nearly to densities than to intensities.

veals the fact that a multiplicatively processed image is itself B. Linear Filtering through Neural Interaction positive and nonzero and thus realizable. This later observa-

tion transcends the fact that the system used to process the

Themechanismforlinearspatialprocessinginvisionis

inputdensitiesinFig. 6 islinear,becausetheprocessedin-

observed in the Hartline equations [4, pt. I , ch. 31, [3, ch. 11,

tensities are formed by exponentiating the processed densities pp. 284-3101. T h e effect of this processing can be observed by

regardless of how those densities were produced. The resulotf means of a number of simple optical illusions.

exponentiating a real density is always positive and nonzero.

The simplest of these illusions is known as the illusion of

Thispropertyofdensityprocessingiscalledtherealizable

simultaneous contrast9 and can easily be observed in Fig. 8.

output guarantee.

I n thisimage we observetwosmallsquaressurroundedby

largerrectangles,onelight,onedark. I n fact the two small

VII. MULTIPLICATIVSEUPERPOSITIIONNVISION

Although a greatdeal of sophisticatedandelaborate knowledge has been gained in the last several decades about theproblemofcommunicatingelectricallybetweenvarious sorts of automaticmechanisms,dissappointinglylittlehas been done to match the ultimate source and receiver, namely the human being, to this body of knowledge and these sys-

7 A recent, lucid, and elaborate discussion of these characteristics is presented by Cornsweet [3]. See especially chs. XI and XII.
8 This and several other test images shown here should be presented
using a calibrated display or calibrated photography. An uncertain but considerable distortion will have taken place during the printing of this paper. The reader must take this into account and estimate the possible degradation for himself.
For a more complete discussion see [3, pp. 210-2841.

834 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, JULY 1972

Fig. 8. The illusion of simultaneouscontrast.Thetwo are of exactly the same intensity.

small squares

squaresareexactlythesameshade

of gray.Theyappear

different,however,duetotheirsurroundings.Thisillusion

can be explained at least qualitatively by assuming that the

image has been subject to linear spatial filtering in whichlow

spatialfrequencieshavebeenattenuatedrelativetohigh

spatial frequencies. Filters of this type cause the averages of

different areas in one image to seek a common level. Since in

Fig. 8 the area of thelefthasadarkeraverage,it

will be

raised,makingtheleftsquarebrighter.Likewise,sincethe

area on therighthas a lighteraverage,it will be lowered,

making the right square less bright.

Another illusion can be observed by returning attentionto

Fig.7(b).Eachrectangleinthisgrayscaleisoneuniform

shade of gray. However, each rectangle appears to be darker

near its lighter partner and lighter near its darker partner.

Again the phenomenon can be explained at least qualitatively

by the assumption of linear spatial filtering.g

The final illusion to be discussed here is presented in Fig.

9. I t is known as theillusion of Mach bands [3, pp. 270-2841,

[4]. In this images there are two large areas, one light and one

dark but eachof a uniform shade. These two areas are coupled

by a linearly increasing density wedge (exponentially increas-

ing intensity wedge) as indicated in Fig. 9(b). The observer

will notice that immediatelyat the left and at the rigohftthis

wedge are a dark and light band as implied by Fig. 9(c). These

bands, known as Mach bands, can also be explained at least

qualitatively by linear processing.lO

DISTANCE

C. Saturation Efects
So far this discussion has implied that the linear spatial processingofdensitiescanexplain a number of visualphe-
*'Quantitative studies of this illusion are common.Unfortunately,
almost all of them employ a matching field or light which in turn perturbs the measurement considerably. Mach himself warned of this problem [4, pp. 50-54, 262, 305, 3221 and suggested that there is no solution. The psychophysical experiment to be described later is offered as a possible counter example to thsuisggestion.

DISTANCE

(C)

Fig. 9. The illusion of Mach bands. (a)Observethedarkandlight

bands which run vertically at the left and right of the ramp, respec-

tively. (b) Thetruedensityrepresentation

of the image. (c) The

approximate apparent brightness of the image.

STOCKHAX: IMAGE PROCESSING I N CONTEXT OF VISUAL MODEL

835

-I,,, log

-+ -* Wh A, L LINEAR IXtY

A /I
` l.x.v

Uniflolrutmutcnhionaematetpiloyon,nent

i moaf gaen

revfalterhicettohsammanoanocfpdrteoeg-anrel,at

nent. For example a blackpiece of paper in bright sunlight

will reflect more light than a white piece of paper in shadow.

logarithsmenicsitsivpiatytial

linear processing soturofim

Fig. 10. A possible approximate model for the processing characteristics of early portions of the human visual system.

Itnhper o p eern v i r o n m e nbto tshi t u a t i o ncso u lodc c uitnrh e same image at the same time, but an observer would always call the white paper "white" and the black paper "black" in spite of the fact that the black paper would be represented by

nomena. I t is clear that these visual phenomena are only observable if there isa proper amountof light available for their

a- higherintensitythanthewhitepaper.Thisvisualphe-

nomenoniscalledbrightnessconstancy.Moreover,

if

there

presentation. I t iscommonknowledgethatbelowcertain

werelowcontrastmarkings on eithersheet of paperthey

illumination levels one cannot see well if at all. The same is could be read in spitoef their insignificance with respect to the

true if illumination levels become too great.

total intensity scale.

T h e physicallimitations of anyvisualmechanismguar-

antee that saturation or threshold effects will occur if inten-

sity levels are raised or lowered far enough. In this respect

consideration of therelationshipbetweentheprocessing

of

\%'ith these facts in mind it is interesting to note that system of Fig. 10 tends to produce an output in which the anvyariationsinilluminationareindeedreduced.Thisis becausetheilluminationcomponentdominatestheFourier

the so,

densities and properties of vision must eventually include the effects of saturation.

spectrum of a density image at low spatial ffequencies while the reflectancecomponentdominates at highspatiaflrequencies. As a result,thespatiallinearfilteringpreviously

D. A Process Model f o r Early Portions of the Human Visual described reduces the illumination variations, because it at-

System

tenuates low frequencies relative to high frequencies. At the

same time the basic structure of images is preserved because

The preceding discussions suggest a model for the process- the model operates linearly on a density representation.

ingcharacteristics of earlyportions system."ThismodelisshowninFig.

of thehumanvisual
10. T h e o u t p u t I=,,'`

in

The more

detailed detail in

consequences [2, sec. VI.

of The

this situation re the use of

are described multiplicative

is a saturated versionof a linearly processed density represen- processorsfor thepurpose of simultaneousdynamicrange

tation.Thelinearprocessingispresumably

of the form in reduction and detail contrast enhancement is discussed and

which low spatial frequencies are attenuated relative to high demonstratedA. nexample

of animage possessingsome

spatial frequencies.

seriousdynamicrangeproblemsisshowninFig.

11 before

The most useful implications of this model do not come

and after such processing. Notice how the illumination is ex-

fromitsrelationshiptotheopticalillusionswhich

we have tremely variable from the outside to the insoifdethe building.

already discussed as much as from the operational character- I n t h e unprocessedimage,detailswithintheroomthough

istics it embodies. The operational characteristics in questionpresent in the original are obscured by the limited dynamic

centeraroundtheability

of thehumanvisualsystemto

range capabilitiesof the printing process you are now viewing.

maintain its sensitivity to patterns of relatively low contrast I n t h e processed image these details are present in spite of

in the context of a total image in which intensities are spread this limitation.

across a very large dynamic range,12 and its ability to preserve

an awareness of the true shades of an object in spite of huge

differenceisnilluminationh.loreovert,hesaebilitieasre

embodiedwithoutsacrificingthebasicstructure

of images

with respect to the separate physical components of illumi-

nation and reflectance!

If the illumination component of an image did not vary

in space, (4)wouldbecome

E. ModelandProcessCompatibility
Whentheimage of Fig. ll(b)isobservedt,hetotal processing system including the approximate visual model is that shown in Fig. 12 which combines Figs. 6 and 10. I n Fig. 12(a) the two linear systems which characterize the processor and the visual system are labeled H a n d V ,respectively. Fig. 12(b) shows the simplified exact equivalent system in which

= i.rz,u.
In this casela the dynamic ranogfean image would be limited to about 100:1, because i t would be determined by thereflectioncomponenta'loneP. roblemws ithsaturationeffects would be relieved if not avoided altogether. In addition the trueshade of anobjectwouldbereproduceddirectlyby I=,,.

as much merging of subprocesses as is possible has been per-

formed.Thenewcompositelinearsystemlabeled

H . V is

merely the cascade of the two previous ones.

Fig.12(b)demonstratesthecompatibility of thevisual

model and the multiplicative image processor. I t does so by

placing in evidence the fact that within the validity of the

model the experience of viewing a processed image is indis-

tinguishable from that of viewing a n unprocessed image ex-

ceptthatitis possible toalterthelinearprocessingper-

11 This model is representative of approximate processing character-

istics a t early stages onlyI.t is not intended as baiophysical or anatomical

modelfor any specificvisualmechanism orasan exactorcomplete

processing representation. In image processing some such model must be

assumed even if it is by default. The classical default assumption is that

of fidelity reproduction namely that like a n ideal camera the eye `sees"

what it sees.

The dynamic range of a n image is the ratio of the greatest to the

leastintensityvaluethereincontained.Ratiosin

excess of 1OOO:l are

often encountered by the eye or camera. 1s hi^ configuration, often sought at great expenSe ipnhotographic

and televisitoundios,

is claiflgllaehtdting.

formetdhrougthhme anipulation labeled H.

of thleineasrystem

F. ModelTestingandCalibration

The approximate visual model of Fig. 10 has been moti-

vated in the above by studying certain illusions, noting cer-

tain asoects of neural structure and neural measurement, and

byconcentratingattention "POn certain

and

a bpleer f o r m a ncchea r a c t e r i s t iTc smh.ios t i v a t icboaenn

sup-

836 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, JULY 1972

Fig. 11. A large dynamic range scene. (a) Before processing. (b) Afterprocessingwith a multiplicative processor adjusted to attenuate low and to amplify high frequency components of density. (Note: These and all other images in this paper are digital.)

(b)
Fig. 12. Total processing systemincluding visualmodelwhenviewing Fig. 11(b). (a) Unsimplifiedsystem. Procewd intensities appear a t the vertical dottedline. (b) Simplified system with processors merged.
Ib)
Fig. 13. Total processing system when viewing a n image which has been subject to a multiplicative processor the linear component of which has been adjusted to be the inverse of the linear component of the visual model. (a) H is exactly the inverse of V . (b) H is the inverse of V except for a constant of propoxtionality g.

An experiment designed to find an H which would simul-

taneously cancel the optical illusions described above can be

carriedoutwithsignificantsuccess[6].Bycomparingthe

pattern of Fig. 14 with Figs. 8 and 9 one can see that this

patternstronglyinducestheillusionsinquestion8

If one

processes this pattern by means of a multiplicative processor with the system H adjusted according to (26)

a = v-'

(26)

one obtains a pattern which appears to have little remaining illusion phenomena.
Such a processed pattern" is shown in Fig. 15. T h e illusionshavebeensignificantlysuppressed,andtheapparent brightness of Fig. 15 follows the profile of true densityof Fig. 14 remarkably well. Thedegreetowhichtheillusionshave been suppressed provides additional support for the model of Fig. 10. I n addition an estimate of the system V results as a byproduct since (26) can be solved forV in termsof the actual H used in the experiment.
I t shouldbenotedthattheaboveresultssupportthe logarithmic component of the model and its position in the system because the cancellation of the illusions depends upon the neutralization of the exponential componentof the multiplicativeprocessor. LVithout thisneutralizationFig.12(a) could not be reduced to Fig. 12(b).
Although one mightfind a system H that would cancel the illusions for a single fixed pattern, it has been shown that the experiment succeeds about equally well for all patterns such

portedby a testingexperimentwhichissuggestedbythe situation depicted in Fig. 12. If the system H were adjusted tobecometheinverse of the system V , the system of Fig. 12(b) could be further simplified as shown in Fig. 13. In this situation it should not be possible to observe the optical illusions described above and portrayed in Figs. 8 and 9.

14 Here the commentsof footnote 8 must be considered most seriously since the illusion cancelling experiment is a sensitive one and gray-scale distortions can upset it easily. The calibrated print sent to the publisher
appears as describedin the text. A limitednumber of such calibrated
prints are available to readers with sufficient interest and requirements.
As published here the pattern should be viewed approximately at arms
length.

STOCKHAM:IMAGE PROCESSING I l i CONTEXT OF VISUAL MODEL

837

r
ccn,
f W 0 W 3
a
I-

DISTANCE
(b)

DISTANCE (b)
I

o)
wcn
z
I-
I
0 a
m

t
z aY a a8
IA
a

DISTANCE
(C)
Fig. 14. Pattern for use intestingandcalibratingthevisualmodel. (a) Observe the illusions of simultaneous contrast a.i3, y, and Mach bands 6. e. (b) The true density representation of the image. (c) The approximate amarent brightness of the imam.

DISTANCE
(C)
Fig. 15. The pattern of Fig. 14 processed for the suppression of optical illusions. Compare with Fig.14. (a) Appraise theamounts of remaining simultaneous contrast a,0, y,and Mach bands 8 , e. (b) The true densityrepresentation of the processed image. (c) Theapproximate apparent brightness of the processed image a s observed from a calibrated print. Curve taken as a subjective consensus from five knowl-

838 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, JULY 1972

0.0 Since the test patterns varied only in one dimension, the

development of a one-dimensional linear system forH was all

that was required.le The one-dimensional frequency response

of that system is shown along with its inverse in Fig. 16. I t

follows from two-dimensional Fourier analysis that under the

- assumption that the two-dimensional frequency response of the eye model has circular symmetry, the curveof Fig. 16(b)

a

1
X

represents a radial cross section of t h a t two-dimensional fre-

quency response. Specifically

V(R)= V(X).

(27)

0.0 0.1

1.0

IO.. 0

63.0

RADIAL FREQUENCY I N

CYCLES / DEGREE

I .o

In addition the two-dimensional point spread function of the

system V can be determined either from theBessel transform

of V ( R ) or fromthetwo-dimensionalFouriertransform

of

the surface of revolution generated by V ( R ) .

I t is interesting to compare the frequency response char-

acteristicsobtainedherewiththosedeterminedelsewhere.

Anexcellentsummarydiscussionandassociatedreferences

are available [3, ch.12, pp. 330-3421. In this respect there isa

marked similarity between the approach taken here and the

work of Davidson [3, ch. 12, pp. 330-3421 in which problems

with both logarithmic sensitivity and spatial interference be-

tween test patterns and matchingfields are avoided."

One might wonder what the world would look like if the

eye did not create the illusions that we have been discussing.

In this regard consider Fig. 17 which bears the same relation

to Fig. ll(a) as Fig. 15(a) bears to Fig. 14(a).

a >I

0:o 0.I

1.0

10.0

6 3.0

RADIAL

FREQUENCY I N
(b)

CYCLES / DEGREE

Fig. 16. Frequency response of one-dimensional systems used in test of eye model. (a) Response of system H for cancelling illusions. (b) Relative response of system V as estimated from H .

VIII. IMAGE QUALITAYND THE VISUALMODEL
Imagequalityis a complicatedconceptandhasbeen studied in a varietyof ways and contexts. In most situatiaons final measure of quality can be defined only in the subjective sense. I t canbemeasuredonlyapproximatelyandwith difficultybymeans of slow andexpensivetestsinvolving human observers. As the understanding of the human visual mechanism grows, objective measures become more feasible. So i t is that with the aid of the visual model of Fig. 10 it is possible to define such a measure of image quality. By virtue of the discussions presented in Section VI1 one expects this measure to be related to some basic subjective considerations. An objective measure is defined by measuring the difference between a distortedimageanditsreferenceoriginal,only after each has been transformed by the model.Anexample of such a definition based on a mean-square error measure is given in (28)

asFig.14notjusttheoneshownhere.Alternately,ithas

beenshownthatthecancellationofFig.

15 holdsacross a

wide range of the constant of proportionality g in which the

processed patterns have enough dynamic range to be clearly

visible andnot so muchdynamicrange so as toproduce

saturation effects.'h

The actual linear system H used intheexperimentde-

scribed above was found by a cut-and-try procedure wherein

an initial estimate was refined through successive rounds

of

processing,visualevaluation,andsystemredesign.

16 Since the cancelation of these illusions requires only that the a p parent brightnesses of Fig. 15 take on a profile of a certain rclalioc shape, the true value of E in (26) and in Fig. 13(b) cannot be determined. Thus V can onlybe estimated towithin an unknown constantof proportionality.

JJE* =

[V,,, 0 (log I,,, - log R,,,)]2dxdy (28)

16 For thepurpose of this experimental effort the linear system portion of the eye model w a s assumed to be position invariant. Since peripheral and central (foveal)vision possess quite M e r e n t resolution properties, this assumption falls short of reality and leaves room for further retinements. For this reason and because the cancellation of illusions as shown in Fig. 15 might be improved we have not given an analytic expression for our present best estimate for V ( R ) as part of (27). Tentatively we are using
V ( R ) = 742/(661 fRr) - 2.463/(2.459 -I-R')
where R is the radial spatial frequencyin cycles per degree. See Fi1g.6(b). See also [7].
17 One canstill find fault with thesemethods, because the test patterns used do not fill the visual field and so there is still interaction between them and the surround which is uncontrolled. See also footnote 16.

STOCKHAM: IMAGE PROCESSING I N CONTEXT OF VISUAL MODEL

839

for a variety of reasons i t is a t least desirable to employ a

density representation to provide part of the resistant effect.

One reason is that no disturbance can violate the propertyof

densityprocessingwhichguarantees

a realizableoutput.

Another is that since the eye is logarithmically sensitive, it

considers errors on a percentage basis. Because disturbances

andistortiontsentddoistributtehemselveusniformly

throughout the range of a signal, they represent extremely

large percentage distortions in the dark areas of an intensity

image. To make matters worse, as can be seen from the in-

tensity histograms of Fig. 4,dark. areas are by far the most

likely in intensity images.

These effects can be observed most readily when images

arequantizedinpreparationfodr igital

processing. The

classicallyfamiliarquantizationcontoursaremostvisible

in the dark areas of intensityrepresentedimagesbutdis-

tribute nearly uniformly in density represented images. As a

result, the useof a given number of bits to represent an image

produces more readily observable quantization distortion in

the form of contouring when an intensity rather than a den-

sity representation is employed. Indeed, for images of large

dynamic range the disparity can be very great.18

As an illustration of the issues presented in this section

Fig. 17. The scene of Fig. ll(a) processed for the suppression of optical considerFigs. 18 a n d 19.Fig. 18 showsthedigitaloriginal

illusions. Compare with Fig. 11 (a).

of Fig. ll(a) in combination with white noise with a rectan-

gular probability density function. I n each of the three differ-

ent combinations shown the peak signal to peak noise ratio

where E is the objective measure, Vz,yis the two-dimensional wasexactlythesamenamely

8:l. T h e noisedisturbsan

pointspreadfunction of thevisualmodeli,stheimage

intensityrepresentationinFig.18(a), a densityrepresenta-

beingmeasured,and Rz,v isthereferenceoriginal.Forex-

tion in Fig. 18(b), and a model-processed image in Fig. 18(c).

amples of the use of such an objective measure see Sakrison For additional discussion and examples see [6].

and Algazi [ 7 ] and Davisson [8]. Since the model emphasizes

Fig.19showsanotherimagequantizedto

4 bit (i.e., 16

certain aspects of an image and deemphasizes certain others equally spaced levels exactly spanning the signal range). The

in a manner approximately the same as early portions of the quantizationdisturbsanintensityrepresentationinFig.

human visual system, distortions which are important to the 19(a), and a density representation in Fig. 19(b).

observer will be considered heavily while those which are not

will betreatedwithfar lessweight.This will be so even

IX. SUMMAARNYD CONCLUSIONS

thoughtheimportantdistortionsmaybephysicallysmall

T h e discussionps resentedinthips apecroncentrated

and the unimportant ones physically large, which is frequenutlpyon the structure of images and the compatibility of t h a t

the case.

structurewiththeprocessesusedtostore,transmit,and

LVith the above ideas in mind it becomes clear that whenmodifythem.Theharmony

of densityrepresentationand

an image is to be distorted as a result of the practical limita- multiplicative processing with the physicsof image formation

tions which characterize all transmission, storage, and processw- as emphasized and special attention was drawn to the fact

ing mechanisms it makes sense to allow such distortions to

that early portionsof the human visual system seem to enjoy

take place after the image has been transformed by the model.that harmony. A visual model based upon these observations

The image can then be transformed back again just before it was introduced anda test yieldinga calibration for the model

is to be viewed. For exampleif an image bandwidth compres- was presented. Finally, an objective criterion for image qual-

sion scheme is to be implemented it probably makes much

ity based upon that model was offered and some examples of

bettersensetoinvokethatschemeuponthemodel-trans-

the use of the model for protecting images against disturbances

formedimagethanuponthephysicalintensityimage.The

were given.

motivationsforthisargumentarenotentirelysubjective.

During the past five years these concepts have been de-

Sincethemodeltransformationemphasizesthereflectance

velopedandemployedin

a continuingprogram of digital

componentsanddeemphasizestheilluminationcomponents

image processing research. Their constant use in guiding the

of a scene, it renders that scene more resistant to disturbing

influences on certain physical grounds as well, because it can

bearguedthatthereflectancecomponentisthemoreimportant one.

la The number of bits needed to represent an image cannot properly be determined withoutspecifying a t least the quality and charactoefr the

For some applications it may be inconvenient to transfoorrmiginal,the kind of processing contemplated,thequality of the final

an

image

by

meanosf the

complete

visual

model

before

expos-

display, the representation to Similarly, the numberof bits

be used, and the dynamic range involved. to be saved byusing a density instead of a n

ing it to disturbing influences, because the processing power intensityrepresentation givena fixed subjectivedistortiondepends a t

required to mechanize the linear portioofnthe model might be

least on the dynamic range in question. In the lighoft the quality obtainable with present technology the "rulesof thumb" which have been popu-

somewhat high in terms of the present technology. However, larly used in the past should be regarded with caution.

840 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, JULY 1972

Fig. 18. Noisy disturbance in the context of three different representations. Peak signal to peak noise is 8: 1 in all cases. (a) Disturbed intensities. (b) Disturbed densities. (c) Disturbed model-processed image. Compare with Fig. 1 1 (a).

basic philosophy of the work has resulted in an ability to ob- Continuing research is attempting to include within the

tain high and consistent image quality and to enhance and

model the aspects of color and time and to enlarge upon the

simplify image processing techniques as they were proposed. model in the context of visual processes which take place a t

Their ability to provide engineering insight and understandingpoints farther along the visual pathway. I t is hoped that en-

complementary to existing ideas has been an invaluable aid ilnargementsandrefinements of the model will continueto

planning and in problem solving.

suggestusefulimageprocessingtechniquesandthatdigital

STOCKHA": IMAGEPROCESSING I N COXTEXT OF \-ISUAL MODEL

841

(b) (C)
Fig. 19. Quantization distortion in the context of two different representations. In both cases 16 equally spaced levels exactly spanning the signal range were used. (a) Quantized intensities. (b) Quantized densities. (c) Original.

signalprocessingmethods will continuetopermittheinvestigation of those techniques which might be too complex to be explored without them.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT I wish to thank the peoplewho have helpedmeinthe course of the image processing research which has led to the ideas presented here. I am grateful toA . V. Oppenheim for his

theory of homomorphic filtering, which for me is the sine qua

non of theseviews. ManythanksarealsoduetoC.

M.

Ellison, D. hl. Palyka, D. H. Johnson, P. Baudelaire,

G. Randall, R. Cole, C. S. Lin, R. B. LVarnock, R. LY.Christ-

ensen, hl. Milochik, KathyGerber,andtothemany

too

numerous to name who have given encouragement, interest,

and ideas. Special appreciation goes to my wife Martha who

has given me unceasing support.

842 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 60,NO. 7, JULY 1972

REFERENCES
[ l ] T. S . Huang, W. F. Schrieber, and 0. J. Tretiak, "Image processing," Proc. JEEE, vol. 59, pp. 15861609, Nov. 1971.
[2] A. V. Oppenheim,R. W. Schafer,and T. G. Sto$ham, Jr., "Nonlinear filtering of multiplied and convolved signals, Proc. I E E E , vol. 56, pp. 1264-1291, Aug. 1968.
[3] T. N.Cornsweet, VisualPerception. New York: AcademicPress, 1970.
[4] F. RatliR, Mach Bands: Quanfifafioc Studies on Neural Nefworks in fheRetina. SanFrancisco,Calif.:Holden-Day, 1965.
[SI L. M. HurvichandD.Jameson, The P n c e p t h of Brighfness and

Darkness. Boston,Mass.:AllynandBacon, 1966, pp. 7-9.
[a] T. G. Stockham, Jr., "Intra-frame encoding for monochrome images
by means of a psychophysical model based on nonlinear filtering of multiplied signals," in Proc. I969 Symp. Picture Bandwidth Compression, T. S . Huang and 0. J. Tretiak, Eds. New York: Gordon and Breach, 1972.
[7] D. J. Sakrison and V. R. Algazi, "Comparison of line-by-line and twodimensionael ncoding of randomimages," IEEETransI. nform. Theory, Vol. IT-17, pp. 386-398, July 1971.
[8] L. Davisson, `Ratedistortion theory and applications, this issue, pp. 800-808.

ImageRestoration: The Removal OF Spatially
InvariantDegradations
MANMOHAN SONDHI

Abstract-This is a reviewof techniques for digital restoration of

images.Opticalandotheranalogprocessorsarenot

discussed.

Restoration is considered fromthe point of view of space-domain as

well as of spatial-frequency-domaindescriptions of images. Consid-

eration is restricted to degradations arising fromnoise and spatially

invariantblurring.However, many of the space-domain methods

apply, withminormodifications,tospatiallyvarying blur as well.

Some examples of restoration are includedto illustrate the methods

discussed. Includedalso is a section on methods whose potentiahl as

not yet beenexploited for image restoration.

a blurredimage b ( x , y) of p . Werestrict our discussion t o

thosesituationswheretheblurringisequivalenttolinear

spatially invariant filtering. Thus

+4x7 r) = b ( x , Y) 4 2 ,r)

(1)

where

J-b ( x , y ) = = d x ' J l d y ' h ( x - x', y - y')p(x', y'). (2)

-w

I. INTRODUCTION

TH E F I E L D of image restoration in the modern sense of the term began in the early 1950's with the work of MarCchal and his co-workers [l].Although the possi-

Here h ( x , y) (oftencalledthepointspreadfunction)isthe response of the blurring filter to a two-dimensional unit impulse 6(x)6(y).
In terms of the model of image degradation expressed by

bility of optical spatial filtering had been demonstrated by the (1) and (2) we define the restoration task as follows: With d

experiments of AbbC and Porter some fifty years earlier, it wagsiven, utilize the availablae priori information aboutn,It, and

MarCchawl hofirsrtecognizeditspotentiaflorestoring

p to make agood estimate $ ( x , y) of p . The various restoration

blurred photographs. His success stimulated others to study

schemes differ from each other in the assumed a priori infor-

image restoration from the poinoft view of optical compensa- mation aswell as in the criterion by which the goodneosfs the

tion of the degradations. In the past few years the versatility estimate is judged.

of the digital computer has been brought to bear upon the

The assumption that d isavailableforprocessingisnot

problem, with promising results. With digital processing it is strictlyvalid.Assuminginstantaneousshutteractionand

possible to overcome many inherent limitations of optical fil- negligible noise, the total exposure in the image plane is pro-

tering and, indeed, to explore new approaches which have no portionalto d. R h a t isrecorded,ingeneral,isanonlinear

conceivable optical counterparts.

function of the exposure (e.g., the H-D curve [3] for photo-

In this paper we describe various digital techniques avail- graphicemulsions).Therefore, d mayplausiblybeassumed

able for the restoration of degraded optical images. Except

available only over a small range around the average expo-

for references to various exampleosf optically restored images sure. I t is possible to accurately measure the nonlinear func-

we exclude optical processing [2] from our discussion.

tion by using standard gray scales. Such a measurement can

We consider imaging under incoherent illumination only

be used to recover d over a larger dynamic range. However,

andrepresentimagesbytheirintensitydistributions.Let

any attempt at extending this range must ultimately be frus-

# ( x , y) represent the original undistorted picture image. We

trated by a drastic increase in thenoise level.

assume d to be the resultof adding a noise intensity n ( x , y) to

Our assumption that noise is additive is also subject to

criticism. Many of the noise sources (e.g., stray illumination,

Manuscript receivedDecember 7, 1971; revised March 6, 1972.
The author is with Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., Murray Hill, N. J. 07974. Presentlyhe is aGuestScientist at the Department of Speech Communication, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, during the academic year1971-1972.

circuit noise, roundoff) may be individually modeled as additive. However, because they occur both before and after the nonlinear transduction previously mentioned their effect on d may be assumed additive only over a small dynamic range.

