JOURNAL OF SPORTPSYCHOLOGY, 1983,s. 302-313
Take Me Out to the Ballgame: The Effects of Objective, Social, and Temporal
Performance Information on Attendance at Major League Baseball Games
Michael A. Becker and Jerry Suls State University of New York at Albany
Two studies examined the relationship between objective, social, and temporal performance indices and fan support of major league baseball teams. In the first study, per game attendance figures for 22 major league teams were regressed on the performance indices. Attendance was found to be positively related to objective and social performance and negatively related to temporal performance. These results were replicated in the second study when season ticket sales for five major league teams was the dependent variable. Although the objective and social results were consistent with expectations, the negative relationship between temporal performance and fan support was unexpected. Primacy effects and regression toward the mean are offered as explanations for this latter finding. The results of both studies are considered in terms of the optimum marketing strategy for professional team sports.
A variety of factors have been found to affect fan attendance at professional sporting events. For instance, Jordon (cited in Bogart, 1972) identified 15 variables that influence such attendance. These include ticket prices, weather, and the presence or absence of radio and television broadcasting. No11 (1974) calculated a series of regression equations that revealed that attendance at major league baseball, basketball, football, and hockey games is related to such variables as population, income, the number of star players on the home team, and the number of other professional teams located in the city. Similarly, Demmert (1973) performed regressions demonstrating that, among other factors, demand for seats at major league baseball games is related to population, the presence or absence of a new stadium, the availability of alternative sports entertainment, and the number of years the team has been in the city.
There is also theoretical and empirical support for a relationship between attendance at professional sporting events and the quality (ability) level of the home team. For instance, Sloan (1979) reviewed theory and research regarding the attraction of sports for fans and concluded that "winning [is] a very real and predominant feature
Requests for reprints should be sent to Michael A. Becker, Department of Psychology, State University of New York, 1400 Washington Avenue, Albany, NY 12222.

EFFECTS OF PERFORMANCE ON ATTENDANCE

303

in [fans'] desires for sport" (p. 257). Empirical investigations of this issue have employed several different measures of team quality. However, these measures have all typically involved either objective or social standards.
Objective evaluation implies that fans base their determination of team quality on some absolute standard. For instance, Quirk and El Hodiri (1974) state that "the playing skills of a team are assumed to be the sum of the playing skills of its players" (p. 34). Canes (1974) elaborates this point as follows:

Team skills are the physical skills of players-how fast they run, how hard and
accurately they throw or hit a ball, how high they jump. . .An appropriate index
of skill would include measures of player running speed, strength, reflex action, and so forth. @. 93)
However, the typical fan does not have such information available to h i d h e r . Furthermore, the difficulty of meaningfully updating, integrating, and summarizing such data would make analyses of this sort quite impractical.
Objective evaluation can also be accomplished in a second, more direct manner. Such measures as the percentage of games won and the number of games over .500 are readily available indices of a team's absolute ability level. For instance, a winning percentage of .500 would imply something quite different about a team's ability than a winning percentage of .300 or .750. Indeed, Noll(1974) computed separate regression equations for professional basketball, football, and hockey teams and found a positive relationship between team winning percentage and home attendance in each case.
The determination of team quality on the basis of social standards (cf. Festinger, 1954; Suls & Miller, 1977)involves comparing relevant aspects of a team (e.g., wonloss record; how well the individual players function as a cohesive unit; team statistics such as batting average, goals per game, etc.) with those of other teams in the league and, based on the outcome of these comparisons, determining team ability. Social comparison based on league standings would be particularly useful in this regard, as this information is readily available through the mass media. Jones (1969) cites the Chicago Blackhawks of the National Hockey League as a prime example of the relationship between social performance and attendance. Indeed, attendance steadily increased from 22% of seating capacity in 1956-1957when Chicago finished in last place (in a 6-team league) to 92% of capacity in 1962-1963 when Chicago finished in second place. Noll (1974) using "games behind the leader" (GBL) at the end of the season and Demmert (1973) using an index based on GBL at several points in the season as predictor variables have also demonstrated a positive relationship between attendance levels and social indices of team quality.
A third, although unexamined, consideration may be the team's temporal sequence of performance. This mode of evaluation determines team quality based on a comparison of the team's present and past success. Suppose, for example, that Team 1 won 40% of its games in the first third of the season while Team 2 won 60%. Furthermore, assume that these records were reversed in the second third of the season (i.e., Team 1 won 60% of its games and Team 2 won 40%). Although the teams have identical records (-500) two-thirds of the way through the season, the differing patterns of temporal performance may lead one to anticipate different outcomes in the remaining games. In the first instance temporal comparison reveals team improvement and, based on this fact, continued success might be expected. Conversely, tem-

304 BECKER AND SULS
poral comparison of Team 2 reveals deterioration and likely leads to a negative expectation regarding future success.
Given the lack of data concerning the relationship between temporal performance and attendance, one aim of the present study was to collect some preliminary information on the role of temporal comparison in attracting spectators to the ballpark. Toward this end, home attendance figures for major league baseball teams were regressed on a measure of these same teams' temporal performance histories. Furthermore, since previous work has not directly assessed the relative effects of objective versus social information on attendance levels, objective and social ability indices were also entered into the regression equation. It was hypothesized that attendance would be positively related to team quality as determined by each of the three criteria. However, no a priori predictions were made regarding which type(s) of information would have the greatest impact.
STUDY 1
Method
Teams
Data were entered into the regression equation for those major league baseball teams that existed for all seasons between 1969 and 1979, inclusive, and that were located in just one city throughout this timespan. Of the current 26 major league teams, 22 met these qualifications. The excluded teams were the Toronto, Seattle, Milwaukee, and Texas franchises.
Procedure
Design. Yearly records and attendance figures were obtained from the Office of the Commissioner of Major League Baseball. Objective, social, and temporal performance indices were subsequently calculated for each of the 22 teams for the years 1970to 1979. These indices were then simultaneously entered into a regression equation with the corresponding seasonal per game home attendance figures as the dependent variable.
The 1970 season is a natural breakpoint in that divisional play was introduced in major league baseball the preceding year. Because it was felt that this switch from two 10-teamleagues to four 6-team divisions and the accompanying expansion might itself significantly influence attendance levels, data collection was restricted to the indicated timespan. To take into account the idiosyncratic effects of a particular team, teams were coded as a set of dummy variables and also included in the regression equation.'
'An additional regression that also included yearly metropolitan population figures as a predictor variable supports the utility of this approach. When the population variable was entered into the equation along with the other predictors, the obtained B for population was outside the range of allowable values (B = 2.27). A subsequent check for multicollinearity showed that the multiple correlation between the set of dummy variables representing the qualitative variable "team" and the population figures was .99878. Thus, the use of team dummy variables

EFFECTS OF PERFORMANCE ON ATTENDANCE

305

VariableDescriptions. The availability of team standings (which typically consist of won-loss records, winning percentages, and GBL) in the mass media assures that even the casual fan will have some idea of how many games the home team has won and lost during the ongoing year. Additionally, prior research (Noll, 1974) has already established a positive relationship between a team's won-lost record and same-season attendance. Based on these facts, the present study operationalized the objective quality measure as a team's winning percentage for the current season. For example, a team that won 92 games and lost 70 games during the 1976season had an objective score of .568 matched with its 1976 average attendance level.2
Analagous with the objective index, the social comparison index was seen as the number of percentage points that a team finished behind the first-place team in its division during the current year (or, if a team won its division, the number of percentage points it finished ahead of the second-place team). For example, the Houston Astros won 54.9% of their games in 1972 and the division-winner had a winning percentage of .617. Thus, the 1972 social score for the Astros was - .068.
Similarly, the temporal comparison index was the difference between a team's winning percentage last year and during the current season. That is, an improvement in winning percentage was assumed to represent a positive temporal comparison, and a decrement in performance a negative one. The Los Angeles Dodgers, for example, won 60.5% of their games in 1977 but only 56.8% in 1976. A temporal score of +.037 was therefore entered into the multiple regression equation along with the corresponding Dodgers attendance figure for 1977.

Results
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 contain the means and standard deviations for the continuous independent and dependent variables. The results of the multiple regression can be found in Table 2. Inspection of this latter table reveals that the objective and social indices are both related to attendance in the predicted manner. Furthermore, this table shows that the magnitude of the objective coefficient (B = 561) is greater than that of the social coefficient (B = .176). The temporal performance index is also significant but is in the nonpredicted direction.
The set of dummy variables also contributed to variability in the dependent
variable, F(21,195) = 18.29, p < .001. Thus, as anticipated, the teams differed in
the number of spectators that they typically attracted to their home games. The multiple R for attendance and the four predictor variables (i.e., the set of team dummy variables and the three ability measures) is 378, indicating that the predictors account for a total of 77.05% of the variance in home attendance.

eliminated the necessity of including population in the equation. In fact, our use of team dummy variables was predicated on the expectation that this strategy would efficiently represent a number of relatively stable team-related variables of this type (e.g., the presence or absence of a new stadium, the number of other professional teams located in the city).
2Each team was scheduled to play 162 games each season. However, rainouts and the players' strike of 1972 resulted in somewhat fewer games actually being played in some seasons for some teams.

BECKER AND SULS
Table 1 Means and Standard Deviations for the Continuous Independent and Dependent Variables

Objective performance
Social performance
Temporal performance Per game attendance Season tickets

507
- .082
.OOO
16,915.49
-

.069 .084 .063 7,121.78
-

.495
- .I01
.OOO
17,869.14
6,596.10

.064 .080 .058 7,997.63 5,116.00

Discussion
Consistent with previous work (Demmert, 1973; Jones, 1969; Noll, 1974), the present analysis found that both the objective and the social ability measures were positively related to attendance levels. Given the greater magnitude of the objective coefficient, it appears that a team's absolute performance level is a stronger determinant of perceived team quality, and thus of attendance, than is a team's relative standing within the league. The magnitude of the temporal coefficient was also greater than that of the social coefficient. Surprisingly, however, improvement in temporal performance was found to impact negatively on attendance- if a team improved relative to its own prior record, the number of paying spectators at home games actually decreased. To clarify this and the other performance-attendance relationships, a further analysis was performed in Study 2.
STUDY 2
Past research conducted to examine the factors affecting fan support of professional sports have typically used final attendance figures as the dependent measure. However, there appear to be at least three problems with this method.
First, a variety of factors other than team quality (e.g., the closeness of the pennant race, specific promotions such as "bat day," the record of the visiting team, the number of radio and television broadcasts) have been found to exert at least a marginally significant impact on game-by-gameticket sales (cf. Demmert, 1973; Jordon, cited in Bogart, 1972; Noll, 1974). To the extent that information regarding these variables is unavailable, predictor equations are incomplete and important interrelationships are possibly masked. Thus, the true relationship between the ability indices and attendance cannot be ascertained with any accuracy under such circumstances. It is possible, for instance, that superior social performance encourages increased television broadcasts and that this additional exposure attracts new fans to the ballpark.

EFFECTS OF PERFORMANCE ON ATTENDANCE
Table 2 Standardized and Unstandardized Coefficients for the Regression of Attendance on the Predictor Variables

Variable

Unstandardized regression
coefficient (b)

Standardized regression
coefficient (B)

Standard error of b

F

Objective record Social record Temporal record Baltimore Orioles Boston Red Sox California Angels Chicago White Sox Cleveland Indians Detroit Tigers Kansas City Royals Minnesota Twins New York Yankees Oakland A's Atlanta Braves Chicago Cubs Cincinnati Reds Houston Astros Los Angeles Dodgers Montreal Expos New York Mets Philadelphia Phillies Pittsburgh Pirates St. Louis Cardinals San Diego Padres Constant

Notes. n = 220. df = 1,195 for each F ratio.
The omitted team category was the San Francisco Giants. Thus, the F values for the
team dummy variables refer to comparisons against per game attendance at Giants
games for the years 1970 to 1979.
The F for the set of dummy variables is 18.29, df = 21,195, p < .001. ' p < .05. " " p < .01.
* * * p < .001.

A second problem is that a team's performance over the course o f a season usually changes. Slumps and winning streaks, a team "coming o f age" midway through the season o r "choking" i n the last weeks, improvement after a trade or deterioration following a key injury, are as much a part of baseball as stolen bases, home runs, and fastballs. Because fan support might be expected to vary as a function o f such shortterm performance, an analysis o f the performance-attendance relationship that

308 BECKER AND SULS
utilizes only global measures of attendance and performance clearly provides an incomplete picture.
The third issue concerns the relative availability of temporal versus objective and social performance information that may exist during an ongoing season. While the presence of current team standings in the newspaper, pennant race analyses in the mass media, office conversation, etc., assures that fans have access to social and objective information, ability-related information from prior years is probably less salient. Thus, we cannot be sure that fans fully utilize temporal criteria when forming their impressions of team quality during an ongoing campaign. It is possible, in fact, that the negative relationship that was obtained in Study 1 between temporal performance and attendance is somehow an artifact of informational bias.
Study 2 attempted to resolve these problems by defining fan support as the number of season tickets sold for a forthcoming season. Purchase of such a ticket "buys" one the same seat for all or a team-designated portion (e.g., only night games) of the team's home games for that season. This operationalization of fan support appears to have several advantages over the traditional method in terms of per game attendance. Because season tickets are typically purchased before a season begins, the purchase of such seats is not affected by factors such as added television dates, specific promotions, and the closeness of the pennant race.3 Indeed, since complete information of this sort is not readily available, it was believed that season ticket sales would be more sensitive to variations in perceived team quality than would game-by-game sales.4 Additionally, since season ticket sales are generally not affected by short-term performance patterns (see footnote 3), the present strategy precludes confounding from this source. Finally, the use of season ticket sales resolves the problem of the greater saliency of objective and social versus temporal information that may exist during an ongoing season.
Method
Teams
Written requests for season ticket sales information for the years 1971 to 1980 were sent to all 26 major league baseball teams. Five teams complied with this re-
'Although season tickets can sometimes be purchased on a pro rata basis after the season has begun, the vast majority of such tickets are bought prior to the start of play for that year. For instance, the ticket director of the St. Louis Cardinals reports that of over 4,000 season tickets sold each year for Cardinals games, only 20 to 120 of them are sold after the season begins (Bertani, Note 1).
4We readily acknowledge that a number of dedicated fans will always support their team, regardless of anticipated or past performance. Furthermore, these "hard core" fans are probably relatively likely to hold season tickets. Thus, one may argue that season ticket sales is actually less sensitive to variations in perceived team quality than is per game attendance. However, a comparison of the means and standard deviations for the two attendance measures (see Table 1) mitigates against this possibility. Because economic and social factors (e.g., season ticket prices, time commitment) greatly limit the number of fans who might be expected to purchase season tickets, the possible range for season ticket sales is in effect truncated relative t o what might be expected for game-by-game sales. Thus, the greater variability of season ticket sales relative to its mean supports our contention that this measure is indeed a sensitive index of perceived team quality.

EFFECTS OF PERFORMANCE ON ATTENDANCE

309

quest (viz., Houston Astros, Los Angeles Dodgers, Minnesota Twins, San Diego Padres, and St. Louis Cardinals) and thus comprise the sample on which subsequent analyses are based. Of the remaining 21 teams, 15 did not answer the authors' letter, one sent incomplete information, and five declined to supply the requested information by stating that the information was not readily available and/or such information is confidential. This low response rate is similar to that encountered by other researchers seeking to obtain information about the economics of professional sports (cf. Demmert, 1973).
It is important to note that these five teams do not appear to differ in any important respects from the other major league baseball clubs. In fact, their performance records reveal that they are almost identical to those of the larger pool of teams (see Table 1).
Procedure
Season ticket sales for the years 1971 to 1980 were regressed on the corresponding objective, social, and temporal performance indices from the previous seasons. For instance, when the dependent variable quantity was a team's season ticket sales for 1976, the objective measure was the team's 1975 winning percentage, the social measure the number of percentage points that the team had finished behind the division leader in 1975 (or, if a team had won its division, the number of percentage points it had finished ahead of the second-place team), and the temporal measure the difference between the team's winning percentages in 1974 and 1975. As in Study 1, teams were coded as a set of dummy variables and also included in the regression equation.

Results
Table 3 contains the results of the multiple regression, and reveals a positive relationship between season ticket sales and social performance and a negative relationship between season ticket sales and temporal performance. Table 3 also shows that objective performance had a positive but statistically nonsignificant effect on the number of season tickets that were sold.
The set of dummy variables also contributed to variability in the dependent vari-
able, fl4,42) = 27.55, p < .001. The multiple R for season tickets and the four
predictor variables was .884, indicating that the predictors account for a total of 78.16% of the variance in season ticket sales.
An additional analysis involving the regression of per game attendance for the five teams on the predictor variables was also undertaken. This revealed a positive relationship between attendance and the objective index, B = .534, F(1,42) = 9.21,
p < .01, a negative relationship between attendance and the temporal index, B = - .244, F(1,42) = 9.75, p < .01, and a nonsignificant relationship between atten-
dance and the social index, B = .197, fl1,42) = 2.16, n.s. The set of team dummy variables also contributed to variability in the dependent variable, fl4,42) = 27.98,
p < .001, and the multiple R was -928.

Discussion
The second regression in Study 2 closely paralleled the multiple regression that was performed in Study 1 with 22 teams. In both instances, objective performance was

BECKER AND SULS
Table 3 Standardized and Unstandardized Coefficients for the Regression of Season Tickets on the Predictor Variables

Variable

Unstandardized Standardized

regression

regression Standard

coefficient (b) coefficient (6) error of b

F

Objective record Social record Temporal record Houston Astros Los Angeles Dodgers Minnesota Twins San Diego Padres Constant

Notes. n = 50. df = 1,42 for each F ratio.
The omitted team category was the St. Louis Cardinals. Thus, the F values for the team dummy variables refer to comparisons against season ticket sales for Car-
dinals games for the years 1970 to 1979. The F for the set of dummy variables is 27.55, df = 4,42, p < .001.
* p < .05. * * p < .01. * * * p < .001.

positively related to attendance while temporal performance and attendance were negatively associated. Although social performance was positively related to attendance in Study 1, this relationship failed to become significant in Study 2. Nevertheless, the standardized regression coefficient for social performance was actually greater in Study 2 (B = .197) than it was in Study 1 (B = .176).
When season ticket sales was used as the dependent variable, the objective (B = .324) and social (B = .360) coefficients were nearly equal in magnitude. However, the large standard error associated with the objective index resulted in this coefficient being statistically nonsignificant. Thus, while social and objective performance are both positively related to fan support, their comparative impact is dependent on the criterion variable (per game attendance or season ticket sales) employed.
Study 2 was conducted in part to clarify the relationship between temporal performance and fan support. When a negative attendance-temporal performance relationship emerged in Study 1, it was proposed that this may have been an artifact of the use of per game attendance as the dependent variable. However, the negative relationship between these two variables was even greater in Study 2 (B = - .313) than it had been in Study 1 (B = - .234). In fact, this coefficient was nearly equal in magnitude to the objective and social coefficients when season ticket sales was used as the measure of fan support. Instead of the fan support-temporal performance relationship being attenuated or reversed when fans have the opportunity to fully utilize temporal criteria during the lag between seasons, the negative association between these variables is apparently strengthened under these conditions.

EFFECTS OF PERFORMANCE ON ATTENDANCE
DISCUSSION
Social comparison has been found to play an important role in self-evaluation of abilities (cf. Festinger, 1954; Suls & Miller, 1977). The present results extend these findings by suggesting that such comparison may also be an important determinant of perceived team quality. Although we did not directly measure fans' assessments of the ability levels of socially successful versus socially unsuccessful teams, it is plausible that such assessment mediated the obtained relationship between social performance and fan support. Similarly, it is reasonable to believe that ability evaluation based on a team's objective record mediated the relationship between this entity and attendance.
While the negative relationship between temporal performance and fan support was unexpected, the available evidence indicates that this is a reliable finding-the effect was strongest under those conditions where temporal information should have the greatest impact (i.e., when season ticket sales, rather than per game attendance, was the dependent variable). Two tentative explanations for this finding are discussed below.
Jones, Rock, Shaver, Goethals, and Ward (1968) conducted a series of experiments in which subjects observed a stimulus person respond to 30 verbal items. Although the stimulus person always solved 15 items correctly, her performance either improved, deteriorated, or was random over the course of responding. Jones et al. consistently found that subjects judged the descending performer to have more ability than either of the other two stimulus persons. That is, a primacy effect was obtained such that subjects weighted initial performance information more heavily than later information when forming their impressions of performers' intellectual ability. A primacy effect of this type would account for the present findings-if fans give more weight to performance information from the prior season than they give to more recent information, judgments of team ability will be biased in the direction of last season's performance. When a team improves for two consecutive seasons, or deteriorates 2 years in a row, a positive relationship will emerge between temporal performance and attendance (assuming, of course, that a positive association between prior objective performance and fan support holds). On the other hand, when a team's record deteriorates after having previously improved, or improves after having previously deteriorated, a negative relationship between temporal performance and fan support will emerge.
To determine the extent to which these various patterns actually existed, the raw data were analyzed for the number of occurrences of improvement-improvement
(+ +), deterioration-deterioration (- -), improvement-deterioration ( + -), and
deterioration-improvement (- +) across all teams. As revealed in Table 4, and con-
+ +sistent with a primacy explanation, the number of occurrences of - and - patterns was substantially greater than the number of occurrences of + + and - - pat-
terns for both the entire sample of 22 teams, x2(7) = 199.74, p < .001, and the subset of five teams, x2(7) = 29.84, p < .001.
Secondly, it is possible that improvement in performance implies poor ability while performance deterioration actually implies relatively great ability. Because teams that have previously performed poorly have the greatest room for improvement, and teams that have previously performed well approach a performance ceiling, the concept of regression toward the mean implies that improvement in inferior teams and deterioration in superior teams is likely. If fans hold this perspective, they

BECKER AND SULS
Table 4 Frequency of Occurrence of Various Patterns of Temporal Performance

22 Teams

Pattern

Frequency

5 Teams

Pattern

Frequency

Notes. + indicates improvement in temporal performance.
- indicates deterioration in temporal performance.
0 indicates no change in temporal performance. The first symbol indicates the change in temporal performance from year 1 to year 2 and the second symbol represents the change in temporal performance from year 2 to year 3.
may associate temporal improvement with poor team quality and temporal deterioration with superior team quality, thus being more likely to support deteriorating, as compared with improving, teams. As with the previous proposal, this alternative merits further attention in the interpersonal as well as in the team realm.
Regardless of the specific mechanisms involved, the present results have interesting implications for the marketing of professional sports teams. Throughout the year, and particularly during preseason, players and other team representatives can be heard to remark on "how much the team has improved" or "how many more games this year's team will win than last year's team." The results of the present analyses clearly suggest that such comments are not the best way to attract spectators to the ballpark. In fact, the present results indicate that actual or predicted improvement in temporal performance should be downplayed. Additionally, these results suggest that the optimum marketing strategy would emphasize the team's objective and social records when they are superior and downplay them when they are inferior.
Reference Note
1. Bertani, M. Personal communication, January 26, 1981.
References
Bogart, L. Television's effects on spectator sports. In M.M. Hart (Ed.), Sport in the socioculturalprocess. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C. Brown, 1972.

EFFECTS OF PERFORMANCE ON ATTENDANCE

313

Canes, M.E. The social benefits of restrictions on team quality. In R.G. Noll (Ed.), Government and the sports business. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1974.
Demmert , H.G. The economics of professional team sports. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath,
1973. Festinger, L.A. A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 1954, 7 , 117-140. Jones, E.E., Rock, L., Shaver, K.G., Goethals, G.R., & Ward, L.M. Pattern of performance
and ability attribution: An unexpected primacy effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 10, 317-341. Jones, J.C.H. The economics of the National Hockey League. Canadian Journal of Economics, 1969, 2, 1-20. Noll, R.G. Attendance and price setting. In R.G. Noll (Ed.), Government and the sports business. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1974. Quirk, J., & El Hodiri, M. The economic theory of a professional sports league. In R.G. Noll (Ed.), Government and the sports business. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1974. Sloan, L.R. The function and impact of sports for fans: A review of theory and contemporary research. In J.H. Goldstein (Ed.), Sports, games, andplay: Social andpsychological viewpoints. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1979. Suls, J.M., & Miller, R.L. (Eds.), Social comparisonprocesses: Theoretical and empiricalperspectives. Washington, DC: Hemisphere, 1977.
Manuscript submitted: October 18, 1982 Revision received: January 17, 1983

