Multivariable Feedback
Control—Analysis
and Design

by SIGURD SKOGESTAD
and IAN POSTLETHWAITE

Multivariable Feedback Control—
Analysis and Design approaches
multi-input, multi-output feed-
back control design for linear
systems using the paradigms,
theory, and tools of robust con-
trol that have arisen during the
past two decades. The book is
aimed at graduate students and
practicing engineers who have a
basic knowledge of classical con-
trol design and state-space con-
trol theory for linear systems. A basic knowledge of matrix
theory and linear algebra is required to appreciate and
digest the material offered. 

Wiley, 2005 
ISBN 0-470-01167-X
US$145.00 (hardcover), 
ISBN 0-470-01168-8
US$72.00 (softcover), 
608 pages.

This edition is a revised and expanded version of the
first edition, which was published in 1996. The size of the
book  has  been  increased,  not  by  the  number  of  pages,
which decreased from 559 to 574, but by a 20% increase in
the  page  size.  The  revision  has  left  intact  the  original
style, approach, and goals. This edition contains revisions
of  almost  all  chapters,  including  minor  corrections,
improvements,  and  new  material.  In  chapters  5  and  6,
recent  results  on  fundamental  performance  limitations
have been added. Chapter 10 has been reorganized, while
Chapter 12 on linear matrix inequalities is new. All Mat-
lab  programs  have  been  updated  and  made  compatible
with the Robust Control Toolbox.

The  book  cohesively  brings  together  three  important
conceptual  achievements  of  the  field  of  control:  1)  multi-
variable feedback design, including a deep understanding
of  its  achievements  and  limitations,  2)  the  concepts  of
uncertainty in plant behavior and uncertainty modeling as
a  natural  part  of  a  model-based  approach  to  control
design,  and  3)  the  synthesis  of  feedback  dealing  with
uncertainty  models  using  H∞ and  µ-synthesis  tools.  The
book shows that the multivariable control design involves
several phenomena not present in single-input, single out-
put (SISO) control design, such as interaction among loops,
directionality,  and  multivariable  zeros.  The  incorporation
of uncertainty in the design process can be seen as a major
achievement,  not  only  from  a  technical  point  of  view  but
also as an educational issue. Uncertainty plays a major role
in many fields of engineering, and the field of control is in
the favorable position of having a theory available on how
to make approximate uncertainty models and how to deal
with them as part of the design of the feedback loop. The
book  teaches  how  to  assemble  the  individual  uncertainty
models  using  the  standard  plant  concept  and  shows  that

control design with H∞ and µ-synthesis tools is suited for
dealing with the uncertainty concepts. 

These  tools  require  a  certain  level  of  mathematics  to
define  signal  classes,  norms,  convexity,  system  factoriza-
tions, and the like, an effort well worth the price. The book
provides  the  necessary  insights  and  basic  facts  of  knowl-
edge, and yet the character of the book is design oriented,
not mathematical. This format gives the book considerable
strength. The main results are formulated with great preci-
sion in a theorem format, and a proof is included when the
reasoning  behind  a  proof  amplifies  understanding  of  the
notions  involved.  Additional  results  are  stated  without
proof, and reference is made to other sources such as [1].
This  approach  makes  the  book  a  fine  example  of  how
mathematical  notions  can  be  creatively  used  as  building
blocks  in  a  design  approach,  where  engineering  students
experience control design as a suite of mental steps. 

Many examples and exercises are scattered throughout
the  text,  and  Matlab  m-files  are  provided  for  the  main
computational  steps.  The  frequency-domain  specification
of uncertainty and performance weights in the H∞ and µ-
synthesis approaches take advantage of insights available
in  classical  control  design.  As  such,  the  concepts  used  in
the book are easily grasped, and the use of classical control
intuition is combined with computations that do the actual
work.  For  almost  all  design  steps  discussed  in  the  book,
computational implementations are available in the Robust
Control Toolbox.

The authors have a strong background in research in the
theory and application of multivariable and robust control.
Sigurd Skogestad’s research work has concentrated on the-
oretical issues in the design of multivariable and robust
control with applications to chemical reaction and separa-
tion processes. A second influence in the book is the suc-
cessful British school of multivariable control at Manchester
and Cambridge. The authors make clear that better theoret-
ical understanding of key concepts of multivariable and
robust control is the key toward better designs, and
throughout the book this idea acts as a stimulus for the
somewhat abstract and advanced ideas involved.

CONTENTS
Multivariable  Feedback  Control—Analysis  and  Design begins
with a chapter on classical control from a modern perspec-
tive, followed by a chapter dealing with basic properties of
multivariable  feedback  systems.  This  chapter  introduces
many topics that are discussed more deeply in later chap-
ters.  The  focus  is  on  multivariable  frequency  response
analysis using the singular value decomposition, sensitivi-
ty  functions,  relative  gain  analysis,  and  the  role  of  multi-
variable  right-half  plane  zeros.  Two  examples  stress  the
relevance of input uncertainty in multivariable control.

Chapter 4 on linear systems provides basic theory need-
ed in the following chapters. For many readers this theory
may be familiar material, but the selection of topics exactly

80 IEEE CONTROL SYSTEMS MAGAZINE » FEBRUARY 2007

1066-033X/07/$25.00©2007IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on October 21, 2008 at 08:36 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

fits the needs of the book. Chapters 5 and 6 go into detail
by treating achievable control performance, depending on
uncertainty  and  robustness  properties.  This  topic  is  first
considered for SISO systems by building intuitive knowl-
edge  about  the  concepts  involved,  followed  by  a  more
technical  treatment  dealing  with  the  multivariable  case.
These  chapters  discuss  feedback  limitations  imposed  by
time  delay,  phase  lag,  right-half-plane  zeros,  unstable
poles,  input  constraints,  and  uncertainty.  Although  the
uninitiated reader may have the impression that feedback
has  only  limitations,  the  development  creates  important
background knowledge for control law design part as well
as  issues  such  as  sensor  and  actuator  placement,  control
structure  design,  controller  implementation,  and  embed-
ded control structures.

Chapters 7 and 8 discuss uncertainty modeling as well
as the analysis of robust stability and robust performance.
The generalized plant is a key concept in the analysis, and
uncertainty  is  represented  by  real  and  complex  perturba-
tions. In the face of multiple perturbations, the structured
singular value is shown to be the basic analysis tool. Using
D-K iteration, the control analysis is extended to a control
synthesis  (design)  step  by  solving  a  sequence  of  scaled 
H∞ problems.  Chapter  9  is  on  controller  design  concen-
trating on tradeoffs in feedback design. The H∞ solution is
given  in  several  variants  such  as  S/KS  mixed  sensitivity
designs.  Also  linear  quadratic  Guassian  design  followed
by loop transfer recovery is discussed. Also included is the
Glover/McFarlane approach to H∞ loop-shaping design. 
Although chapters 7–9 form the culmination of the book,
there are four additional chapters with material that broad-
ens the approach. Chapter 10 discusses control structure
design, which is an important subject from an applications
point of view but difficult to present coherently and system-
atically in a single chapter since an underlying theory of
structure selection is not available. Yet the authors have
done a remarkable job explaining control layers, configura-
tion selection, decentralized control, and classical structures
such as cascade control. In addition, relations between struc-
ture selection and performance limitation indicators such as
right-half-plane zeros are discussed. 

Chapter 11 considers model reduction, which is necessi-
tated by the design methods presented in the book. In par-
ticular,  µ synthesis yields controllers whose order is the
sum of the orders of the model and weighting functions,
which is generally impractically high. Consequently, this
chapter focuses on truncation and residualization of
balanced forms, as well as on Hankel-norm reduction.
Chapter 12 provides an introduction to linear matrix
inequalities (LMIs), which arise in the synthesis proce-
dures. Although the chapter is short, it provides a basic
introduction to the theory and a single example. Chapter 13
discusses applied control design for three case studies,
namely, helicopter flight control, gas turbine control, and
distillation process control. The book contains appendices

on matrix theory, signal and system norms, and subjects
such as linear fractional transformations.

EVALUATION
Multivariable  Feedback  Control—Analysis  and  Design pro-
vides a well-balanced, effective, and efficient treatment of
robust multivariable control, well suited for graduate stu-
dents and for engineers in industry. The book concentrates
on  creating  an  understanding  of  the  underlying  concepts
and  then  formulates  the  problem  in  mathematical  terms.
This  approach  works  well  and  creates  synergy  between
building intuitive understanding and exploiting theoretical
insight. The Matlab routines available in the Robust Con-
trol Toolbox are expected to handle all computations nec-
essary  in  the  various  design  steps.  Because  the  book  can
rely on this toolbox, there is no need to have much materi-
al  on  computational  algorithms  in  the  book,  although
some numerical issues are discussed, such as the necessity
of  proper  scaling  and  conditioning  of  model  representa-
tions.  However,  for  larger  industrial  robust  control  prob-
lems  in  high  dimensions,  solving  the  numerical  issues  is
the key to success.

Apart  from  being  an  excellent  textbook,  the  book  has
several  other  merits  that  make  it  a  valuable  gem  in  the
field of systems and control. The book combines high stan-
dards  regarding  precise  formulations  and  mathematical
correctness  with  being  creatively  design  oriented  and
accessible  for  those  having  only  a  classical  control  back-
ground. The designs that the authors have in mind are full-
scale industrial multivariable designs, where only the best
concepts and tools bring success, and this message is heard
throughout the book.

The  contents  of  the  book  can  already  be  viewed  as
“classical  robust  control  design,”  and  the  book  has  con-
tributed substantially toward bringing the field of control
to  this  point.  Finally,  the  book  sets  a  firm  international
standard for the level of a graduate course in multivariable
robust control.

Okko H. Bosgra

REVIEWER INFORMATION
Okko H. Bosgra obtained his M.S. degree with research
diploma  from  Delft  University  of  Technology,  The
Netherlands. From 1980–1985 he was professor of systems
and control at Wageningen University, and since 1986 he has
chaired the Mechanical Engineering Systems and Control
Group at Delft University of Technology. Since 2003 he has
held a joint appointment at Eindhoven University of Technol-
ogy, The Netherlands. His research interests are in applica-
tions of robust control and system identification to the areas
of process control and motion control. 

REFERENCE
[1] K. Zhou, J.C. Doyle, and K. Glover, Robust  and  Optimal  Control. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on October 21, 2008 at 08:36 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

FEBRUARY 2007 « IEEE CONTROL SYSTEMS MAGAZINE 81

