Computational Ecology and Software, 2011, 1(4):240-243
Short Communication
A fitter use of Monte Carlo simulations in regression models
Alessandro Ferrarini
Department of Evolutionary and Functional Biology, University of Parma, Via G. Saragat 4, I-43100 Parma, Italy E-mail: sgtpm@libero.it, alessandro.ferrarini@unipr.it
Received 17 August 2011; Accepted 22 September 2011; Published online 1 December 2011 IAEES
Abstract In this article, I focus on the use of Monte Carlo simulations (MCS) within regression models, being this application very frequent in biology, ecology and economy as well. I'm interested in enhancing a typical fault in this application of MCS, i.e. the inner correlations among independent variables are not used when generating random numbers that fit their distributions. By means of an illustrative example, I provide proof that the misuse of MCS in regression models produces misleading results. Furthermore, I also provide a solution for this topic.
Keywords Monte Carlo simulations; regression models; correlated independent variables.
1 Introduction The Monte Carlo method was invented in the 1940s by John von Neumann, Stanislaw Ulam and Nicholas Metropolis, when they were working at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (Metropolis and Ulam, 1949; Eckhardt, 1987). Thenceforward, the Monte Carlo method has been frequently employed in many scientific fields (Fishman, 1995; Hammersley and Handscomb, 1975; Rubinstein and Kroese, 2007).
In this article, I focus on the use of Monte Carlo simulations (MCS) in regression modelling, which is a very frequent application in biology, ecology, medicine and economy as well. I'm interested in enhancing a typical fault in this use of MCS, i.e. the correlations among independent variables are not used when generating random numbers that fit their distributions. The misuse of MCS in regression models can lead to misleading results. In this view, I provide a solution for this topic.
2 The MCS in Regression Modelling The typical use of MCS within regression models in ecology, biology and economy is as follows: a) a deterministic relation between Y and (X1...Xn) is found; b) the distributions of X1...Xn are fitted from sampled data along with distribution parameters; c) for each independent variable X1...Xn, m random numbers are simulated that follow the distribution properties of the previous step. As a result, a (m rows * n columns) matrix of simulated independent data is available; d) the deterministic relation between Y and (X1...Xn) is applied to the previous matrix. As a result, m simulated values for Y are generated;

IAEES

www.iaees.org

Computational Ecology and Software, 2011, 1(4):240-243

241

e) the resulting distribution for Y is examined for reasonable assumptions about the nature of uncertainty expected from the model and source data.

3 How It Should Be The previous framework neglects to use a pivotal information present within the source data, i.e. the correlations existing among independent variables. This is a inner property of sampled data that can't be ignored, because it's at least as meaningful in representing the system under study as the other parameters considered in the MCS of regression models.
If the simulated (m rows * n columns) matrix of simulated independent data does not possess the same correlations as the starting sampled data, hence it does not represent the system under study and the resulting outcomes about the real nature of Y are not correct. Hence two further steps are required within the previous framework: correlations among X1...Xn must be calculated, and then integrated within the simulation of m random numbers for X1...Xn.

4 An Illustrative Example Let's suppose that X1...Xn have distributions as depicted in Table 1.

Table 1 Supposed distributions of independent variables X1...X5

In addition, let's suppose that correlations exist among variables as showed in Table 2. Since 4 variables out of 5 are not Gaussian-like distributed, a Spearman's non-parametric coefficient for continuous data is the most correct.
Table 2 Supposed correlations among independent variables X1...X5

Last, let's say to have found a regression model as follows: Y = 2.3*X12 + 6.4*X2*X3 + 7.2*X4 /X5
IAEES

(1)

www.iaees.org

242 Computational Ecology and Software, 2011, 1(4):240-243
Now, I'll follow two ways. Firstly, I'll generate 5000 values for X1...Xn just following distribution properties of Table 1 (i.e., typical use of MCS in regression models). Secondly, I'll generate 5000 values for X1...Xn that also take into account correlations of Table 2 among variables. See online supplementary material for the Excel spreadsheets of both approaches.
To do this, I've used the algorithm by Iman and Conover (1982) to generate sets of intercorrelated random deviates. The paper of Iman and Conover is highly recommended reading. To this aim, I've coined an Excel worksheet named CorrMCS that applies all the previously-depicted MCM steps along with the algorithm by Iman and Conover. CorrMCS is able to perform both the typical use of MCS in regression modelling, and the improved approach proposed here to better fit the system under study. When applied to the previous example, results are listed in Table 3.
It's clear that using correlated or uncorrelated MCS produced different results, both with regard to Y's predicted range and mean-modal values.
Table 3 Results for Y basing on a) correlated, and b) randomly correlated Monte Carlo simulations

I add several hints: a) the improved MCS approach is as necessary as the number of independent variables increases; b) I suggest to use only significant correlations (p<0.05 or p<0.01) among X1...Xn when using the improved MCS approach; nonsignificant correlations should be set to 0 when generating Monte Carlo numbers; c) when generating Monte Carlo numbers, attention should be paid to the kind of correlations among X1...Xn . Pearson's r is correct only for Gaussian-like distributed sampled data.
5 Conclusions The misuse of MCS in regression models leads to very serious errors in ecology, biology, medicine and economy. I've developed the computer framework CorrMCS based on Iman and Conover's algorithm to overcome these tough mistakes. I provide consultancy to any research or working groups that need to correctly apply MCS in their experiments.
References Eckhardt R. 1987. Stan Ulam, John von Neumann, and the Monte Carlo method. Los Alamos Science, 15:
131­137 Fishman GS. 1995. Monte Carlo: Concepts, Algorithms, and Applications. Springer, New York, USA Hammersley JM, Handscomb D.C. 1975. Monte Carlo Methods. Methuen, London, UK

IAEES

www.iaees.org

Computational Ecology and Software, 2011, 1(4):240-243

243

Metropolis N, Ulam S. 1949. The Monte Carlo Method. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 44: 335­341
Iman RL, Conover W.J. 1982. A distribution-free approach to inducing rank correlation among input variables. Communication in Statistics - Simulation and Computation, 11: 311-334
Rubinstein RY, Kroese D.P. 2007. Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method (2nd edition). John Wiley & Sons, New York, USA

IAEES

www.iaees.org

