The Statistical Analysis of Temporal Resolution in the Nervous System
Stuart Geman stuart geman@brown.edu Division of Applied Mathematics
Brown University Providence, RI 02912 Asohan Amarasingham asohan@andromeda.rutgers.edu Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience
Rutgers University Newark, NJ 07102 Matthew T. Harrison mtharris@cmu.edu Department of Statistics Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Nicho Hatsopoulos nicho@uchicago.edu Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy University of Chicago Chicago, IL 60637
June 1, 2008
1

Abstract
The existence and role of fine-temporal structure in the spiking activity of central neurons is the subject of an enduring debate among physiologists. Are the timings of individual spikes, to within 10, 5, or even 1 millisecond, relevant to building the powerful representations that support cognition, or is the relevant time resolution closer to 20, 30, or 40 milliseconds? Certainly there are specialized systems and special circumstances that rely on precise timing, but are these the exception or the rule? Multi-electrode recordings are collecting evidence that bears on these fundamental questions, but the results to this point are far from definitive. To a large extent the problem is a statistical one: what inferences can be drawn from neurons monitored in the absence of full control over their presynaptic environments? Given that experiments with the best of designs and executions can hardly be expected to control the myriad of sources of trial-to-trial variability, what hope is there for extracting the invariants of neuronal responses, beyond a few coarse measures of excitation or inhibition? In principle, spike resampling methods can be devised to meet these challenges. We will focus on an approach to resampling known as jitter, which is based on a statistical notion of temporal resolution that is robust to statistical assumptions of repeatability, independence, or stationarity. We will provide an introduction and overview of jitter methods and their applications to the exploratory analysis of temporal resolution in multi-neuron recordings. We include tools for measuring an effective time scale, and we construct proper statistical tests for the existence of fine-temporal structure at any given scale.
1 Introduction
What is the temporal resolution of neuronal activity? What role does fine-temporal structure play in neuronal processing? Whereas millisecond resolution has been demonstrated in a multitude of special systems (the retina of several vertebrate species [44], the mammalian medial superior olivary nucleus [70, 62], the honeybee olfactory system [69], the bat sonar system [23], and the cat lateral geniculate nucleus [6, 19], to name a few), the significance of these observations to cortical processing in general is controversial [29, 58, 55, 68]. The advent of multi-electrode technologies and the feasibility of stable simultaneous recordings from multiple neurons in awake and performing animals now offer hope for meaningfully addressing these fundamental issues.
Many authors have argued that the useful information transmitted from one neuron to another, in the general cortical circuitry, is well described by the number of spikes, as measured over a ten or twenty millisecond interval, rather than the timing of the spikes, as might be measured at a one or two-millisecond resolution. The issue is unresolved. The physiological evidence does not yet favor one point of view over the other. On the one hand, we are able to associate firing rates of select cortical neurons

(as measured on a ten or greater millisecond scale) with numerous perceptual and motor states, such as a face in the visual field or the direction of limb movement. On the other hand, as we have already observed, there are indeed a multitude of systems, albeit highly specialized, which demonstrate and almost certainly require millisecond accuracy in spike timing. What is more, there is the often-repeated argument that neural representation must accommodate the relational structure among the parts of an action, a thought, a perceived object, or a scene, and that fine-temporal structure might offer a natural way to capture this kind of information [67, 1, 13, 61, 27].
In fact, even the definition of fine-temporal structure is problematic: What do we mean by "the nervous system operates on a millisecond time scale" or "there exists excess fine-temporal synchrony across neural populations, beyond what would be expected from the firing rates of individual neurons"? We will introduce a collection of statistical approaches to temporal resolution, based on spike resampling, collectively known as jitter methods. Although we will not emphasize hypothesis testing per se, we will relate jitter-based spike resampling to a corresponding collection of hypotheses, each formulated in terms of temporal resolution, thereby making available proper hypothesis tests and p values.
The analysis of neuronal data in an awake animal is made especially challenging by inevitable changes, from instant to instant and trial to trial, of the statistical nature of the recorded signal. The status of tens of thousands of pre-synaptic neurons, not directly influenced by the experimental paradigm, is largely out of the control of the experimenter; the environments of individual neurons are in constant flux. Thus time-honored assumptions about "repeated" samples (having similar or identical distributions), perhaps warranted in a slice preparation or an anesthetized and immobilized animal, become untenable in cortical recordings from awake and performing animals. The unique character of variability in a neurophysiological data set raises, in statistical terms, concerns of robustness. That is, the conclusion of a conventional statistical analysis of a spike train may be contaminated by the fact that trial-to-trial variability causes its underlying probabilistic model to be misspecified.
As we have argued elsewhere [8], it is our opinion that these observations essentially preclude the gathering of statistical evidence for a lack of precision in the cortical micro circuitry. Imprecision could arise from non-repeatability in the dynamics of individual neurons, or, equally well, from a failure to reproduce a neuron's trial-to-trial input. On the other hand, these observations do not preclude collecting statistical evidence against any given limitation on precision or repeatability.
We will formulate a definition of temporal resolution, and review the application of jitter methods for testing the hypothesis that neurons operate at or below any specified resolution. As with a number of other approaches, these procedures are based upon observations of precisely timed events in the spike record, such as a count of synchronous events across neurons. The challenge is to formulate an approach that properly evaluates the significance of the observations without explicitly estimating

trial-to-trial, much less instant-to-instant, firing rates of the participating neurons. After all, in light of our remarks about the non-repeatability of experimental trials, such estimations would be at best problematic.
The approach starts with a thought experiment, offered by our colleague Professor Elie Bienenstock of Brown University. Bienenstock imagines a pharmacological agent with the peculiar property that it modestly advances or retards every spike of every neuron, independently, for the duration of the drug's action. How large would the "jitter window" have to be in order to disrupt cortical processing? Would one feel the effect, or indeed would the brain even function, under a five-millisecond random change in the timing of every spike? How about ten milliseconds? Neuroscientists and the neuro-scientific evidence are divided. Nevertheless, in addition to taking a step towards a definition of temporal resolution, the thought experiment suggests a statistical approach to testing any given hypothesized limit on resolution. In particular, one could examine the spike times across two simultaneously recorded neurons, count the number of one-millisecond synchronies, and then repeatedly jitter each spike within a ten-millisecond window. How does the original synchrony count compare with the ensemble of counts generated by the random jitters? This is the beginning of a definition ("the system is said to operate at a resolution no finer than ten milliseconds if all positionings of spikes within plus or minus five milliseconds of their observed locations are equally likely") and of a statistical test ("reject the hypothesis that the system operates at a resolution no finer than ten milliseconds if the observed number of synchronies is rare in the distribution of synchronies generated by ten-millisecond jitters"). As it stands, this test is crude in that it does not accommodate even slow variations in an underlying firing rate, much less bursting or absolute and relative refractory periods. We will present a suite of tools for measuring and testing temporal resolution, despite the time-varying nature of neuronal excitability, the non-repeatability of trials, and the various phenomena, like bursting and refractoriness, that statistically tie together individual spikes.
In §2 we review a representative selection of existing statistical methods that address the problem of temporal resolution in neuronal activity, with special attention to jitter and other spike-resampling methods. In sections §3 and §4 we provide a step-bystep introduction to jitter-based methods, for estimating temporal resolution, "excess" synchrony, and other measures of precision, and we explore related formulas for making exact hypothesis tests about fine-temporal structure. Some concluding remarks and discussion are in §5.

2 Statistical Approaches to Temporal Resolu-
tion
It has by now been widely observed that the classical distinction between rate and temporal coding lies on a continuum and is more generally an issue of time scale [21, 54]. Putting aside the difficult issue of relating neural representation to explicit coding mechanisms, evidence regarding timing can commonly be drawn from statistical analyses of correlations between environmental or behavioral signals and spike counts measured on various time scales. One line of inference begins with the assumption that, in a given (suppose, experimental) context, the only source of statistical dependence between spikes is time (the "independent spike hypothesis" of Dayan and Abbott (2001), "rate coding" in Koch, (1999)). Such an inference is allied as well with a Poisson process model for spike trains. Many analyses utilize statistics superficially related to fine-temporal structure, such as synchrony counts, and compare the observed statistics with what would be expected under some variation of an independent-spike model, in the style of hypothesis testing. For example, one can estimate the rate function for two neurons by averaging across several repetitions of the neural response, or trials, in the same experimental context, and then compute the amount of synchrony expected under the independent-spike model. Then the expected synchrony can be compared with the amount of synchrony empirically observed. The JPSTH normalization discussed in Aertsen et al. (1989), for example, can be viewed from this perspective, and is still of contemporary use [57], as can many other techniques [64, 30, 31, 39].
Trial shuffling, or the shift predictor [50], is an alternative, model-free, or nonparametric, procedure which relaxes the independent-spike assumption, allowing for arbitrary dependencies within any one neuron's response on a single trial. This may be more credible at the least because generic spike phenomena such as bursting and the refractory periods are incompatible with the independent-spike hypothesis. Trial shuffling involves permuting (or shuffling) individual neural responses across trials to generate surrogate data sets. Statistics such as synchrony can then be compared between the surrogate data sets and the original one, as in a permutation test. The basic statistical assumption is that, while there may be arbitrary dependencies within a single neuron's response on one trial, there is no dependency across neurons. (Precisely, and more generally, the response of each neuron is assumed to be conditionally exchangeable across trials, given the response of the other neuron.) See [38, 18], for example, for contemporary applications.
We note, then, that the key underlying assumption ("null hypothesis") of these analyses is that the responses of two neurons are independent of each other. This assumption permits averaging across trials to estimate rates or the permutation of trials as in permutation tests, in order to compute a prediction of the synchrony expected on individual trials.

However, many authors have pointed out that the relevance of such analyses to the issue of time scale is unclear. The basic, quite plausible, counterexample is a slowly varying common input to multiple neurons such as due to background excitation or internal variables not controlled by the experiment. Another is latency variations [63, 10] wherein the "true" onset time with respect to a trial varies from trial to trial so that the responses of the recorded neurons are coupled with respect to (by) the experimental clock. Such effects are generally referred to as forms of trial-totrial variability. Several authors [15, 32, 12, 65] have observed or demonstrated that such effects, even while operating at coarse time scales, can contaminate fine timescale statistics such as synchrony, when assessed with respect to an assumption of independence across neurons. We provide a similar demonstration of this phenomenon below. Statistically, these coupled, but nonetheless slow, fine-scale effects violate the assumption of independence, and violate it in the direction of increased synchrony; it is perhaps unsurprising then, that these procedures can detect this violation. More diagnostically, the time scale of interest should not be dictated by the statistic (in this case, synchrony), but rather by the null hypothesis. Independence across neurons is the wrong null hypothesis.
Proposed remedies for this problem, while varying in detail and levels of sophistication, have principally been drawn from a parametric framework. Here a natural approach is to incorporate trial-varying parameters into a spike-train model and then to construct estimates and/or tests under the model. For example, Ventura et al. (2005a) decompose rate functions for individual neurons as Pr(t) = P (t)gr(t), which specifies a rate function for trial r. P (t) can be estimated, as before, by averaging across trials. The challenge is the estimation of gr(t), because only data from a single trial is available to estimate it. As Ventura et al. write: "Because there are often relatively few spikes per trial, there are relatively few data for fitting P~r(t), so that the deviations g~r(t) are highly variable. To reduce their variability, our next step is to identify a suitable low-dimensional representation of these deviations." They then construct a principal-components based representation for g~r(t) and proceed with estimation via generalized linear models and testing via bootstrap techniques. (Some alternative choices of low-dimensional representation are enumerated in Ventura et al.; see also Brody (1999), Ben-Shaul et al. (2001), and Pauluis and Baker (2000), for some other implementations.) In such approaches, the basic dilemma is a conflict between the issues posed by trial-to-trial variability and estimation. This dilemma almost certainly requires, either explicitly or implicitly, strong modeling assumptions, and leads again to a question of interpretation. Does rejection using a synchrony statistic in such a test indicate that there is fine-temporal structure, or does it reflect, instead, the particulars of the model?
As an alternative to synchrony-type statistics, many studies have examined more general patterns of precisely timed spiking relationships, often among simultaneously recorded neurons [4, 2]. Here one examines the number of occurrences of sequences of

spikes (among multiple neurons) with a fixed order of occurrence and specified interspike intervals, and other statistics of similar form. A typical statistic, for example, might be the total number of patterns involving a fixed number of spikes which repeat a minimum of k times in the sequence [2]. Significant values for such statistics are assessed by models and approximations in the direction of the stationary Poisson process [2, 52, 66, 24]. Both Oram et al. (1999) and Baker & Lemon (2000) argue that the findings in such studies are confounded by artifacts such as nonstationarity, trial-to-trial variability, and refractory period-induced structure. Each presents a resampling algorithm to control for these effects and to argue that they are sufficient to account for an apparent excess number of repeating patterns in a V1 study [46] and a motor-cortex study [11].
One of the interesting discoveries in nonparametric statistics is the availability of hypothesis tests in the absence of an explicit probabilistic model, and therefore absent the necessity of estimating model parameters, when hypotheses are characterized by invariance assumptions [42, 53]. Such techniques are bound to be especially appealing in situations where data are sparse and estimation error thus likely to be substantial. Jitter techniques borrow from this generic idea and were first developed for triplet analysis in Date et al. (1998). Further developments were presented in Hatsopoulos et al. (2003), Amarasingham (2004), and Harrison (2005).
There have been several studies from within this statistical framework.1 Abeles & Gat (2001) suggest statistics for triplet analysis. Gerstein (2004) suggests a variation of a jitter resampling scheme that incorporates the structure of the ISI (inter-spike interval) distribution. Pipa et al. (2007) in fact preserve the entire ISI distribution by rigidly jittering (translating) the entire spike train of a neuron within a trial. Pazienti et al. (2007) and Pazienti et al. (2008) analyze aspects of the power of jitter tests under the alternative of a spike train model characterized by `injected' coincidences (similar in this way to some of the models we study below). Other applications in related neurophysiological studies can be found in Nadasdy et al. (1999), Shmiel et al. (2005), Shmiel et al. (2006), and Fujisawa et al. (2008).
Either independently or under the influence of these ideas, the basic idea of jittering a spike train is quite intuitive and appears occasionally but with increasing frequency in the literature. A common approach, perhaps more directly motivated by the neural coding problem, is to incorporate stimuli into the statistic [59, 60]: for example, by
1Some authors prefer alternative terms for jittering, such as "dithering" [28, 48], "teetering" [59], or "artificial jitter" [56], etc., presumably to distinguish from another use of the word "jitter" as the intrinsic temporal variability in individual spikes. For example, in some situations involving highly reliable (e.g., Billimoria et al., 2006) or simulated or modeled (e.g., Pazienti et al., 2007) spike trains, individual spikes can unambiguously be placed in correspondence with one another across trials. In that case, the temporal variability in a spike's timing, under this correspondence, can be quantified directly and is commonly called the "spike jitter" (e.g., Billimoria et al., 2006). In this paper, we continue to use "jitter" in its resampling sense, leaving these two uses of the term to be disambiguated by context.

comparing either estimates of the mutual information between stimuli and spike trains (Fig 3.20 in Rieke et al., 1997; Rokem et al., 2006; Lu & Wang, 2003; Furukawa & Middlebrooks, 2007), or the ability to predict stimuli from spike trains, under a reconstruction model [17, 40], before and after jittering the spike trains. (Notably, some studies do not examine the distribution of the chosen statistic across multiple jittered surrogate sets, which, even as an "exploratory" hypothesis test, compounds difficulties in its interpretation). In related work, Gutig et al. (2002) investigated the analyses of Grun et al. (2002a,b) in the framework of a permutation test, which then becomes jittering in very large windows. A similar interpretation can be made of the resampling component which controls for trial-to-trial variability in the algorithm of Oram et al. (1999).
3 Spike Jitter
We will develop two categories of jitter methods, "spike jitter," introduced in this section, and "pattern jitter," introduced in section IV. Both involve defining an ensemble of spike processes through random perturbations of observed spike timings, with the intention of preserving coarse characteristics of the spiking process (e.g. fluctuations in firing rate) while disrupting fine-temporal structure, as might exist, for example, in the form of synchronies across neurons. Spike jitter methods generate an ensemble through the random movements of individual spikes. Pattern jitter methods, instead, rigidly move entire patterns of spikes, for the purpose of preserving prototypical sequences such as signature bursting. Loosely speaking, pattern jitter focuses on fine-temporal structure above and beyond what can be explained by bursting per se.
We start with what we call "basic jitter," which is the process of perturbing each spike's timing according to a distribution symmetrically centered at the original spike position. We use a series of computational experiments, with simulated spike processes, to demonstrate a variety of properties of the jitter ensemble, including its utility in detecting "significant" fine-temporal structure, its utility in approximating the numbers of fine-temporal synchronous events that can not be explained by relatively slowly varying firing rates, and its utility in approximating the characteristic time scale of a spike process. The basic jitter is then extended to "interval jitter," in order to formulate exact statistical tests for various hypothesized limitations of temporal resolution. Interval jitter provides an intuitive (and exact) connection to statements about the rapidity of change of firing rates in conventional models of the spike process, such as the Poisson process and its various generalizations.
3.1 Basic Jitter
Imagine making a one-second recording from each of two neurons for each of onehundred trials. Possibly, the two neurons have similar inhomogeneous (i.e. time-

varying) firing rates, and possibly, the firing-rate profile changes from trial to trial. In such a circumstance even slow variations in firing rate, shared between two neurons in a given trial but changing from trial to trial, can masquerade as highly significant zero-lag synchrony. The cross correlogram will likely have a peak at zero, and the peak will appear to be significant when measured, for example, against a corresponding cross correlogram value produced by a "shuffle" (permutation) of trials of one or the other of the neurons. These effects have been revealed and analyzed in depth by Brody (1998, 1999), Baker and Gerstein (2001), and others. A peak at and around zero in a shufflecorrected cross correlogram is not, in and of itself, an artifact; common variation in firing rates across two neurons induces a statistical correlation in spike timings. The issue is one of interpretation and, in particular, one of time scale. A significant zero-lag peak does not necessarily suggest a millisecond-precise mechanism for aligning spikes across two neurons.
Is there a way to test for millisecond precision, per se, against the evident correlation induced by shared trial-to-trial variation in firing rate? It is tempting to try to first correct for trial-to-trial variation and then to look for residual high-resolution correlation, and in fact many methods along these lines have been proposed. As already mentioned in §1, we have some doubts about the feasibility of estimating parameters, much less rate functions, for individual trials. Here we recommend instead a jitterbased approach that avoids direct estimation of firing rates, whether common to trials or corrected for trial-to-trial variation. A simple computer experiment will illustrate the idea.
Figure 1, panel A, shows nine randomly generated Poisson intensity functions, each one-second long and each made up of randomly placed, fifty-millisecond-wide, peaks.2 One hundred of these intensity functions were used to generate spike times for each of two neurons in each of one-hundred one-second trials. Thus one of the intensity functions is used for each trial to generate two independent and identically distributed Poisson processes, one for each simulated neuron. Panel B contains the one-hundred raster-scan plots for each of the two neurons, as well as the post-stimulus time histogram for each neuron, pooled over the one-hundred trials. The cross correlogram, together with shuffle-derived confidence bands, is displayed in panel C. As expected, there is a significant peak at and around zero-lag correlation.
How are we to know that the significant peak in the cross correlogram is the result of relatively slow, 50 ms, undulations in firing rate that are common between the two neurons in a given trial, but different from trial to trial? What if, instead of shuffling trials we were to perturb individual spikes, independently, within a small window, say plus or minus 10 ms, mimicking the action of the fictional drug introduced in §1?

2The intensity function for the j'th trial is fj(t) = 10 +

40 k=1

g(t,

µjk),

where

the

µjk's

are

i.i.d

uniform

on (0, 1), and where g(t, µ) is a double exponential centered at µ with standard deviation ("bandwidth") 50

ms (before wrapping) that wraps around (0, 1) so that it integrates to 1 over the unit interval. Thus the

associated inhomogeneous Poisson process has mean "firing rate" of exactly 50 Hz.

Would the apparent synchrony survive? If so, then we could reasonably interpret the peak in the cross correlogram as arising from temporal effects acting on a time scale no finer than about 10 ms. In particular, we would conclude that the apparently significant zero-lag peak in the cross correlogram is secondary to events operating on a slower time scale (in this case the 50-millisecond-wide peaks in the shared intensity functions).
The perturbation experiment, in which each spike of each neuron is perturbed uniformly and independently within a 20 ms (±10 ms) window centered at its original location, was performed repeatedly. After each experiment the number of synchronous spike pairs ("synchronies") across the two neurons, as defined by occuring within plus or minus one ms of each other,3 was recorded. Figure 2 shows the distribution of synchronies generated from 1,000 such perturbation experiments, as well as the number of synchronies detected in the original, un-perturbed, spike data.
We would expect the jitter experiment to disrupt temporal processes operating at a time scale finer than 10 ms, in which case the number of synchronies in the unperturbed data would be large relative to the population of 1,000 synchrony counts produced by random perturbations. On the other hand, effects operating at slower time scales, as is the case in these experiments, would be relatively well preserved; the number of synchronies in the un-perturbed data would be more-or-less representative of the randomly generated population.4 Thus Figure 2, which shows that more than 33% of the randomly generated synchrony counts exceeded the un-perturbed count, suggests that the significant peak in the cross correlogram (Figure 1) is due to effects occuring on a time scale no finer than 10 ms.
There is another side to this coin: How would the "jitter method" perform in the presence of actual fine-temporal structure across two neurons? In particular, can spike jitter be used to discover fine-temporal synchrony between two simultaneously recorded neurons, above and beyond what can be explained by slow but shared modulation of firing rates?
3.2 "Non-accidental Synchrony"
One way to experiment with fine-temporal structure is to modify the simulated spike trains depicted in Figure 1 by injecting randomly placed pairs of highly synchronous spikes. To what extent, if any, will the presence of these pairs alter the conclusion that the fine-temporal structure is adequately explained by a slow modulation in firing rates? After all, each injection contributes real fine-temporal structure, but how is this to be separated from the "accidental" synchrony that is secondary to correlated but
3The definition is arbitrary, and the approach equally accommodates sub-millisecond or multi-millisecond notions of synchrony.
4Indeed, since the ±10 ms jitter window substantially preserves the 50 millisecond-wide peaks of the intensity functions, the distribution of counts in Figure 2 is a crude approximation of the actual distribution on synchronous counts for these model neurons.

slow changes in firing rate?

Five additional data sets were produced with progressively more injected syn-

chronous spikes. Locations for injected pairs were produced by sampling from the

same inhomogeneous Poisson processes used in the original experiments depicted in

Figure 1, but with the intensity functions scaled down from 50 Hz to 0.2, 0.4, 0.6,

0.8, and 1.0 Hz, respectively for the five experiments, corresponding to a mean total

number of injected synchronous pairs of 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 over the 100 trials. The

actual numbers of injected synchronous pairs are Poisson random variables, and turned

out to be 18, 33, 50, 64, and 87, total over the 100 trials, in these experiments. In

order to maintain identical marginal (single-neuron) statistics following the addition of

the synchronous pairs, each Poisson spike process was first thinned by subjecting every

spike, independently, to random elimination. (The actual probability of elimination

was, for example, .004 for the experiment with 0.2 Hz injected synchrony, and more

generally

was

h
50

for

the

experiment

with

synchronies

injected

at

h

Hz.)

For each of the five data sets a distribution of synchrony was generated by jit-

tering spikes, exactly as in the experiment reported in Figure 2. Figure 3 shows the

resulting jitter distributions, along with the number of observed (± 1 ms) synchronies

and the "p value" of the observed synchronies relative to the jitter distribution. For

comparison, Figure 3 also includes cross correlograms (as in 1C) and, in the first row,

the "0 injected spikes" example, taken from Figures 1C and 2. Notice that a total of

50 injected synchronies (fourth row, injection rate .6 Hz), in one-hundred seconds of

recording containing approximately 5,000 spikes in each neuron, is already detected as

"significant" (p = .015).

Returning to the issue of time scale, and keeping in mind that the jitter window in

these experiments is 20 ms wide (±10 ms), it is not unreasonable to think of the jitter

distribution on synchronies as the distribution on accidental synchronies, as would be

expected from co-varying activities across pairs of neurons that occur on a time scale

greater than 10 or so ms. Correlations at smaller time scales would be disrupted, and

indeed the observed numbers of synchronies in the experiments with injected pairs move

further into the tails of the jitter distributions as more pairs are injected (Figure 3). In

fact, we can make a crude estimate of the number of "non-accidental" synchronies by

subtracting the mean of the jitter distribution from the observed number of synchronies.

This estimate works well here: the differences, corresponding to 18, 33, 50, 64, and 87

injected synchronies, are 24.7, 35.6, 47.8, 59.7, and 79.6 respectively. (The estimate is

crude because of its dependence on the number of "accidental synchronies," which will

not necessarily turn out to be close to the mean of the jitter distribution.)

3.3 Temporal Resolution
What if repeated trials really are "repeated," in the statistical sense, and the spike trains are independent of one another? For example, suppose that the response of

two neurons is characterized by firing rates that do not vary from trial to trial. Then there might appear little to argue against trial shuffling to explore the significance of fine-temporal structure such as synchrony, above and beyond what might be explained by firing rates. However, if the two, fixed, firing rates for the neurons were themselves rapidly changing and correlated in time, then this represents a possible mechanism, or at least model, for fine-temporal structure. Yet, this kind of fine-temporal structure would be invisible to trial shuffling, exactly because the trials are truly repeatable and the spike processes are dictated solely by their respective firing rates.
Whether or not the assumption of statistical repeatability is valid, temporal processes operating at fast time scales, relative to a given jitter window, would be disrupted by jitter, and thus in principle detectable by comparing statistics of the unperturbed spike train to those of the jittered spike train.
An extreme example is illustrated in Figure 4. Five inhomogeneous Poisson processes were created, one for each row, by the same procedure used for the experiments reported in Figure 1, but at different bandwidths. The left-hand column lists the respective bandwidths, and the second column shows the fluctuating firing rates. For each row, two independent Poisson spike processes ("Neuron 1" and "Neuron 2") were generated according to the row-specific rate function. The process was repeated one-hundred times, independently, to produce one-hundred simulated simultaneous recordings from the two neurons.
The trial-permutation method (shuffling) fails to show significant correlated activity between the two neurons -- see third column, Figure 4. Now examine the fourth (righthand) column: a jitter histogram was produced for each set of one-hundred trials, using a jitter window of ± 10 ms. Each histogram is displayed along with the observed (± 1 ms) synchrony count from the un-perturbed spike process, and a corresponding righttail p value. Notice the gradual transition in p value, from small to large, from one row to the next, as the true correlation bandwidth increases relative to the jitter window.
Jitter disrupts temporal structure at scales near or smaller than the jitter window. Thus if we were to repeat the experiment depicted in Figure 4, but fixing the temporal resolution of the process while increasing, instead, the size of the jitter window, then we would expect a more-or-less monotone rise in significance (drop in p value).
3.4 The Jitter-Corrected Cross Correlogram
A traditional way to look for synchrony is to look for peaks in the cross correlogram in and around lag zero. The other bins, corresponding to other spike-to-spike lags, provide analogous evidence for other fine-temporal relationships, such as those that might arise from direct (single-synaptic) connections between two recorded neurons. A traditional calibration of the cross-correlogram bin counts is generated by trial shuffle, as we have done here in Figures 1, 3, and 4. But, in that it has been repeatedly observed (and again demonstrated here) that trial shuffling can miss-calibrate synchrony counts,

the interpretation of trial-shuffled confidence bands is not always transparent. On the other hand, the apparent advantages of jitter-calibrated synchrony counts suggests examining the other bins of the cross correlogram, in addition to the zero-lag bin, with reference to the corresponding ensemble of counts from an ensemble of jitter-produced re-sampled spike trains (cf. Amarasingham et al. (2007)).
For this purpose, it is convenient to first subtract the (jitter-produced) mean count from each bin. The resulting cross correlogram (the "jitter-corrected cross correlogram") displays the excess counts instead of the raw counts of the uncorrected cross correlogram ­ see Figure 5. With reference to §3.2, the zero-lag bin of the jitter-corrected cross correlogram thus contains what we have previously called the non-accidental synchrony count, meaning an estimate of the number of synchronies above and beyond what might be anticipated from processes operating at time scales coarser than the jitter interval. Analogously, the counts in the remaining bins of the jitter-corrected cross correlogram have been corrected for these same coarse-time-scale processes, and the resulting counts, at each lag, can be interpreted as estimates of the numbers of spike pairs, at the corresponding lag, that arise form processes operating at least as fast as the radius of the jitter interval.
Jitter confidence bands are computed just like trial-shuffle confidence bands (see Figure 1, panel C): at each lag, the ensemble of counts from the cross correlograms of the re-sampled spike trains is examined to obtain the counts corresponding to the desired upper and lower percentiles. Figure 5A, left-hand side, reproduces the cross correlogram from Figure 1C (with shuffle bands corresponding to 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles); the right-hand side shows the same cross correlogram, but this time jitter corrected, and this time with confidence bands derived from the jitter ensemble. Notice that the zero-lag peak, resulting from trial-to-trial variation in the face of shared but slowly changing firing rates, is no longer significant in the jitter-corrected cross correlogram. Now examine Figure 5B. The left-hand cross correlogram is reproduced from the first row of Figure 4. The shuffle bands fail to flag significant synchrony counts arising from fine-temporal (7.5 ms) shared fluctuations in firing rate, whereas the zero-lag peak is well outside of the corresponding bands in the jitter-corrected cross correlogram (right-hand side).
3.5 Interval Jitter and Hypothesis Testing
Perhaps because of their simplicity as statistical decisions, hypothesis tests can make astonishingly efficient use of data. An example is already evident in §3.2, where small quantities of injected synchronies are picked out by the jitter hypothesis test (e.g. 50 synchronies inserted among approximately 5000 spikes ­ see Figure 3). Such sensitivity, a virtue, has a corollary, which calls for caution: a hypothesis test is equally capable of picking out a very fine misspecification of the (scientifically relevant) null hypothesis.
Examining this idea closely, a hypothesis that specified that every configuration

of spikes generated by "basic jitter" was equally likely might be of little interest to the neuroscientist. Who would take seriously the proposition that each location in a jitter window, say the ±10 ms window used in §3.1-§3.3, is precisely as likely to contain a spike as any other location in the window? What of temporal effects, such as a change in firing rate following a stimulus after a more-or-less fixed delay? Yet, if we are to interpret the p values, as reported in Figures 2-4, in the context of a proper hypothesis test, then the tested hypothesis ("null hypothesis") would assert, minimally, that every jittered spike train was equally likely. Evidently, the utility of basic jitter and the associated p values has more to do with exploratory analysis then with proper statistical hypothesis testing.
Although our primary purpose is to offer a suite of tools ("jitter methods") for assessing temporal precision, rather than for rigorous hypothesis testing, it is of some value to explore the application of spike jitter in a traditional hypothesis-testing framework. If, for example, we were to assume that the spike processes of two neurons were truly generated by Poisson processes with time-varying rate functions (as in the artificially generated data of §3.1-§3.3), how might we test the hypothesis that firing rates do not vary by more than, say, 25% within any 20 ms window? Interval jitter is a modification of basic jitter that accommodates exact tests for this and related hypotheses.
As with basic jitter, interval jitter is a procedure for generating an ensemble of spike processes from a single observed process. The difference is that spikes are jittered within a priori defined windows ("intervals") rather than within windows centered at the observed spike locations. Thus for a jitter window of  ms, a recording history is first partitioned into successive  ms intervals. An ensemble of spike processes is then generated by relocating each spike, independently, to a random point within its original  ms interval. Everything else is the same: a statistic, such as the number of one-millisecond synchronies, is chosen, and the observed value from the original, unperturbed, spike train is compared against the ensemble of values collected through the jitter process. If the distribution governing spike relocation is uniform on each jitter interval, then this is not so different from basic jitter and it is not surprising that it yields similar p values. Under uniform relocation, the hypothesis being tested is that all arrangements of any given number of spikes within any given jitter interval are equally likely. Among other examples, this "null hypothesis" includes the popular inhomogeneous Poisson model for spike generation, under the constraint that the intensity function is piecewise-constant over the jitter intervals.
Sticking to the inhomogeneous Poisson model, a more realistic and interesting hypothesis about the time-varying intensity function would be that it is (essentially) piecewise linear, with a given bound on the percent change that can occur within any one jitter interval. Figure 6 reproduces the first intensity function from the experiment discussed in §3.1, with a piecewise-constant approximation over 20 ms jitter intervals (panel A), and a piecewise-linear approximation, also over 20 ms intervals, but with

the additional constraint that firing rate not change by more than 25% within any one interval (panel B). Processes generated from the piecewise linear intensity function would be, for all intents and purposes, indistinguishable from processes generated from the original intensity function.
The hypothesis of piecewise linear intensity function, with a hypothesized bound on the percent change within a jitter interval, can be tested in either member of a pair of recorded neurons. Spikes in the selected neuron are randomly relocated; the other neuron's spikes remain fixed. Synchrony is defined with respect to the second ("reference") neuron: a spike in the selected neuron is synchronous if it falls within one ms of any of the (fixed) spikes in the reference neuron. As with ordinary jitter, the observed synchrony count is compared to the population of counts generated by the randomization process. For each jitter interval of the selected neuron, the linear intensity function that maximally promotes synchronies is computed. These "worstcase" intensities define the spike-relocation distribution ("tilted jitter").5 Uniform relocation follows as the special case in which the null hypothesis bounds by zero the percent change within a jitter interval. All spikes are randomly relocated within their respective jitter intervals, according to this worst-case distribution, and the resulting synchrony count is recorded. Repeated samplings generates a population histogram for comparison to the original synchrony count.
How does the p value, as computed by the basic jitter procedure introduced in §3.1, hold up under the more conservative test provided by interval jitter with non-uniform relocation probabilities? Referring to the experiments in §3.2, we found that in the case of 1 Hz injected synchrony (Figure 3, last row), we could allow for as much as an 82% change in Poisson intensity functions (i.e. maximum-rate/minimum-rate  1.82) over each 20 ms jitter interval and still achieve a p value below .1. Strictly speaking, "we reject (at p=.1) the hypothesis that the data was generated from an inhomogeneous Poisson process with rate function piecewise linear on 20 ms jitter intervals and changing no faster than 82% in any one interval." In plain words, the evidence favors a fast (fine-temporal) mechanism, as well it should given that we injected pairs of millisecond-synchronous spikes. For .8 Hz injected synchrony (fifth row), p remains below .1 with up to 51% change in each 20 ms interval, and up to 23.1% for .6 Hz synchrony (fourth row). In short, spike jitter continues to flag the presence of small numbers of synchronous events even when recast into the framework of an exact and conservative hypothesis test.
Much more can be said about spike jitter for hypothesis testing, including the use of more general functional forms (e.g. quadratic) for the relocation (jitter) probabilities, as well as the development of exact tests for more general (non-Poisson) point processes [7, 34]. But our intention is more to emphasize spike jitter as a robust exploratory tool
5These worst-case intensity functions are easy to compute, analytically, although here we will not go into the details.

for detecting fine-temporal structure in neuronal spike trains, despite inevitable trialto-trial variability in the statistics of the recorded signals.
4 Pattern Jitter
Relative and absolute refractory periods, and the patterned sequences of neuronal spikes known as bursting, in and of themselves, constitute a form of fine-temporal structure. A neuron that fires in highly prototypical bursts, with well-preserved interspike intervals, is indeed operating at high temporal precision. In that these phenomena restrict the placements of spikes relative to neighboring spikes, they already violate the hypothesis under which spike jitter calibrates the likelihood of an observed count of synchrony. How then is the practitioner to interpret observations of "excess" synchrony? Are the alignments an epiphenomenon, secondary to the structuring effects of refractory periods [46, 11] and bursting [3], or are they due, instead, to less local properties like common input, network oscillations, or post-stimulus transients?
Pattern jitter is a method for exploring fine-temporal structure in spike trains that cannot be explained by short-range temporal dependencies among spikes of single neurons. The idea is to construct a randomization technique that not only preserves approximate firing rates, but also preserves the local statistics of neighboring spikes within single neurons. To this end, pattern jitter is a spike-resampling method that rigidly moves local patterns of successive spikes. The short-range statistics within individual neurons are preserved, exactly, through restrictions on the allowable translations.
This is made precise in §4.1, and illustrated, in §4.2, with data recorded simultaneously from three neurons in a monkey's primary motor cortex during visually cued two-dimensional movements. Of course synchrony is not the only type of fine-temporal structure of possible interest. In §4.3, the same recordings are used to demonstrate the application of both spike and pattern jitter to exploring other forms of fine-temporal structure.
4.1 Preserving History
A "pattern" is a sequence of spikes from a single neuron satisfying two constraints: on the one hand, successive interspike distances within the pattern are small, but on the other hand, the pattern is well separated from surrounding spikes. Precisely, given a "history" parameter, R, successive spikes in a pattern are separated by no more than R milliseconds, and there are no surrounding spikes from the same neuron that are within R milliseconds of pattern spikes. The actual number of spikes in a pattern is variable. The smallest pattern is made of a single spike, but larger patterns will be typical when R is large. For the experiments in §4.2 we use R=100; for those in §4.3 we explore a variety of values from 1 to 64 milliseconds. Notice that the parameter R defines a unique partitioning of a spike train into patterns.

Rather than jittering individual spikes, we jitter patterns. If we designate the location (time) of a pattern to be the location of its first spike, then pattern jitter is just a generalization of spike jitter: R=0, which generates single-spike patterns, is replaced by R >0. Windows are defined a priori, as with interval jitter (§3.5), but patterns (rather than spikes) are randomly relocated in such a way that the first spike of each pattern (i.e. the pattern location) remains in its original interval.6 The only complication is that in order to preserve the statistics of local spike arrangements (as defined by the history parameter R), we must prevent the appearance of new patterns in the new (jittered) spike sequence. Hence patterns must remain separated by more than R ms. Fortunately, an ensemble of pattern-preserving spike trains can be efficiently generated ­ see [35] for details and generalizations, and http://jitter.stat.cmu.edu/ to download a library of pattern-jitter software tools.
Figure 7 illustrates pattern jitter using two jitter intervals (20 ms and 64 ms) at three different values of R (0 ms, 25 ms, and 100 ms).
4.2 Jitter Analysis of Three Motor-Cortical Neurons
Three neurons (designated N1, N2, and N3) were selected from simultaneous multineuronal recordings made in primary motor cortex (MI) of the monkey. Single-unit activity was recorded from a multi-electrode array composed of 100 electrodes (1.0 mm electrode length; 400 µm inter-electrode separation) that was chronically implanted in the arm area of MI of one macaque monkey (Macaca Mulatto) -- see Hatsopoulos et al. (2007) for details. During a recording session, signals from up to 96 electrodes were amplified (gain, 5000), band-pass filtered between 0.3 Hz and 7.5 kHz, and recorded digitally (14-bit) at 30 kHz per channel using a Cerebus acquisition system (Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Systems, Inc., MA). Only waveforms (1.6 ms in duration; 48 sample time points per waveform) that crossed a threshold were stored and spike-sorted using Offline Sorter (Plexon, Inc., Dallas, TX). The monkey was operantly trained to move a cursor appearing above the monkeys hand location to targets projected onto a horizontal, reflective surface in front of the monkey. At any one time, a single target appeared at a random location in the workspace, and the monkey was required to move to it. As soon as the cursor reached the target, the target disappeared and a new target appeared in a new, random location. All of the surgical and behavioral procedures were approved by the University of Chicagos IACUC and conform to the principles outlined in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH publication no. 86-23, revised 1985).
There were 391 successfully completed trials. Spike times were discretized to 1/30 ms, and we analyzed the first 30,000 bins (one second) for each neuron in each successful trial. The three neurons, N1, N2, and N3, were recorded from separate electrodes. All
6Notice however that R=0 preserves "histories of length zero," meaning that it prevents two spikes from landing in the same bin, a restriction not imposed in our experiments in §3.

three had relatively low firing rates -- 5.39, 5.12, and 4.28 Hz respectively. Spike-time rasters and post-stimulus time histograms (PSTH) are shown in Figure 8, panel A. The three cross correlograms (N1/N2, N1/N3, and N2/N3), along with shuffle-derived 95% confidence bands (as described in Figure 1), are shown in panel B.
There is evidence in the cross correlograms for fine-temporal correlations between N1 and N2 as well as N1 and N3. Yet, as we have demonstrated in §3.1, and has been demonstrated in a variety of physiological experiments (see discussion in §2), evidence from a cross correlogram for significant fine-temporal correlations can be misleading. Relatively slow but correlated fluctuations in firing rates together with trial-to-trial variation can produce significant high-resolution spike coincidences. Nevertheless, in the case of these three neurons, slow and correlated firing rates is an unlikely explanation, as can be demonstrated using 20 ms interval jitter and counting ±1 ms synchronous spikes. The left-hand column of Figure 9 displays the three histograms of synchrony counts (N1/N2, N1/N3, N2/N3) derived from jittered spike trains. The low p values in pairs N1/N2 and N1/N3 correspond to about 44 and 15 "non-accidental" synchronies (cf. §3.2), respectively.
In these examples, interval jitter confirms the impression given by the cross correlograms of substantial fine-temporal correlation between neurons N1 and N2, and N1 and N3. In particular, it is highly unlikely that these synchronous events are secondary to the effects of trial-to-trial variation on the shuffle-derived confidence bands of the cross correlograms. It remains possible, however, that the apparent significance of the observed synchronous events is secondary to the piecewise-constant approximation of firing rates implicit in the interval jitter method. As discussed in §3.5, this can be addressed conservatively by specifying a maximum rate of change of firing rates within the 20 ms jitter intervals. For example, even allowing for up to 50% variation in firing rate within each 20 ms window, the p value for the N1/N2 pair remains below .001, and the p value for N1/N3 remains below .05 (albeit increasing from .015 to .048).
But what about possible refractory or bursting phenomena? Could the regularizing effects of these spike-to-spike dependencies be at the root of the significant synchrony counts observed in these two pairs of neurons? Pattern jitter addresses the issue: even if we jitter spikes in such a way as to exactly preserve all interspike intervals of duration less than or equal to R=100 ms, the N1/N2 and N2/N3 pairs remain significant at p=.001 and p=.01, respectively (Figure 9, right-hand column).
We close this section with a word of caution and a disclaimer. Whereas these jitterbased statistical tests are indeed exact, in a well-defined mathematical sense, actual p values must (as always) be interpreted in light of both the hypothesis being tested and the amount of data brought to the task. We will have more to say about this in the discussion (§5), but for now we wish to emphasize that our primary purpose is to offer exploratory tools, and not to offer evidence, one way or another, on the fundamental questions of timing and its possible role in neuronal dynamics. In particular, whereas the evident excess synchrony between N1 and N2 can not be explained by trial-to-trial

variations, relative or absolute refractory periods, bursting, or any long-range (up to 100 ms) intra-neuronal dependencies, we want to be clear that these three neurons were not chosen randomly from a library of recordings. To the contrary, they were selected for the specific purpose of illustration.
4.3 Beyond Synchrony: Other Measures of Precision
In principle, an ensemble of jittered spike trains, constrained to reproduce lengthR local spike statistics and trial-independent time-varying firing rates, can serve to calibrate any measure of temporal precision, not just spike synchronies. To illustrate, we will look at the recurrences of specific, precisely timed, sequences of three spike events (a "triplet") within neuron N2, throughout the 391 successfully completed trials. Repetitions of precisely timed spike sequences were offered by Abeles et al. (1988,1993) as evidence for a hypothesized collective neuronal dynamic known as a synfire chain. Abeles et al. (1993) reported excessive numbers of repetitions of such spike sequences, as measured against what would be expected from Poisson-like statistics. On the other hand, Oram et al. (1999), and later Baker & Lemon (2000), both using spikeresampling methods, found that the number of repetitions in their data, of triplets as well as other precisely timed sequences, was adequately explained by taking into account the distribution of nearest-neighbor ISI intervals and inhomogeneous firing rates.
By a triplet we will mean a sequence of three increasing intra-trial times, say (t1,t2,t3), each occupied by a spike, such that t2-t1 and t3-t2 are no greater than one second. There may be multiple spikes, in addition to the spike at t2, in the interval between t1 and t3. All triplets, over all 391 successful trials, were identified in neuron N2.7 A triplet is said to repeat if the identical intervals, t2-t1 and t3-t2 (both rounded to the nearest millisecond), are shared by another triplet, regardless of trial. There are many statistics involving repeating triplets that could be examined for evidence of fine-temporal structure (cf. [3, 46, 11]). We chose to look at the maximum number of repetitions of any triplet (Date et al. (1998)), reasoning that an extremal statistic is likely to be particularly sensitive to repeatable and precise influences on spike timings. In this data, there were 15 triplets, (t1,t2,t3), with interspike times t2-t1=23 ms and t3-t2=27 ms, and this was the maximum number of repetitions of any triplet in the record.
How unusual is it to find a triplet that repeats 15 times in a record containing 8,455 spikes over 391 trials? We used pattern jitter, with a variety of jitter intervals, and preserving a range of history lengths (R), to generate ensembles of 1,000 resampled spike trains, one ensemble for each interval/history pair, and to build a histogram of
7For the synchrony study reported in §4.2, in order to match the discussion of artifical data from §3, only the first second from each trial was used. Here we used the full duration, ranging from 1 to 14 seconds, of each trial, coming to a total of 1,752 seconds of data.

the maximum number of repetitions for each ensemble. For each histogram the probability ("p value") of observing a triplet that repeats 15 or more times was recorded, as was the "excess number of repeats," meaning the difference between 15 and the ensemble average of the maximum number of repetitions. Small p values are evidence for additional structure in the spike-time recordings, beyond what could be reasonably accounted for by changes in firing rate on a time scale coarser than the jitter interval, or by spike-history effects of durations below R. With R=0 (jittering individual spikes), jitter intervals of 8, 16, and 32 ms fail to generate "significant" (less than or equal to .05) p values, although 32 ms comes in at p=.055. But only 1.2% of the resampled spike trains produced triplets that occured 15 or more times, when spikes were jittered in 64 ms intervals (p=.012). This last observation could be due to an effective rate change operating faster than about 64 ms (as in fact suggested by the less-significant results at 8, 16, and 32 ms), or possibly to refractory periods, bursting, or other statistical constraints on interspike timings.
Exploring the possible role of these "history" effects, Figure 10 displays six maximumrepetition histograms, all from a 64 ms jitter interval, and corresponding to preserved spike histories (R) of 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 milliseconds.8 The respective p values are .012, .014, .008, .015, .038, and .408. Taken together, these pattern-jitter experiments point to significant rate changes occuring on a scale of about 32 ms (or finer), or significant inter-spike interactions with extent, at the least, 8 ms, or both.
Obviously, triplet repetitions could be substituted with other measures of precision, dictated by the experiment and the experimental focus. Spike sequences involving more than three spikes, or more than one neuron, and statistics such as the total number of repeating sequences (not just the maximum number of repeated triplets), are some of the choices, but really any function of the recorded data (i.e. any "statistic") can be calibrated by the same resampling method. Naturally, different statistics have different power, depending on the hypothesis being tested. Repetitions of multi-spike sequences make a sensible statistic when looking for synfire chains; millisecond synchrony is sensible when looking for common input. In any case, the usual caution applies: it is unwise and poor practice to use a statistic suggested by the data itself, at least for any purpose beyond exploratory analysis. In fact it is arguably good practice to use simple or at least clearly-motivated statistics; an uninitiated reader may be more likely to suspect that an exotic, unmotivated statistic has been `fished out' of the data, possibly for good reason.
8History values of 28 ms or larger will preserve exactly all 15 of the triplets in the original recording, since these have interspike times of 23 (t2-t1) and 27 (t3-t2) ms. Hence, necessarily, p=1 for experiments with R 28; every resampled spike train has at least 15 repetitions of some triplet.

5 Discussion
Stable recordings from multiple neurons in awake animals are now routine. Better data raise hope for new progress on the fundamental questions of temporal resolution and its role in supporting the neural code. Yet, there have been widespread concerns that otherwise-compelling evidence for the precise timing of groups of spikes, both within single neurons and across multiple neurons, can often be fully understood as the statistical consequence of commonplace properties of neuronal dynamics. This is not surprising: neural recordings represent observations of a small number of subunits embedded within an extraordinarily complex, large, and interacting system. Under the circumstances, one might expect the statistical challenges to be nontrivial as well as novel (Brown et al., 2004). The current state of the art of statistical practice in behavioral and multiple single-unit neurophysiology, characterized more by tremendous variety and less by standardization of practice, is a reflection of these challenges. Another reflection is that the neurophysiological community as a whole is, to a large degree, persuaded only by the evidence of very strong and unambiguous signals. Can statistics help to uncover more subtle clues? Certainly, a more persuasive approach will begin with more persuasive statistical assumptions, regarding the structure of the data and the questions one seeks to answer.
With some of these challenges in mind, we have presented an introduction to a collection of methods designed to highlight precision in the neuronal record that can not be explained by slowly varying firing rates, inevitable changes in trial-to-trial response, or any local constraint between the timings of spikes within a neuron. Jitter is an approach to spike-resampling that preserves local firing rates to a specified accuracy, as determined by the jitter window, and local spike dependencies to a specified range, as determined by the history parameter, R. How surprising are apparent coincidences of spike timing, such as a large number of synchronous spike pairs? An ensemble of jittered spike trains produces a corresponding ensemble of coincidences, thereby calibrating the original observation. By this means, any measure of precision, not just spike synchronies, can be put to the test: Do the observations in the recorded spike train depart from the range of values that could be reasonably expected under the hypothesis that spike times are unconstrained beyond time-varying firing rates and local interspike interactions?
There are many variations on the theme. Individual spike times can be re-selected from windows centered at their observed locations ("basic jitter") or from an a priori partitioning of the spike record ("interval jitter"). The recent history of every spike can be preserved, exactly, by re-selecting the positions of entire patterns of spikes ("pattern jitter") rather than individual spikes. The jitter distribution can be uniform in a window, or tilted by as much as a pre-specified amount, to probe for lower bounds on the intrinsic rate of change of spike probabilities.
Jitter methods are accompanied by precise hypotheses ("null hypotheses") about

the spike-generating process. Twenty-millisecond uniform interval jitter, of individual spikes, tests the hypothesis that spikes falling in a given interval are independent and equally likely to land at any position. "Tilted" versions generalize from the uniform probability, acknowledging possible rate changes of up to a specified percentage within a specified amount of time. More elaborate and presumably more realistic hypotheses, accommodating relative and absolute refractory periods and other dependencies among the timings of groups of multiple spikes (e.g. bursting), are tested by pattern jitter, as adjusted to preserve any specified range of spike-to-spike interactions. Different statistics, perhaps synchrony count or the repetition count of spatial-temporal patterns of spikes, point to different alternative hypotheses, and will ideally have high power (likelihood of rejecting the null when in fact the alternative is true) in the general direction of one or another theorized mechanism of special interest.
The execution of a hypothesis test and the interpretation of p values always require caution, possibly extra caution when testing hypotheses about the collective dynamics of complex nonlinear devices like neurons. A null hypothesis formulated at any meaningful level of specificity is unlikely to be precisely true, and therefore is doomed to be rejected, with high significance, in the face of a well-designed test and a high volume of quality data. Firing rates may be well approximated by a piecewise-linear function, as in tilted jitter, but it is nevertheless unlikely that the probability of a spike location, given its presence in a particular interval, is actually a linear function of time. A sufficiently powerful test, provided with enough data, will reject anything but a perfect fit; significant results are a foregone conclusion. As Wasserman (2006) puts it, there is a distinction between "statistical significance" and "scientific significance." We urge the reader not to make too much of p values, per se.
On the other hand, much can be gleaned from a jitter-based statistical exploration of a data set. An apparent excess of repeating spike sequences, as calibrated under spike jitter, that is then found to be well predicted when spike jitter is replaced by pattern jitter, is likely to have been secondary to intra-neuronal, intra-spike, interactions. A significant peak in a shuffle-corrected cross correlogram, in the face of a lack of significance under spike jitter, suggests trial-to-trial variability. And a substantial drop in the significance of extra synchronies, in moving from, say, forty to twenty-millisecond jitter intervals, points to relatively slow and shared changes in firing probabilities evolving on a forty-or-so millisecond time scale. Although jitter-derived p values provide exact tests for precisely formulated hypotheses, it will often be the case that these methods best serve the practitioner when used as exploratory tools.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to A. Date for insightful comments and suggestions, and to B. Anderson and W. Truccolo for their feedback while exercising the methods and the software on their data. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foun-

dation under grants DMS-0240019, IIS-0423031, and ITR-0427223, by the National Institutes of Health under grant NIMH-2RO1MH064537, and by the Office of Naval Research under contract ONR-N000140610749.

References
[1] M. Abeles. Corticonics: Neuronal circuits of the cerebral cortex. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1991.
[2] M. Abeles, H. Bergman, E. Margalit, and E. Vaadia. Spatiotemporal firing patterns in the frontal cortex of behaving monkeys. Journal of Neurophysiology, 70(4):1629­1638, 1993.
[3] M. Abeles and I. Gat. Detecting precise firing sequences in experimental data. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 107:141­154, 2001.
[4] M. Abeles and G.L. Gerstein. Detecting spatiotemporal firing patterns among simultaneously recorded single neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 60(3):909­ 924, 1988.
[5] A. Aertsen, G.L. Gerstein, M.K. Habib, and G. Palm. Dynamics of neuronal firing correlation: modulation of 'effective connectivity'. Journal of Neurophysiology, 61(5):900­917, 1989.
[6] J.M. Alonso, W.M. Usrey, and R.C. Reid. Precisely correlated firing in cells of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Nature, 383:815­819, 1996.
[7] A. Amarasingham. Statistical methods for the assessment of temporal structure in the activity of the nervous system. PhD thesis, Brown University Division of Applied Mathematics, 2004.
[8] A. Amarasingham, T.-L. Chen, S. Geman, M.T. Harrison, and D. Sheinberg. Spike count reliability and the poisson hypothesis. Journal of Neuroscience, 26:801­809, 2006.
[9] A. Amarasingham, M.T. Harrison, and S. Geman. Jitter methods for investigating spike train dependencies. Computational and Systems Neuroscience (COSYNE 07), 2007. Abstract.
[10] S.N. Baker and G.L. Gerstein. Determination of response latency and its application to normalization of cross-correlation measures. Neural Computation, 13:1351­1377, 2001.
[11] S.N. Baker and R.N. Lemon. Precise spatiotemporal repeating patterns in monkey primary and supplementary motor areas occur at chance levels. Journal of Neurophysiology, 84(4):1770­1780, 2000.
[12] Y. Ben-Shaul, H. Bergman, Y. Ritov, and M. Abeles. Trial to trial variability in either stimulus or action causes apparent correlation and synchrony in neuronal activity. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 111(2):99­110, 2001.
[13] E. Bienenstock. A model of neocortex. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 6:179­224, 1995.

[14] C.P. Billimoria, R.A. DiCaprio, J.T. Birmingham, L.F. Abbott, and E. Marder. Neuromodulation of spike-timing precision in sensory neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 26:5910­5919, 2006.
[15] C.D. Brody. Slow variations in neuronal resting potentials can lead to artefactually fast cross-correlations in the spike trains. Journal of Neurophysiology, 80:3345­ 3351, 1998.
[16] C.D. Brody. Disambiguating different covariation types. Neural Computation, 11:1527­1535, 1999.
[17] D.A. Butts, C. Weng, J. Jin, C.-I. Yeh, N.A. Lesica, J-M. Alonso, and G.B. Stanley. Temporal precision in the neural code and the timescales of natural vision. Nature, 449:92­96, 2007.
[18] C. Constantinidis, G.V. Williams, and P.S. Goldman-Rakic. A role for inhibition in shaping the temporal flow of information in prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 5:175­180, 2002.
[19] Y. Dan, J.M. Alonso, W.M. Usrey, and R.C. Reid. Coding of visual information by precisely correlated spikes in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Nature Neuroscience, 1:501­507, 1998.
[20] A. Date, E. Bienenstock, and S. Geman. On the temporal resolution of neural activity. Technical report, Brown University, Division of Applied Mathematics, 1998.
[21] P. Dayan and L.F. Abbott. Theoretical Neuroscience. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2001.
[22] P.N. Mitra E.N. Brown, R.E. Kass. Multiple neural spike trains analysis: stateof-the-art and future challenges. Nature Neuroscience, 7:456­461, 2004.
[23] M.J. Ferragamo, T. Haresign, and J.A. Simmons. Frequency tuning, latencies, and responses to frequency-modulated sweeps in the inferior colliculus of the echolocating bat, eptesicus fuscus. J. Comp. Physiol. A, 182:65­79, 1998.
[24] R.D. Frostig, Z. Frostig, and R.M. Harper. Recurring discharge patterns in multiple spike trains: I. detection. Biological Cybernetics, 62:487­493, 1990.
[25] S. Fujisawa, A. Amarasingham, M.T. Harrison, and G. Buzsaki. Behaviordependent short-term assembly dynamics in the medial prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, in press, 2008.
[26] S. Furukawa and J.C. Middlebrooks. Cortical representation of auditory space: information-bearing features of spike patterns. Journal of Neurophysiology, 87:1749­1762, 2002.
[27] S. Geman. Invariance and selectivity in the ventral visual pathway. Journal of Physiology - Paris, 100:212­224, 2006.

[28] G.L. Gerstein. Searching for significance in spatio-temporal firing patterns. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 64:203­207, 2004.
[29] C.M. Gray. The temporal correlation hypothesis of visual feature integration: Still alive and well. Neuron, 24:31­47, 1999.
[30] S. Gru¨n, M. Diesmann, and A. Aertsen. Unitary events in multiple single-neuron spiking activity: I. detection & significance. Neural Computation, 14(1):43­80, 2002.
[31] S. Gru¨n, M. Diesmann, and A. Aertsen. Unitary events in multiple single-neuron spiking activity: Ii. nonstationary data. Neural Computation, 14(1):81­119, 2002.
[32] S. Gru¨n, A. Riehle, and M. Diesmann. Effects of cross-trial nonstationarity on joint-spike events. Biological Cybernetics, 88(5):335­351, 2003.
[33] R. Gu¨tig, A. Aertsen, and S. Rotter. Statistical significance of coincident spikes: Count-based versus rate-based statistics. Neural Computation, 14(1):121­153, 2002.
[34] M.T. Harrison. Discovering compositional structures. PhD thesis, Brown University Division of Applied Mathematics, 2004.
[35] M.T. Harrison and S. Geman. A rate and history-preserving resampling algorithm for neural spike trains. Neural Computation, 2008. In revision.
[36] N. Hatsopoulos, S. Geman, A. Amarasingham, and E. Bienenstock. At what time scale does the nervous system operate? Neurocomputing, 52:25­29, 2003.
[37] N.G. Hatsopoulos, Q. Xu, and A. Amit. Encoding of movement fragments in the motor cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 27(19):5105­5114, 2007.
[38] T. Hirabayashi and Y. Miyashita. Dynamically modulated spike correlation in monkey inferior temporal cortex depending on the feature configuration within a whole object. Journal of Neuroscience, 25:10299­10307, 2005.
[39] H. Ito and S. Tsuji. Model dependence in quantification of spike interdependence by joint peri-stimulus time histogram. Neural Computation, 12:195­217, 2000.
[40] L.M. Jones, D.A. Depireux, D.J. Simons, and A. Keller. Robust temporal coding in the trigeminal system. Science, 304:1986­1989, 2004.
[41] C. Koch. Biophysics of Computation: Information Processing in Single Neurons. Oxford University Press, 198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York, 1999.
[42] E.L. Lehmann. Nonparametrics: Statistical Methods Based on Ranks. HoldrenDay, Inc., San Francisco, 1975.
[43] T. Lu and X. Wang. Information content of auditory cortical responses to timevarying acoustic stimuli. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91:301­313, 2003.
[44] M. Meister and M.J. Barry II. The Neural Code of the Retina. Neuron, 22:435­ 450, March 1999.

[45] Z. Nadasdy, H. Hirase, A. Czurko, J. Csicsvari, and G. Buzsaki. Replay and time compression of recurring spike sequences in the hippocampus. Journal of Neuroscience, 19(21):9497­9507, 1999.
[46] M.W. Oram, M.C. Wiener, R. Lestienne, and B.J. Richmond. Stochastic nature of precisely timed spike patterns in visual system neural responses. Journal of Neurophysiology, 81:3021­3033, 1999.
[47] Q. Pauluis and S. N. Baker. An accurate measure of the instantaneous discharge probability, with application to unitary joint-event analysis. Neural Computation, 12(3):647­669, 2000.
[48] A. Pazienti, M. Diesmann, and S. Gru¨n. Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Advances in Brain, Vision, and Artificial Intelligence, chapter Bounds on the ability to destroy precise coincidences by spike dithering, pages 428­437. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany, 2007.
[49] A. Pazienti, P. Maldonado, M. Diesmann, and S. Gru¨n. Effectiveness of systematic spike dithering depends on the precision of cortical synchronization. Brain Research, in press, 2008.
[50] D.H. Perkel, G.L. Gerstein, and G.P. Moore. Neuronal spike trains and stochastic point processes ii. simultaneous spike trains. Biophysical Journal, 7:419­440, 1967.
[51] G. Pipa, A. Riehle, and S. Gru¨n. Validation of task-related excess of spike coincidences based on NeuroXidence. Neurocomputing, 70:2064­2068, 2007.
[52] Y. Prut, E. Vaadia, H. Bergman, I. Haalman, H. Slovin, and M. Abeles. Spatiotemporal structure of cortical activity: properties and behavioral relevance. Journal of Neurophysiology, 79:2857­2874, 1998.
[53] R.H. Randles. Introduction to the theory of nonparametric statistics. Krieger Publishing Company, Melbourne, FL, 1991.
[54] F. Rieke, D. Warland, R. van Steveninck, and W. Bialek. Spikes: Exploring the Neural Code. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997.
[55] M. Riesenhuber and T. Poggio. Are cortical models really bound by the binding problem? Neuron, 24:87­93, 1999.
[56] A. Rokem, S. Watzl, T. Gollisch, M. Stemmler, A.V.M. Herz, and I. Samengo. Spike-timing precision underlies the coding efficiency of auditory receptor neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95:2541­2552, 2006.
[57] J.M. Samonds, Z. Zhou, M.R. Bernard, and A.B. Bonds. Synchronous activity in cat visual cortex encodes collinear and cocircular contours. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95:2602­2616, 2006.
[58] M.N. Shadlen and J.A. Movshon. Synchrony unbound: A critical evaluation of the temporal binding hypothesis. Neuron, 24:67­77, 1999.

[59] T. Shmiel, R. Drori, O. Shmiel, Y. Ben-Shaul, Z. Nadasdy, M. Shemesh, M. Teicher, and M. Abeles. Neurons of the cerebral cortex exhibit precise interspike timing in correspondence to behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102(51):18655­18657, 2005.
[60] T. Shmiel, R. Drori, O. Shmiel, Y. Ben-Shaul, Z. Nadasdy, M. Shemesh, M. Teicher, and M. Abeles. Temporally precise cortical firing patterns are associated with distinct action segments. Journal of Neurophysiology, 96:2645­2652, 2006.
[61] W. Singer. Neuronal synchrony: A versatile code for the definition of relations? Neuron, 24:49­65, 1999.
[62] P.H. Smith. Structural and functional differences distinguish principal from nonprincipal cells in the guinea pig ms0 slice. Neurophysiology, 73:1653­1667, 1995.
[63] V. Ventura. Testing for and estimating latency effects for poisson and non-poisson spike trains. Neural Computation, 16:2323­2349, 2004.
[64] V. Ventura, C. Cai, and R.E. Kass. Statistical assessment of time-varying dependence between two neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94:2940­2947, 2005.
[65] V. Ventura, C. Cai, and R.E. Kass. Trial-to-trial variability and its effect on timevarying dependence between two neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94:2928­ 2939, 2005.
[66] A.E P. Villa, I.V. Tetko, B. Hyland, and A. Najem. Spatiotemporal activity patterns of rat cortical neurons predict responses in a conditioned task. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 96:1106­1111, 1999.
[67] C. von der Malsburg. The correlation theory of brain function. Technical report, Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Neurobiology, Go¨ttingen, Germany, 1981. (Reprinted in Models of Neural Networks II, 1994, E. Domany, J.L. van Hemmen, and K. Schulten, eds., Berlin, Springer).
[68] C. von der Malsburg. The what and why of binding: The modelers perspective. Neuron, 24:95­104, 1999.
[69] M. Wehr and G. Laurent. Odour encoding by temporal sequences of firing in oscillating neural assemblies. Nature, 384:162­166, 1996.
[70] T.C.T. Yin and J.C.M. Chan. Interaural time sensitivity in medial superior olive of cat. Neurophysiology, 64:465­488, 1990.

A
intensity functions for trials 1-9
123

Bneuron 1

neuron 2

C
cross correlation

Hz 100 trials

456 120
789

0

0 1 sec

1 sec

-400 0 400

1 sec

lag (ms)

Figure 1: Two identical, non-repeating inhomogeneous Poisson "neurons." A. Nine of
one-hundred randomly generated Poisson intensity functions. B. Raster plots of one-hundred trials for each of two simulated neurons. In each trial, each neuron is an inhomogeneous Poisson process with identical intensity function. Different intensity functions are used for different trials. Trialto-trial structure is lost in the PSTH, seen below raster plots. C. Cross correlogram together with
shuffle-derived 95% confidence bands. The cross correlogram is derived from the normalized JPSTH and plotted. Confidence bands are then generated by randomly permuting trials for "Neuron 1" 200 times. For each permutation the cross correlogram is recomputed, and at each time lag the population of correlations is examined to determine the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles. The interval between these percentiles is colored in grey.

frequency

p = .335
100
500 550 600 650 number of synchronous pairs
Figure 2: Distribution of synchrony in jittered spike train. Refer to Figure 1. The position
of every spike in every trial was randomly and independently perturbed within a 20 ms (±10 ms) window, and the number of one-millisecond synchronies across the two neurons was recorded. The histogram is the distribution of the number of synchronies obtained from 1,000 such perturbation experiments. The number of synchronies observed in the original, un-perturbed, spike trains (indicated by the vertical dashed line) is not significant, when measured against the jitter distribution (right-tail probability of .335).

Injected synchronous spikes: mean rate

Cross correlogram with shu e bands

0.0 Hz

Synchrony distribution from ±10 ms jitter
p = .335

0.2 Hz

p = .143

0.4 Hz

p = .059

0.6 Hz

p = .015

0.8 Hz

p = .007

1.0 Hz

0 -400

0 lag (ms)

100 p = .001

frequency

400 500

600

number of synchronous pairs

Figure 3: Non-accidental synchrony. Each row contains a cross correlogram from 100 one-
second trials (as in Figure 1C), and a jitter histogram (as in Figure 2). Synchronous spike pairs were injected at the rates indicated on the left side of each row, corresponding to mean values of 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 total injected spike pairs, respectively, over all one-hundred trials. (Actual numbers of injected pairs were 0, 18, 33, 50, 64, and 87.) A crude estimate for the number
of "non-accidental" synchronies (i.e. synchronies not explained by shared, slow, fluctuations in
firing rates) is obtained by subtracting the mean of the histogram distribution from the observed synchrony count.

Hz Hz Hz Hz Hz frequency

Bandwidth

Poisson intensity

function

300

7.5 ms

10.0 ms

0 250

12.5 ms

0 200

15.0 ms

0 200

25.0 ms

0 140

0 1 second

Cross correlogram with shu e bands
0

Synchrony distribution from ±10 ms jitter
p = .001

p = .007
0

p = .004
0

p = .207
0

160 p = .457
0

-400 0 400 600 750 900

lag (ms)

number of synchronous pairs

Figure 4: Temporal resolution. Rate functions, with bandwidths 7.5 ms, 10 ms, 12.5 ms, 15
ms, and 25 ms, are shown, top-to-bottom, in the second column. Each rate function is shared by "Neuron 1" and "Neuron 2," and is used to produce one-hundred Poisson spike processes for each neuron, simulating one-hundred identically distributed trials. For each rate function, the cross correlogram from all one-hundred trials is shown in the third column, along with the 95% shuffle-produced confidence bands. The correlograms are almost entirely within the confidence bands. For each rate function and simulated set of one-hundred trials, the right column contains the jitter (±10 ms) distribution on synchronies (± 1 ms), along with the number of synchronies in
the original (un-perturbed) spike train and the corresponding right-tail p value. Twenty ms jitter
(±10 ms) disrupts spike correlations that arise from shared rate fluctuations with bandwidth 7.5 ms but not bandwidth 25 ms, with a general progression from more disrupted to less disrupted through intermediate values.

Cross correlograms with shuffle bands
A

Cross correlograms with jitter bands

Matt: some kind of common axes for all four correlograms,
B and 2.5% & 97.5% bands

Figure 5: Jitter-corrected cross correlograms. A. Left-hand cross correlogram is taken from
Figure 1C, and suggests a significant excess of one-millisecond synchronies, as calibrated by shufflegenerated 2.5 and 97.5 percentile confidence bands. The actual spike-generating processes have common, but slowly varying, firing rates. See §3.1. The right-hand panel displays the jittercorrected cross correlogram, along with the corresponding jitter-generated confidence bands, again
using the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles (see §3.4 for details). The zero-lag peak is no longer significant.
B. Same as A, except that the data is taken from the experiments reported in Figure 4 and discussed in §3.3. The left-hand cross correlogram is the one displayed in the first row of Figure 4, corresponding to rapid and shared rate fluctuations. Excess synchrony is missed, but flagged in
the jitter-corrected cross correlogram (right-hand side).

Hz Hz

Poisson intensity function
A100
60
20
B100
60
20 1 second
Figure 6: Piecewise approximations of a rate function. The rate function shown in the
upper-left panel of Figure 1A is approximated by a piecewise constant (panel A) and piecewise linear (panel B) function, with respect to a fixed 20 ms partitioning ("jitter intervals"). The linear approximation is constrained to change by no more than 25% within any 20 ms interval. Spike processes generated from the linear approximation would be nearly indistinguishable from processes generated from the original rate function.

jitter interval = 20 ms R = 0 ms

jitter interval = 64 ms

R = 25 ms

R = 100 ms

1 second

1 second

Figure 7: Pattern jitter. The top horizontal line of dots for each subfigure shows an identical
sequence of observed spike times (dots) during a one-second interval. Each of the remaining 15 lines
of dots shows an independent spike sequence generated by pattern jitter. Jitter intervals in the left column are 20 ms; those in the right column are 64 ms. Notice that coarse-temporal modulations in firing rate are preserved, more so with 20 ms jitter than with 64 ms jitter. The top, middle and bottom rows of subfigures have R = 0, 25 and 100 ms histories, respectively. The only patterns in the top and middle rows are single spikes. Nevertheless, since the middle row has a larger R, the sampled spike sequences are more regular: spikes cannot be jittered too close to one another or new patterns will be created. The bottom row has three patterns. Notice that the patterns are preserved in the sampled sequences and that only the first spike of each pattern is constrained to remain in its original jitter interval.

A N1
10

N2
10

N3
10

391 trials Hz
391 trials Hz
391 trials Hz

1 sec

0 1 sec

B N1/N2

1 sec

0 1 sec

N1/N3

1 sec

0

N2/N3

1 sec

0 0 0

-400

0 ms

400 -400

0 ms

400 -400

0 ms 400

Figure 8: Simultaneous recordings from monkey motor cortex. Panel A: Raster plot and
PSTH for each of three simultaneously recorded neurons. Data is from the first 1,000 ms of each of 391 trials. Panel B: Cross correlograms, with 95% shuffle-derived confidence bands.

N1/N2

spike jitter
(20 ms)

pattern jitter
(20 ms)

p = .001 150

p = .001

60 120 60 120

p = .015 150

p = .010

N1/N3

N2/N3

30 60

30 60

p = .093
150

p = .066

frequency

20 50 20 50 number of synchronous pairs
Figure 9: Spike and pattern jitter analysis of Figure 8 data. Left column: results of
(single-spike) interval jitter on each of the three pairs of analyzed neurons. Jitter interval is 20 ms, and synchrony counts are from spike pairs, one from each neuron, occuring within ±1 ms. Right column: Pattern jitter, also using 20 ms intervals. Patterns preserve R=100 ms spike histories. The excess synchronies in spike pair N1/N2 can not be explained by taking into account relative or absolute refractory periods, bursting, or any other statistical dependency between sequential spikes that acts within a time window of 100 ms.

R = 0 ms
400 p = .012

R = 1 ms
p = .004

R = 2 ms
p = .008

frequency

E.R. = 3.0

E.R. = 3.4

E.R. = 3.3

10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25

R = 4 ms
400 p = .015

R = 8 ms
p = .038

R = 16 ms
p = .408

frequency

E.R. = 3.1

E.R. = 2.5

E.R. = 0.5

10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25 maximum number of repetitions

Figure 10: Maximum number of triplet repetitions. Triplets (t1,t2,t3) with t2-t1=23 and
t3-t2=27 occured 15 times in neuron N2 during 391 successful trials; no other triplet repeated as often. The six histograms are of the maximum numbers of repetitions of triplets in 1,000 resampled spike trains produced by pattern jitter. The jitter interval, in all six experiments, is 64 ms, and the pattern histories are, as indicated, 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 milliseconds. The displayed p values are the respective probabilities of finding 15 or more repetitions of a triplet in the ensemble of resampled
spike trains. E.R. (excess repetitions) is the difference between 15, the observed maximum repetition
count, and the mean of the resampling distribution.

