511

CROWD SIMULATION FOR ANCIENT MALACCA VIRTUAL WALKTHROUGH
Mohamed `Adi Bin Mohamed Azahar1, Mohd Shahrizal Sunar2, Abdullah Bade2, Daut Daman2
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
1adiazahar@gmail.com, 2{shahrizal, abade, daut}@utm.my

ABSTRACT
The recreation of virtual cultural heritage sites and urban environment simulations has become more common nowadays. However, an empty environment in the simulations will diminish the immersive experience that the simulations suppose to present. That's why the simulations of massive crowd play an important role in this field. In recent years, the growth of the research in this area has escalated and there has been many techniques developed in the crowd simulations area, mainly in entertainment and games industry both for real-time and non-real time rendering. In this paper, we will present some of the related work in crowd simulation, and a few types of crowd rendering methods that are usually used. Furthermore, we will also give an overview on framework suggested for developing crowd simulations in our project.
Keywords: Crowd Simulation, Virtual Reality, Computer Graphics.
1 INTRODUCTION
The wide use of computer graphics in education, entertainment, games, simulation, and virtual heritage applications has led it to become an important area of research. In simulation, it is important to create an interactive, complex, and realistic virtual world so that the user can have an immersive experience during navigation through the world [1]. As the size and complexity of the environments in the virtual world increased, it becomes more necessary to populate them with peoples, and this is the reason why rendering crowd in real-time is crucial.
Generally, crowd simulation consists of three important areas. There are realism of behavioural [2], high-quality visualization [3], and convergence of both areas. Realism of behavioural is mainly used for simple 2D visualizations because most of the attentions are concentrated on simulating the behaviours of the group. . High-quality visualization is regularly used for movie productions and computer games, its give intention

on producing more convincing visual rather than realism of behaviours. The convergences of both areas are mainly used for application like training systems. In order to make the training system more effective, the element of valid replication of the behaviours and high-quality visualization is added.
The purpose of this paper is to present some of the related work in crowd simulation, crowd rendering issues, a few types of crowd rendering methods that are usually used, and an overview on framework that will be used for developing crowd simulations in Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough project. Afterward, we conclude our paper with some future research directions pertaining with the area.
2 RELATED WORK
In this section we will present an overview of the selected works related to the simulation of groups and crowds. We will also present project background that will be used in this research.
2.1 Real-time Crowd Simulation
Real-time crowd simulation is a process of simulating the movement of a large numbers of animated characters or agents in the real-time virtual environment. Crowd movement in certain cases requires the agents to coordinate among themselves, follow after one another, walking in line or dispersing using different directions. All of these actions will contribute to the final collective behaviours of the crowd that must be achieved in real-time. Unlike non-real-time simulations which is able to know the full run of the simulated scenario, real-time simulations have to react to the situation as it unfolds in the moment. Real-time rendering of a large number of 3D characters is also a challenge, because it can exhaust the system resources quickly even for a powerful system [4].
A behavioural animation of human crowd was based on foundations of group simulations of much more simple entities, notably flocks of birds [5] and schools of fish [6]. Earliest procedural animation of flocks of virtual birds called Eurhythmy was developed from concept that was presented at The

ISSN 1858-1633 @2008 ICTS

512 4th International Conference Information & Communication Technology and System

Electronic Theater at SIGGRAPH in 1985 and the final version was presented at Ars Electronica in 1989 [7]. The flock motion was achieved by a global vector force field guiding a flow of flocks. In his early work, Reynolds describes a distributed behavioural model for simulating aggregate motion of a flock of birds. The idea was that a complex behaviour of a group of actors can be obtained by simple local rules for members of the group. The flock was simulated as a complex particle system, using the simulated birds, called boids, as the particles. Reynolds, later extended his work by including various steering behaviours as goal seeking, obstacle avoidance, path following, or fleeing [8], and introduced a simple finite-state machines behaviours controller and spatial queries optimizations for real-time interaction with groups of characters [9].
More recent work was studies on group modelling based on hierarchies. Niederberger et al. [10] proposed architecture of hierarchical and heterogeneous agents for real-time applications. Behaviours were defined through specialization of existing behaviours types and depend on multiple inheritances to create new types. An approach that has become more common now was geometry baking. By taking snapshots of vertex positions and normals, complete mesh descriptions were stored for each frame of animation as in the work of Ulicny et al. [11]. Another approach was through dynamic meshes, which was using systems of caches to reuse skeletal updates. A hybrid of baked meshes and dynamics meshes was found in Yersin et al. [12] where the graphics programming unit (GPU) was used to its fullest.
A real-time crowd model based on continuum dynamics has been proposed by Treuille et al. [13]. In their model, a dynamic potential field integrates global navigation with moving obstacles, efficiently solving for the motion of large crowd without the need for explicit collision avoidance. In addition, Mao et al. presented an effective and ready to use framework for real-time visualization of large-scale virtual crowd. Script that describes motion state and position information was use as input, provides convenient interface and makes the framework universal to almost all application of crowd simulation [14]. Recently, Berg et al. have introduced a multi-agent navigation algorithm using a simple and effective combination of high-level and low-level methods that model human spatial navigation. A pre-computed roadmap was used for global path planning and Reciprocal Velocity Obstacles was used for local navigation and collision avoidance [15].

2.2 Project Background
The Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough [16] is a project that focuses on the modelling and visualization of Malacca city in 15th century. It is based on local and foreign sources, such as the Sejarah Melayu and the descriptions by Portugese writer; Tome Pires described the city and the empire as an opulent and prosperous centre of maritime Malay civilizations. As a maritime empire, trading and commercial activities, both local and foreign, became the mainstay and the backbone of her economy. The focus area of visualization is Central Business and Administrative District of the Malacca Empire. The project is visualized in real-time rendering mode using SGI Onyx 3800 with 16 CPU, 32GB RAM and three Infinite Reality3 graphics pipes.
Figure 1. Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough
Figure 1 shows a screen capture of Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough. Currently, there is no crowd simulation done to this walkthrough project. The challenge of this project is to bring the visualization of crowd simulation to the project with low computational cost.
3 CROWD RENDERING
The tricky part when dealing with thousands of characters is the quantity of information that needs to be processed. Simple approaches, where virtual humans are processed one after another without specific order will produce high computational cost for both the central processing unit (CPU) and graphics processing unit (GPU). This is the reason why data that flows through the same path need to be grouped for an efficient use of the available computing power. Therefore, for the best simulation result, characters capable of facial and hand animation are simulated in the area near to the camera to improve believability, while for farther area, less expensive representations are used. Concerning efficiency of storage and data

ISSN 1858-1633 @2008 ICTS

087 Crowd Simulation For Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough - Mohamed `Adi Bin Mohamed Azahar

513

management, database must be used to store all the virtual human-related data. In this chapter we will discuss one of the major components in crowd simulation development which is rendering.
3.1 Crowd Rendering Issues
Figure 2 shows certain problems that arise when rendering crowd. For instance, collision avoidance problems for a group of peoples in the same place required different strategies in comparison with the methods used to avoid collision between individuals. Moreover, motion planning used in a group that walks together requires more information compared to individual motion planning. The trajectories computed for agents in the same group that walk together with similar speeds must be different even when they share the same environment and goals. In addition, other levels of behaviours can exist when treating crowd in this hierarchical structure. The group behaviours can be used to specify the way a group moves, behaves, and acts in order to fit different group structures (flocking, following, repulsion, attraction, etc). Individual abilities are also required in order to improve the autonomy and intelligence of crowd. However, to render thousands of individuals, these complex behaviours cannot be provided individually due to the hardware constraints and computational time rates. Another problem relates on how to improve the intelligence and provide autonomy to scalable crowd, in real-time systems. Furthermore, the simulation of large crowd in real time requires many instances of similar characters, that why an algorithms to allow for each individual in the crowd to be unique is needed.

Figure 2. Crowd Rendering Issues
There are several techniques used to speed up rendering process in crowd simulation. Billboarded impostors are one of the methods used to speed up crowd rendering. Impostors are partially transparent textured polygons that contain a snapshot of a full 3D character and are always facing the camera. Aubel et al. [17] proposed dynamically generated impostors to render animated virtual humans. A different possibility for a fast crowd display is to use point-based rendering techniques. Wand and Strasser [18] presented a multiresolution rendering approach which unifies image based and polygonal rendering. An approach that has been getting new life is that of geometry baking. By taking snapshots of vertex positions and normal, complete mesh descriptions are stored for each frame of animation as in the work of Ulicny et al. [19]. Another approach to crowd rendering using geometry is through dynamic meshes as presented in the work of de Heras et al. [20], where dynamic meshes use systems of caches to reuse skeletal updates which are typically costly.
3.2 Types of Crowd Rendering Method
In recent years, researchers have applied several approaches, either separately or in combination, to develop crowd simulation in various graphics application. In this section, five of the crowd simulation approaches will be reviewed.
3.2.1 Cellular Automata
Cellular automata were first proposed by Von Neumann [21]. Cellular automata are discrete

ISSN 1858-1633 @2008 ICTS

514 4th International Conference Information & Communication Technology and System

dynamic systems consisting of a regular grid of cells. Cellular automata evolve at each discrete time step, with the value of the variable at one cell determined by the values of variables at the neighbouring cells. The variables at each cell are simultaneously updated based on the values of the variables in their neighbourhood at the previous time step and according to a set of local rules [22]. At present, cellular automata have been successfully applied to various complex systems, including traffic models and biological fields. In recent years, cellular automata models have been developed to study crowd evacuation under various situations. These models can be classified into two categories. The first one is based on the interactions between environments and pedestrians. The other is based on the interaction among pedestrians.
3.2.2 Social Force
Helbing and Molnar [23] introduce a `Social force model for pedestrian dynamics'. They suggest that the motion of pedestrians can be described as if they are subject to social forces which are a measure of the internal motivation of individuals to perform certain actions or movements. They describe three essential forces: 1. Acceleration - the velocity of the pedestrian
varies over time, as it attempts to reach its optimum speed and as it avoids obstacles. 2. Repulsion - there is a repulsive force from other pedestrians and from obstacles and edges. 3. Attraction - pedestrians are sometimes attracted by other people or by other objects. Putting these three forces together, Helbing produces an equation for a pedestrian's `total motivation' and combining this with a term to allow for fluctuations in behaviour, produces the `social force model'. He goes on to describe computer models based on the equations, which have been successful in demonstrating various observed phenomena, for example lane formation. In Helbing et al. [24], the social force model is applied to the simulation of building escape panic, with impressive results.
3.2.3 Fluid Dynamics
Helbing et al. [25] have described that at medium and high densities, the motion of pedestrian crowds shows some striking analogies with the motion of fluids. For example, the footprints of pedestrians in snow look similar to streamlines of fluids or, again, the streams of pedestrians through standing crowds are analogous to riverbeds. Fluid-dynamic models describe how density and velocity change over time with the use of partial differential equations. Colombo and

Rosini [26] presented a continuum model for pedestrian flow to describe typical features of this kind of flow such as some effects of panic. In particular, this model describes the possible overcompressions in a crowd and the fall in the outflow through a door of a panicking crowd jam. They considered the situation where a group of people needs to leave a corridor through a door. If the maximal outflow allowed by the door is low, then the transition to panic in the crowd approaching the door may likely cause a dramatic reduction in the actual outflow, decreasing the outflow even more.
3.2.4 Particles
The majority of pedestrian simulations take this particulate approach, sometimes called the atomic approach. Early influential work was that of Craig Reynolds [5] who worked on simulations of flocks of birds, herds of land animals and schools of fish. Each particle, or boid, was implemented as an individual actor which navigates according to its own perception of the environment, the simulated laws of physics, and a simple set of behavioural patterns. Later work Reynolds [8] extends the concepts to the general idea of `autonomous characters', with an emphasis on animation and games applications. Bouvier et al. [27] describe a generic particle model and apply it to both the problem of pedestrian simulation and to the apparently distinct problem of airbag deployment. They present software allowing the statistical simulation of the dynamic behaviour of a generic particle system. In their system, the particle system was defined in terms of:
· The particle types - mass, lifetime, diffusion
properties, charge, drag, interactions with surfaces, visualisation parameters · The particle sources or generators - size, geometry, rate and direction of emission · The 3D geometry, including obstacles · The evolution of particles within the system
3.2.5 Agent Based
Agent based are computational models [28] that build social structures from the ``bottom-up'', by simulating individuals with virtual agents, and creating emergent organizations out of the operation of rules that govern interactions among agents. Bonabeau [29] supported the following point of view: in agent terms, collective panic behaviour is an emergent phenomenon that results from relatively complex individual-level behaviour and interactions among individuals; the agent based seems ideally suited to provide valuable insights into the mechanisms and preconditions for panic

ISSN 1858-1633 @2008 ICTS

087 Crowd Simulation For Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough - Mohamed `Adi Bin Mohamed Azahar

515

and jamming by incoordination. In the last few years, the agent based technique has been used to study crowd evacuation in various situations. Agents based are generally more computationally expensive than cellular automata, social force, fluiddynamic or particles models. However, their ability to allow each pedestrian to have unique behaviours makes it much easier to model heterogeneous humans, which are groups that contain individual with difference characteristic.

4 FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW
We will add our crowd rendering framework to the Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough. In the early stage, the simulation will update the position and heading for each character. A fragment program will read the character pixel buffer as a texture, and then will update the attributes for characters. The new position and heading will be then copied to a new character pixel buffer. Both character pixels buffers can be swapped after the rendering procedure has finished. This pass can also include the update of the animation frame for characters. Then, the LOD map will be updated according to the camera position. The LOD map will also be stored into a pixel buffer. Details and character positions will be used later in the impostor rendering proccess. Figure 3 shows the overview of our framework for crowd rendering in Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough.

Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough

View Frustum Culling

User Interface

Crowd Rendering
Simulation Update

LOD Info Generation

Impostor Rendering

Figure 3: Crowd rendering framework.

5 CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
In this paper we have presented some of the related work in crowd simulation, crowd rendering issues, a few types of common crowd rendering methods, and an overview of the framework that will be used for developing crowd simulations in Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough project. For the future work, there are rooms of improvement to the framework developed. As the framework will be using CPU for the entire processing task, we can also make use the power of nowadays GPU to take part in the processing task. This will make the application not only rely with the CPU but also distribute the task to GPU. As conclusion, we hope that this research is useful for the virtual walkthrough system developer. Consequently, it can also benefit the virtual heritage community.
6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like express our appreciation to Malaysian Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation under eScienceFund grant (01-01-06sf0066) for financial support of this research. We also like to thanks Creative Application Development Centre (CADC), Multimedia Development Corporation, Cyberjaya, Malaysia for allowing us to use the 3D model taken from Ancient Malacca Project and permit us to explore the potential improvement of the project.
REFERENCE
[1] Tecchia, F., Loscos, C., & Chrysanthou, Y.: Visualizing Crowd in Real-Time. Computer Graphics Forums. (2002)
[2] Thompson P., Marchant E.: Testing and application of the computer model 'simulex.' Fire Safety Journal 24, 2, 149­ 166 (1995)
[3] Dobbyn S., Hamill J., O'Conor K., O'Sullivan C.: Geopostors: A real-time geometry/impostor crowd rendering system. In SI3D '05: Proceedings of the 2005 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games (New York, NY, USA), ACM Press, pp. 95­102 (2005)
[4] Thalmann, D. and Musse, S. R.: Crowd Simulation. Springer-Verlag, London (2007)
[5] Reynolds C. W.: Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavioural model. In Computer Graphics (ACM SIGGRAPH '87 Conference Proceedings) (Anaheim, CA, USA), Vol. 21, ACM, pp. 25­34 (1987)
[6] Tu X., Terzopoulos D.: Artificial fishes: Physics, locomotion, perception, behaviour. In Computer Graphics (ACM SIGGRAPH '94 Conference Proceedings) (Orlando, FL, USA), Vol. 28, ACM, pp. 43­50 (1994)
[7] Amkraut S., Girard M., Karl G.: Motion studies for a work in progress entitled "Eurnythmy." SIGGRAPH Video Review, 21. (second item, time code 3:58 to 7:35) (1985)
[8] Reynolds C. W.: Steering behaviours for autonomous characters. In Proceedings of Game Developers Conference 1999, pp. 763­782 (1999)

ISSN 1858-1633 @2008 ICTS

516 4th International Conference Information & Communication Technology and System

[9] Reynolds C. W.: Interaction with groups of autonomous characters. In Proc. Game Developers Conference '00, pp. 449­460 (2000)
[10] Niederberger C., Gross M.: Hierarchical and heterogeneous reactive agents for real-time applications. Computer Graphics Forum 22, 3 (Proc. Eurographics'03) (2003)
[11] Ulicny B., de Heras Ciechomski P., Thalmann D.: Crowdbrush: Interactive authoring of real-time crowd scenes. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation (SCA'04) (2004), pp. 243­252.
[12] Yersin B., Ma¨im J., de Heras Ciechomski P., Schertenleib S., Thalmann D.: Steering a virtual crowd based on a semantically augmented navigation graph. In First International Workshop on Crowd Simulation (VCROWD'05) (2005).
[13] Treuille A., Cooper S., Popovic Z.: Continuum crowd. ACM Transactions on Graphics 25 (3), 1160­1168 (2006)
[14] Mao, T., Shu, B., Xu, W., Xia, S., Wang, Z.: CrowdViewer: from simple script to large-scale virtual crowd. In Proc. of the 2007 ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. (2007), pp. 113-116.
[15] Berg, J. v. d., Patil, S., Sewall, J., Manocha, D., Lin, M.: Interactive Navigation of Multiple Agents in Crowded Environments. In Proc. of the 2008 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games. (2008), pp. 139-147.
[16] Sunar, M. S., Mohd Zin, A., and Tengku Sembok, T. M.: Effective Range Detection Approach for Ancient Malacca Virtual Walkthrough. In: The International Journal of Virtual Reality 5(4):31-38 (2006)
[17] Aubel A., Boulic R., Thalmann D.: Real-time display of virtual humans: Levels of detail and impostors. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 10 (2), 207­217 (2000)
[18] Wand M., Strasser W.: Multi-resolution rendering of complex animated scenes. Computer Graphics Forum 21, 3 (Proc. Eurographics'02) (2002)

[19] Ulicny B., de Heras Ciechomski P., Thalmann D.: Crowdbrush: Interactive authoring of real-time crowd scenes. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation (SCA'04), pp. 243­ 252 (2004)
[20] De Heras P., Schertenleib S., Ma¨im J., Thalmann D.: Realtime shader rendering for crowd in virtual heritage. In Proc. 6th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (VAST 05) (2005)
[21] Xiaoping, Z., Tingkuan, Z., Mengting, L.: Modeling crowd evacuation of a building based on seven methodological approaches. In: The International Journal of Building Science and its Applications (2008)
[22] Wolfram S.: Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. In: Reviews of Modern Physics 55:601­44 (1983)
[23] Helbing D, Molnar P.: Social force model for pedestrian dynamics. In: Physical Review E 51(5):4282­6 (1995)
[24] Helbing D, Farkas I, Vicsek T.: Simulating dynamical features of escape panic. In: Nature 407:487­90 (2000)
[25] Helbing D, Farkas IJ, Molnar P, Vicsek T.: Simulation of pedestrian crowds in normal and evacuation situations. In: Schreckenberg M, Sharma SD, editors. Pedestrian and evacuation dynamics. Berlin: Springer; p. 21­58 (2002)
[26] Colombo RM, Rosini MD.: Pedestrian flows and nonclassical shocks. In: Mathematical Methods in the Applied Sciences 28:1553­67 (2005)
[27] Bouvier E., Cohen E., Najman L.: From crowd simulation to airbag deployment: Particle systems, a new paradigm of simulation. Journal of Electrical Imaging, 6 (1), 94­107 (1997)
[28] Goldstone RL, Janssen MA.: Computational models of collective behavior. In: Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9(9):424­30 (2005)
[29] Bonabeau E.: Agent-based modeling: methods and techniques for simulatinghuman systems. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA(PNAS) 99(Suppl. 3):7280­7 (2002)

ISSN 1858-1633 @2008 ICTS

