Hartismere News

1
Volume 1 No. 3  February 2008 

Hartismere High School presents
OLIVER
by Lionel Bart
at Hartismere High School Wednesday 12th -- Saturday 15 March 2008
7.30 pm
£8.00 / £5.00
Bar open from 7.00 pm
Tickets available after Half Term

EXTRA PD DAY 

Contents 

Please note that the government have allocated schools an  additional day for professional development in order to sup  port changes to the curriculum which will take place from Sep  tember 2008.  We have decided that this day will be Tuesday  8 April 2008. 
Therefore pupils will return for the Summer Term on  Wednesday 9 April 2008.

Eco Council News.................................p. 3 Gifted and Talented...............................p. 4 Library...............................................p. 3 National Cipher Challenge.......................p. 2 Oliver................................................p. 1 Sports................................................p. 2 Term Dates.........................................p. 1, 2

PUPILS RETURN TO SCHOOL ON MONDAY 18TH FEBRUARY 

Vol.1 No. 3 

2 

Trampolining 
The Hartismere Trampolining Team from Years 711 took part in the High Suffolk Trampolining Competi  tion at Leiston on 23r d  January. Boys and girls from across the age groups had to perform a set 10bounce  routine, followed by a 10bounce routine they had made up themselves, and were marked on the quality  of their performances and the difficulty of their routines. All performed extremely well against a high stan  dard of competition. 
Congratulations to Charlotte Arnold in Y8 who came 2n d  in the U13 girls competition, and the Y8 team  (Hugh Lowery, Charlotte Arnold, Issy Charman and Jojo Madden) who came first in the U13 Team Com  petition. 

Aerobics gets us fit! 

Swimming 

An after school aerobics club has proved  very popular with staff and pupils. Aero  bics instructor Zoë George has been lead  ing a packed class every Wednesday after  school, with staff and pupils benefiting  from her energetic routines and taxing  body conditioning exercises. 
The class will continue after half term from  56pm in the Sports Hall all staff and pu  pils are welcome. 

This term we have been working with Year 7 pupils at  Diss Swimming Pool to increase their confidence in the  water. Some pupils are also working towards Personal  Survival Level 1 Badge and certificate. 
We have decided to continue this for another 5 weeks  free of charge on Thursday evenings 45.30pm at Diss  Swimming Pool. 
If your son/daughter (in any year) would benefit from  swimming lessons aimed at lowintermediate ability  please contact Miss Riches. 

National Cipher Challenge 

Students from Years 7 & 8 have been taking part in the  University of Southampton's Quantum Code Challenge. 
There were sixteen challenges over the period October  to January. With over 1300 teams taking part, Hartis  mere managed to be joint first in Part A and 132 nd  in  Part B. 
Well done to the team captain, Mitchell Harwood (8F),  and team members Adam Wright (8C), Miranda Oliver  (8C), Emily Jordan (8C0, Amanda McManus (8B), Harry  Stevens (7E) and Zackary St John Clarke (7C). 

Dates of the School Year 2008 
Spring Term  Ends Thursday 20 March 
Summer Term  Tuesday 8 April--Tuesday 22 July  Pupils return Wednesday 9 April 
Half Term: week beginning 26 May

Mr Page 

Vol.1 No.3 

3 

Library News 

Congratulations to Alfie Beard (7C) who, having won the school heats of Book Mastermind in December, has  just won the Northern Area Final of this countywide competition where he had to answer questions on both his  chosen book `The Rilloby Fair Mystery' by Enid Blyton and general knowledge. Alfie is now reading `Eagle  Strike' by Anthony Horowitz in preparation for the County Final in March.  We wish him the best of luck. 

During the next half term we will be celebrating World Book Day (March 6th) with a quiz at lunchtime and other 

competitions. Every pupil will receive their £1 book voucher which they can either exchange for one of the spe 

cial books produced (see opposite for a selection) or use to get £1 off any 

book of 

their choice. 

In conjunction with World Book Day, there will be a Book Fair in the  Library every lunchtime from Wednesday 27 th  February to Tuesday 4 th 
March. Pupils will be able to browse and buy books, using their £1 World 
Book Day vouchers if they wish. Please encourage your child to come and  have a look at the books, the Library gets a percentage of 
the total takings and can choose books from the Fair up to that value, 
so the more you buy the more free books we get. 

Mrs Lewis, Librarian

Eco Council News 
The ecocouncil consists of ten Eco Reps (two from each form) in each year group.  We  meet every term to discuss the ideas students have expressed about how to make Hartis  mere a more environmentally sound school.  We have already started this process by or  dering recycling bins for every office and by starting a mobile phone recycling scheme.  For every phone we  salvage, the school receives £5.  A similar system has been introduced for ink cartridges and for this the school  gets £1 per cartridge.  We also remind teachers and students to turn the lights off when they are not in the  room.  As well as making the school better environmentally we are making our school a healthier place by intro  ducing fruit instead of biscuits in the sixth form block and staff room (the staff are encouraged to eat them!).  We  would welcome any ideas on how to raise more money to further help our cause, as the Headmaster has  pledged that he will match fund so that for every pound we raise he will contribute the same amount.  This  means we will raise twice as much! 
The school is aiming to attain a bronze environmental award which makes us one of the EcoSchools.  This is a  national scheme which recognises schools' efforts to lessen their impact on the environment. Next year we plan  to receive the more prestigious silver award.  We have already started planning several challenges that we will  set ourselves such as further reducing our carbon footprint and reducing our energy consumption.  We plan to  do this by acquiring a wormery or compost heap in the future, in addition to planting a herb garden.  We appre  ciate the efforts made on behalf of the students and teachers so far and welcome any suggestions parents may  have for fundraising, sponsorship or eco ideas. 
Sophie Brown 
Genevieve MarshFeiley 

Vol.1 No.3 

4 

Year 10 Challenge Day at
Cambridge University 
Mr R Miller ­ Leading Teacher for Gifted & Talented Education writes: 
Thirteen Y10 pupils recently attended a Challenge Day at Cambridge University during which they participated in a  variety of activities aimed at raising awareness of opportunities in higher education. Undergraduates and staff from  the University worked with our pupils during the morning on a series of tasks that developed their knowledge of the  way Cambridge University is organised and its history. These team activities also saw Hartismere pupils competing  against other schools not, unusually, for the highest grades but this time for chocolate they acquitted themselves  admirably! However after a busy morning there were still a few stomachs rumbling and a well earned lunch was  taken in Trinity College with its undergraduates and masters. 
The afternoon session took the form of two quite different lectures from post graduate students. The first presenta  tion was delivered by a PhD student whose research was looking at French Films.  Pupils were asked to interpret a  short contemporary French film and  present their ideas on its significance.  Our spokesperson, Chris Smith, took  to the stage to deliver our views in a  clear and succinct manner. The final  lecture, delivered again by a research  student, was more scientific and fo  cused on engineering calculations! By  the end of the session our pupils had  worked out some pretty demanding  problems in order to suggest how  modern society might make the most  efficient and sustainable use of limited  energy resources. 
It was easy for me to imagine a whole  range of pupils from Hartismere study  ing at Universities like Cambridge, Ox  ford or indeed any of the other mem  bers of the Russell Group. The mes  sage was clear ­ set your sights high  and go for it! For more information  about the Russell Group visit:  www.russellgroup.ac.uk/ 

The picture shows our pupils outside  Trinity College Cambridge at the end  of their Challenge Day.

