This PDF is a selection from an out-of-print volume from the National Bureau of Economic Research
Volume Title: Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes Volume Author/Editor: Jagdish N. Bhagwati Volume Publisher: NBER Volume ISBN: 0-884-10487-7 Volume URL: http://www.nber.org/books/bhag78-1 Publication Date: 1978
Chapter Title: Front matter, "Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes" Chapter Author: Jagdish N. Bhagwati Chapter URL: http://www.nber.org/chapters/c1017 Chapter pages in book: (p. -19 - 0)

ANATOMY AND
CONSEQUENCES OF EXCHANGE CONTROL REGIMES
by Jagdish Bhagwati
BaIinger Pubhshing Company · Cambridge, Massachusetts A Subsidiary of J. B. Lippincott Company

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH Studies in International Economic Relations
1. Problems of the United States as World Trader and Banker Hal B. Lary
2. Price and Quantity Trends in the Foreign Trade of the United States Robert E. Lipsey
3. Measuring Transactions Between World Areas Herbert B. Woolley 4. Imports of Manufactures from Less Developed Countries Hal B. Lary 5. The Responsiveness of Demand Policies to Balance of Payments: Postwar
Patterns Michael Michaely 6. Price Competitiveness in World Trade Irving B. Kravis and
Robert E. Lipsey 7. Money, Financial Flows, and Credit in the Soviet Union
George Garvy 8. Foreign Dollar Balances and the International Role of the Dollar
Raymond F. Mikesell and J. Herbert Furth 9. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Liberalization
Attempts and Consequences Anne 0. Krueger 10. Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes
Jagdish N. Bhagwati
This book is printed on recycled paper.
Copyright © 1 978 by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. All
rights reserved.
Library of Congress Card Number: 78-18799 ISBN for the series: 0--87014--500--2 ISBN for this volume: 0-88410487-7
Printed in the United States of America

Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
A Special Conference Series on Foreign Trade Regimes
and Economic Development
VOLUME XI
NATIONAL BUREAU OF EcoNoMIc RESEARCH
New York 1978

Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
ANATOMY AND CONSEQUENCES OF EXCHANGE CONTROL REGIMES

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

Arthur F. Burns, Honorary Chairman James J. O'Leary, Chairman
Eli Shapiro, Vice Chairman Martin S. Feldstein, President Victor R. Fuchs, Vice President, Director,
Palo Alto Office Philip J. Sandmaier, Jr., Treasurer

Charles E. McLure, Jr., Executive Director for Research
Douglas H. Eldridge, Executive Secretary
Sam Parker, Director of Finance and Ad-
ministration Robert E. Lipsey, Director, New York Office Joel Popkin, Director, Washington Office

DIRECTORS AT LARGE

Moses Abramovitz, Stanford University Atherton Bean, International Multifoods
Corporation Andrew F. Brimmer, Brimmer & Company,
Inc.
Otis F. Brubaker, United Steelworkers of
America Arthur F. Burns, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
Wallace J. Campbell, Foundation for Co-
operative Housing Solomon Fabricant, New York University Martin S. Feldstein, Harvard University Eugene P. Foley, Pan American Building,
York
Edward L. Ginzton, Varian Associates David L. Grove, International Business
Machines Corporation Walter W. Helter, University of Minnesota

Walter E. Hoadley, Bank of America Roy E. Moor, Becker Securities Corporation Geoffrey H. Moore, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research J. Wilson Newman, Dun & Bradstreet Corn-
panies, Inc. James J. O'Leary, United States Trust Corn-
pany of New York Peter G. Peterson, Lehman Brothers Robert V. Roosa, Brown Brothers Harriman &
Co.
Richard N. Rosett, University of Chicago Bert Seidman, American Federation of Labor
and Congress of Industrial Organizations Eli Shapiro, The Travelers Corporation Arnold M. Soloway, Jamaicaway Tower, Bos-
ton, Massachusetts Lazare Teper, International Ladies Garment
Workers' Union

DIRECTORS BY UNIVERSITY APPOINTMENT

Gardner Ackley, Michigan G.L. Bach, Stanford Charles H. Berry, Princeton Otto Eckstein, Harvard
Walter D. Fisher, Northwestern
John H. Kareken, Minnesota J. C. LaForce, California Los Angeles Robert J. Lampman, Wisconsin

Maurice W. Lee. North Carolina James L. Pierce, California, Berkeley Almarin Phillips, Pennsylvania Lloyd 0. Reynolds, Yale Robert M. Solow, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Henri Theil, Chicago William S. Vickrey, Columbia

DIRECTORS BY APPOINTMENT OF OTHER ORGANIZATIONS

Richard M. Bird, Canadian Economics Asso-
ciation Eugene A. Birnbaum, American Management
Associations Carl F. Christ, American Economic Associa-
tion Robert 0. Dederick, National Association of
Business Economists
Franklin A. Lindsay, Committee for Eco-
nomic Development
Paul W. McCracken, American Statistical
Association

Douglass C. North, Economic History Association
Rudolph A. Oswald, American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organ!-
zations Philip J. Sandmaier, Ji., American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants G. Edward Schuh, American Agricultural
Economics Association James C. Van Home, American Finance Asso-
ciation

DIRECTORS EMERITI

Percival F. Brundage Emilio 0. Collado Frank W. Fetter
Thomas D. Flynn

Gottfried Haberler Albert J. Hettinger Jr. George B. Roberts
Murrary Shields

Boris Shishkin Willard L. Thorp
Joseph H. Willits Theodore 0. Yntema

RELATION OF THE DIRECTORS TO THE
WORK AND PUBLICATIONS OF THE
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
The object of the National Bureau of Economic Research is to ascertain and to present to the public important economic facts and their interpretation in a scientific and impartial manner. The Board of Directors is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that the work of the National Bureau is carried on in strict conformity with this object.
2. The President of the National Bureau shall submit to the Board of Directors, or to its Executive Committee, for their formal adoption all specific proposals for research to be instituted.
3. No research report shall be published by the National Bureau until the President has sent each member of the Board a notice that a manuscript is recommended for publication and that in the President's opinion it is suitable for publication in accordance with the principles of the National Bureau. Such notification will include an abstract or summary of the manuscript's content and a response form for use by those Directors who desire a copy of the manuscript for review. Each manuscript shall contain a summary drawing attention to the nature and treatment of the problem studied, the character of the data and their utilization in the report, and the main conclusions reached.
4. For each manuscript so submitted, a special committee of the Directors (including Directors Emeriti) shall be appointed by majority agreement of the President and Vice Presidents (or by the Executive Committee in case of inability to decide on the part of the President and Vice Presidents), consisting of three Directors selected as nearly as may be one from each general division of the Board. The names of the special manuscript committee shall be stated to each Director when notice of the proposed publication is submitted to him. It shall be the duty of each member of the special manuscript committee to read the manuscript. If each member of the manuscript committee signifies his approval within thirty days of the transmittal of the manuscript, the report may be published. If at the end of that period any member of the manuscript committee withholds his approval, the President shall then notify each member of the Board, requesting approval or disapproval of publication, and thirty days additional shall be granted for this purpose. The manuscript shall then not be published unless at least a majority of the entire Board who shall have voted on the proposal within the time fixed for the receipt of votes shall have approved.
5. No manuscript may be published, though approved by each member of the special manuscript committee, until forty-five days have elapsed from the transmittal of the report in manuscript form. The interval is allowed for the receipt of any memorandum of dissent or reservation, together with a brief statement of his reasons, that any member may wish to express; and such memorandum of dissent or reservation shall be published with the manuscript if he so desires. Publication does not, however, imply that each member of the Board has read the manuscript, or that either members of the Board in general or the special committee have passed on its validity in every detail.
6. Publications of the National Bureau issued for informational purposes concerning the work of the Bureau and its staff, or issued to inform the public of activities of Bureau staff, and volumes issued as a result of various conferences involving the National Bureau shall contain a specific disclaimer noting that such publication has not passed through the normal review procedures required in this resolution. The Executive Committee of the Board is charged with review of all such publications from time to time to ensure that they do not take on the character of formal research reports of the National Bureau, requiring formal Board approval.
7. Unless otherwise determined by the Board or exempted by the terms of paragraph 6, a copy of this resolution shall be printed in each National Bureau publication.
(Resolution adopted October 25, 1926, as revised through September 30, 1974)

Dedication

For Alex and Rachel
Erlich

vi'

Contents

Foreword Preface
PART I. Introduction
Chapter 1: Scope of the Study
PART II. Anatomy of Exchange Control Regimes: Patterns and Sequences
Chapter 2: Anatomy of Exchange Control Regimes Conventional Theory Regulating Imports Regulating Exports Regulating Services Regulating Capital Flows Overall Setting
Price Instruments: Imports Price Instruments: Exports
VIII

xiv xvii
1
2
7
8 8 12 38 40 40 41 41 46

Chapter 3: Sequential Phases and Contrasting Structures in Exchange Control Regimes
General Propositions Sequential Patterns and Phases Phase Evolution and Patterns in Countries
in the Project
PART III. The Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes
Chapter 4: Illegal Transactions and Exchange Control
Illegality in Awarding, Claiming, and Disposing of Licenses
Faked Invoicing and Smuggling Capital Flight Reverse Links between QRs and Illegal Transactions Appendix
Chapter 5: Allocative Efficiency
Some Overall Indicators Interactivity Allocation of Resources: DRCs et al. Underutilization of Capacity Excess Holdings of Inventories Effects of Cheap Imports of Capital Goods and
Raw Materials Miscellaneous Effects
Chapter 6: Saving: Domestic and Foreign
Possible Links Between Domestic Saving and Foreign Trade Regimes
Empirical Evidence on Links Between Domestic Saving and Foreign Trade Regimes
Overall Phase Relationships Possible Links Between Foreign Capital Flows
and Foreign Trade Regimes Concluding Remarks

ix
53 53 56
59
64
65
65 67 71 77 77
82 83 85 101 110
113 117
127
128
138 160
161 174

x
Chapter 7: Export Performance and Other Effects Export Performance Export Performance and Growth Performance Other Growth Effects Income Distributional Effects
PART IV. Conclusions
Chapter 8: Foreign Trade Regimes: Overall Conclusions Export-Promoting vs. Import-Substituting Strategy and Relationship to Phase Analysis
Reasons for Superiority of Export-Promoting Strategy: Some Hypotheses
Concluding Observations
Appendix Author Index Subject Index About the Author

182 182 191 192 197
205
206
207
209 215
219
222 224 232

Figures

2-1 The Equivalence of Tariffs and Quotas Under Perfect Competition
2-2 The Foreign Exchange Market and Overvaluation 3-1 Phases of Exchange Control Regimes 8-1 Definition of Import-Substituting and Export-Promoting
Strategies 8-2 Welfare Effect of Successive Inflows of Capital in Presence of
Tariff Distortion

9 10 61
208
213

xi

Tables

2-1 Transition Matrices, 100-Commodity Samples: Turkey

19

2-2 Comparison of the Shifts in the Import Structures in LDCs and

DCs 22

2-3 Effectiveness of Import Restrictions in Israel, 1956

44

4-1 Exports of LDCs to OECD Countries Compared with Cor-

responding Imports by OECD Countries from LDCs and Black

Market Premium of U.S. Dollars, for 28 LDCs: 1966

73

4-2 Imports of LDCs from OECD Countries Compared with Cor-

responding Exports by OECD Countries to LDCs: 1966

75

5-1 Summary Information on DRCs and ERPs in Country Studies 92

5-2 Ranking of Crops in 1963 According to ERP, DRC, and Alter-

native Measures of Acreage Misallocation: Egypt

97

5-3 Ratio of Investment in Stocks to Fixed Investment, Various

Countries, 1966-1968

111

6-1 Summary of Results of Regressions of Gross Domestic Saving on

GDP and Exports: Several Countries and Periods

143

6-2 Corporate Saving Regressions in Selected Industries: India

145

6-3 Real Consumption-Saving Functions for Chilean Households and

Non-profit Institutions, Business, and the Government:

1945-1965

148

6-4 Estimated Shares of Government, Corporate, and Personal Sav-

ing in Total Domestic Saving in Countries in the Project

152

6-5 Effect of Exchange Rate on the Development Budget, 1951-1968:

Israel

157

6-6 Saving Regressions for India: 1951-1952 to 1959-1960 and

1960-1961 to 1969-1970

161

xii

xl"

6-7 Results of Major Analyses Regressing Saving on Foreign Capital

Flows

168

6-8 Alternative Saving Regressions for India: 1951-1970

171

6-9 Private and Government Saving Regressions for India: 1951-1952

to 1965-1966

173

7-1 Principal Project Results on Time Series Regressions of Exports 185

Foreword
This volume by Jagdish Bhagwati, together with Anne Krueger's Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, published earlier, brings to a conclusion the National Bureau of Economic Research Project on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development, directed by Professors Bhagwati and Krueger. Professor Bhagwati's synthesis volume concentrates on the exchange control regimes themselves, while Professor Krueger's focused on attempts at liberalization. The syntheses draw on the previously published studies of Turkey, Ghana, Israel, Egypt, the Philippines, India, South Korea, Chile, and Colombia, as well as the two studies that were begun but not completed on Brazil and Pakistan. The Project, which began in 1970, is being followed up under the National Bureau's program on International Economic Relations by a study of Alternative Trade Strategies and Employment under Professor Krueger's direction. Both of these studies have been financed under research contracts with the Agency for International Development of the U.S. Department of State.
Perhaps the outstanding point of both syntheses is the conclusion that an export-promoting strategy is superior to an import-substitution strategy for
the promotion of economic growth in developing countries. Professor
Bhagwati defines export promotion policy as one which removes import bias, and in fact he finds that what are called export promotion policies usually do not involve a bias toward exporting but something closer to neutrality and therefore to a free-trade position.
xiv

FOREWORD

xv

The very isolation from world markets fostered by an import-substitution strategy leads to "chaotic" incentives, so that the strategy is far from an
"ideal" one that might be theoretically constructed. Export-promoting strategy, on the other hand, seems to lead to incentives that are less chaotic--more neutral among industries--and on this ground alone should
contribute to economic growth. One reason why export-promotion policies do not involve large biases toward exports is that export subsidies,the main possible source of export bias, are an open cost in national budgets. An importsubstitution policy, operating typically through quantitative restrictions, does not involve any budgetary cost for the Treasury, and inadvertent major distortions are therefore much more likely.
Given the way an import-substitution regime actually works, including the fact that it typically operates largely through physical measures (quotas) rather than price measures (tariffs), many aspects of the regime seem to be at best irrelevant for development and often clearly injurious in ways that are barely touched on by the theoretical literature Professor Bhagwati reviews. As
in Professor Krueger's volume, there is strong evidence here not only of the effects of domestic political considerations but also of that appears to have been sheer inadvertence. Quantitative controls became so complex that governments did not realize their impact, as in the case cited for India in which
the import control regime seems to have provided the private sector with incentives to add to capacity in the face of excess capacity."
The gains from an export-promotion strategy are thus largely in the removal of such unintended consequences of import substitution as excess capacity, excess inventories, and bottlenecks. These effects are reinforced by the apparent success of export promotion in inducing greater capital inflows, despite the high profits for local production offered by import-substitution policies. Professor Bhagwati's explanation is, first, that foreign capital inflow is encouraged by the prospect of higher exports, which can finance the servicing and repatriation of the debt. His second point is that the type of "tariffjumping" direct investment induced by import substitution may lower real income in the receiving country, while under an export-promotion strategy the investment is more likely to take advantage of the country's abundant resources, particularly labor, and thus raise the country's (and the world's) real income.
Professor Bhagwati points out that both tariffs and quantitative restrictions give rise to opportunities for illegal transactions, favoritism, and corruption. However, quantitative restrictions, by producing larger deviations from free market prices than do tariffs, offer larger temptations to illegal behavior. The awarding of import licenses has produced the most flagrant examples, but quantitative restrictions also offer greater incentives to smuggling and false invoicing than tariffs because the implicit tariffs resulting from quantitative

xvi FOREWORD
restrictions are so high. Explicit tariffs of over 100 percent are rare, but implicit tariffs over 100 percent resulting from quantitative controls are numerous.
Even where the quantitative Testrictions do not give rise to illegal transactions or corruption, the effort to avoid favoritism in awarding licenses often
leads to mechanical methods of allocation on the basis of "fairness," or "equality of treatment." The result of such efforts is to ignore efficiency in favor of rules of thumb that seem "fair" such as allocation by past shares, capacity, employment, and so on, all of which shelter and thus preserve the least efficient firms.
Professor Bhagwati examines each aspect of the anatomy of exchange controls theoretically and points out the often severe limitations that the required assumptions place on the applicability of the theory. He then combs the country studies and related literature for examples, counter-examples, and statistical tests of the nature and consequences of exchange control regimes. He carefully points out the difficulties in tracing clear effects of exchange controls and calls attention to the exceptions and ambiguous cases.
In a sense, by examining the anatomy of exchange control regimes, Professor Bhagwati opens up an area beyond the usual theory of optimum development policy. What is needed is a theory of how policy will actually be made and administered under different trade regimes given the incentives for the policy-makers, the administrators of the policy within the government, and the firms that must live with or evade the policy. It may be irrelevant to any actual problem whether a quantitative restriction program can be imagined that would maximize real income or growth. A policy of import substitution, particularly under quantitative restrictions, may involve so many opportunities to secure private profits in ways that defeat the ostensible purpose of the restrictions that it is bound to be manipulated to that end. Even if an export promotion policy were not theoretically superior, it might be superior in fact because it offered fewer opportunities for exploitation.
The success of Professors Bhagwati and Krueger in drawing substantial conclusions about trade policy from such intractible materials testifies to the value of this type of large-scale comparative study that could draw on the experience of many countries and expert contributors. In a study of any single country the complexities and national peculiarities would obscure the lessons. A series of studies, in a well-designed common framework, can bring out the major common themes of each country's experience and provide conclusions for scholars and policy-makers.
Robert E. Lipsey Director, International Studies

Preface
This volume is designed to be a partial synthesis of the major findings of the National Bureau of Economic Research Project directed by me and Professor Anne Krueger. It is meant to be a complement to the more substantial synthesis written by Professor Krueger and therefore is deliberately kept extremely brief in regard to both the description of the country studies and its overall size, the former so as to avoid undue repetition and the latter so as not to strain the patience of the reader who seeks to gain a total view of the Project's findings.
Two caveats must be entered. First, the two synthesis volumes complement each other in focusing on different aspects of the Project. This volume is addressed to the static efficiency and dynamic effects of exchange control regimes whereas the Krueger volume is addressed principally to the causes and consequences of liberalization attempts. Nevertheless, inevitably, several overlaps of topics do exist. In these instances, no attempt has been made to impose uniformity of views. This is, in fact, in the spirit of the Project, and we hope that it also encourages the readers of the synthesis volumes to refer to the original country studies and attempt their own syntheses! Nonetheless, the reader of both volumes should find a substantial conformity in the overall conclusions reached by Professor Krueger and myself, especially in regard to the major questions addressed by the Project.
Second, the syntheses cannot expect to, and in fact do not, capture the full complexities and subtleties that the reader will find in many of the country studies. At least this volume should therefore be treated as a guide to certain key contributions in the country studies rather than as a perfect substitute to reading them for their many insights.
xvii

Xviii

PREFACE

In the course of reflecting over the questions posed in the Project and interacting with the many distinguished collaborators in the Project, I have chalked up a number of intellectual debts. I should particularly like to thank Hal Lary of the National Bureau of Economic Research who oversaw the Project over its long life. Although he is an economist with distinguished contributions of his own, he selflessly gave an immense amount of time, energy, and intellectual ability to the Project. While therefore no volume bears his name, the stamp of his meticulousness, carefulness with data and interpretation, and insightfulness is evident in all the volumes published under the Project, and none of them has failed to improve from his generous input. I should also like to add that I have profited much from the collaboration with Anne Krueger in co-directing the Project. Over the several years that we have worked on the Project, we have discussed many things, and it is now impossible to
take the partial derivatives and assign marginal product to either of us. But it is evident to me that, without her many contributions, the Project would have been much the poorer. Next, all the country authors have freely placed at our disposal their ideas, in penciled comments on early drafts, through their excellent studies, and at the on-the-way conferences that were held to discuss the progress of the Project. The penultimate draft in particular has profited immensely from the detailed and careful comments of Bent Hansen, Clark Leith, Larry Westphal, Jere Behrman, Anne Krueger, Hal Lary, T.N. Srinivasan, Padma Desai, and Gideon Fishelson.
Finally, the reader should be warned that, except for minor revisions, the writing of this volume was substantially finished by June 1977.

Cambridge March 1978

Jagdish N. Bhagwati

Other Books by the Author
The Economics of Underdeveloped Countries Trade, Tariffs and Growth The Theory and Practice of Commercial Policy The Amount and Sharing of Aid India: Planning for Industrialization (with Padma Desai) India in the International Economy Contributions to Indian Economic Analysis (with S. Chakravarty)
Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: India (with T.N.
Srinivasan) International Trade (editor) Foreign Aid (co-editor with R.S. Eckaus) Economics and World Order (editor) Development and Planning (co-editor with R.S. Eckaus) Trade, Balance of Payments, and Growth (co-editor with R. Jones, et a!.) Illegal Transactions in International Trade (editor) Taxing the Brain Drain: A Proposal (co-editor with M. Partington) The Brain Drain and Taxation (editor) The New International Economic Order: The North-South Debate (editor)
xix

