POLICYFORUM

ENERGY
Beneficial Biofuels--The Food, Energy, and Environment Trilemma

Exploiting multiple feedstocks, under new policies and accounting rules, to balance biofuel production, food security, and greenhouse-gas reduction.

David Tilman,1* Robert Socolow,2 Jonathan A. Foley,3 Jason Hill,3 Eric Larson,4 Lee Lynd,5 Stephen Pacala,6 John Reilly,7 Tim Searchinger,8 Chris Somerville,9 Robert Williams4

Recent analyses of the energy and greenhouse-gas performance of alternative biofuels have ignited a controversy that may be best resolved by applying two simple principles. In a world seeking solutions to its energy, environmental, and food challenges, society cannot afford to miss out on the global greenhouse-gas emission reductions and the local environmental and societal benefits when biofuels are done right. However, society also cannot accept the undesirable impacts of biofuels done wrong.
Biofuels done right can be produced in substantial quantities (1). However, they must be derived from feedstocks produced with much
1Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA. 2Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. 3Institute on the Environment, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA. 4Princeton Environmental Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. 5Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. 6Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. 7Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 8Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. 9Energy Biosciences Institute, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: tilman@umn.edu

lower life-cycle greenhouse-gas emissions than traditional fossil fuels and with little or no competition with food production (see figure, below). Feedstocks in this category include, but may not be limited to, the following:
1) Perennial plants grown on degraded lands abandoned from agricultural use. Use of such lands minimizes competition with food crops. This also minimizes the potential for direct and indirect land-clearing associated with biofuel expansion, as well as the resultant creation of long-term carbon debt and biodiversity loss. Moreover, if managed properly, use of degraded lands for biofuels could increase wildlife habitat, improve water quality, and increase carbon sequestration in soils (1­3). The key to carbon gains is to use land that initially is not storing large quantities of carbon in soils or vegetation and yet is capable of producing an abundant biomass crop (4, 5). Some initial analyses on the global potential of degraded lands suggest that they could meet meaningful amounts of current global demand for liquid transportation fuels (5­7).
2) Crop residues. Crop residues such as corn stover and straw from rice and wheat
are produced in abundance. They are rich in elements (C, N, and P) essen-

tial for maintaining soil fertility and carbon stores, and they help minimize soil erosion. Recent research suggests that it is to the benefit of farmers to leave substantial quantities of crop residues on the land (8), but that, nonetheless, even conservative removal rates can provide a sustainable biomass resource about as large as that from dedicated perennial crops grown on degraded lands (1).
3) Sustainably harvested wood and forest residues.Another abundant feedstock is residues from forestry operations, which include slash (branches, but not leaves or needles) that currently is left in place, unused residues from mill and pulp operations, and forest "thinnings" removed to reduce fire risk or to allow select trees to attain merchantable sizes more quickly (9, 10).
4) Double crops and mixed cropping systems. Double crops grown between the summer growing seasons of conventional row crops and harvested for biofuel production before row crops are planted in the spring are representative of a class of landuse options with potential to produce biofuel feedstocks without decreasing food production and without clearing wild lands (11). Mixed cropping systems in which food and energy crops are grown simultaneously present similar opportunities (12, 13).

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 26, 2009

CREDIT: M. TWOMBLY/SCIENCE

The best biofuels. The search for beneficial biofuels should focus on sustainable biomass feedstocks that neither compete with food crops nor directly or indirectly cause land-clearing and that offer advantages in reducing greenhouse-gas emissions. Perennials grown on degraded formerly agricultural land, municipal and

industrial sold waste, crop and forestry residues, and double or mixed crops offer great potential. The best biofuels make good substitutes for fossil energy. A recent analysis suggests that more than 500 million tons of such feedstocks could be produced annually in the United States (1).

270

17 JULY 2009 VOL 325 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Published by AAAS

POLICYFORUM

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 26, 2009

5) Municipal and industrial wastes. Solid cycle greenhouse-gas reduction relative to

waste streams, which are frequently rich in conventional gasoline (23).

organic matter, including paper, cardboard, The biofuels industry is positioned to

yard wastes, and plastics, can be converted undergo rapid growth. The attendant policy

to liquid fuels (14, 15).

should anticipate and provide for a biofuels

As global population and standards of industry that meaningfully and positively

living increase during the coming decades, addresses pressing sustainability and secu-

both the urgency to lower greenhouse-gas rity challenges. Biofuels should receive pol-

emissions and the demand for transporta- icy support as substitutes for fossil energy

tion and meat may increase. Nonetheless, only when they make a positive impact on

the five biomass sources discussed above-- four important objectives: energy security,

in combination with large reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions, biodiversity, and

fuel demand, achieved through increased the sustainability of the food supply. Perfor-

efficiency, and large increases in both food mance-based policies are needed that provide

and biomass productivity on existing farm- incentives proportional to the benefits deliv-

land--could produce enough biofuels to ered. Legislation that is vague could allow

meet a substantial

significant portions

portion of future Dramatic improvements in policy of the biofuels indus-

energy demand for transportation (1).
However, loom-

and technology are needed to ... meet global demand for both food

try to develop along counterproductive pathways. Comple-

ing over the future of and biofuel feedstocks.

mentarypoliciesmust

biofuels are several

directly target related

wrong options. Sometimes, the most profit- goals, such as land- and water-efficient food

able way to get land for biofuels is to clear production, reduced agricultural greenhouse-

the land of its native ecosystem, be it rain- gas emissions, and the prevention of habitat

forest, savanna, or grassland. The resulting loss from land-clearing (24, 25).

release of carbon dioxide from burning or The recent biofuels policy dialogue in

decomposing biomass and oxidizing humus the United States is troubling. It has become

can negate any greenhouse-gas benefits of increasingly polarized, and political influ-

biofuels for decades to centuries (16­20). ence seems to be trumping science. The

Decisions regarding land for biofuels can best available science, continually updated,

have adverse consequences far beyond the should be used to evaluate the extent to

land directly in question. For example, if which various biofuels achieve their mul-

fertile land now used for food crops (such tiple objectives, and policy should reward

as corn, soybeans, palm nuts, or rapeseed) is achievement. Three steps should be taken:

used to produce bioenergy, this could lead, meaningful science-based environmental

elsewhere in the world, to farmers clearing safeguards should be adopted, a robust bio-

wild lands to meet displaced demand for fuels industry should be enabled, and those

crops. In this way, indirect land-use effects who have invested in first-generation biofu-

of biofuels can lead to extra greenhouse- els should have a viable path forward.

gas emissions, biodiversity loss, and higher In support of such policy, rigorous account-

food prices (21, 22).

ing rules will need to be developed that mea-

Dramatic improvements in policy and sure the impacts of biofuels on the efficiency

technology are needed to reconfigure agri- of the global food system, greenhouse-gas

culture and land use to gracefully meet emissions, soil fertility, water and air quality,

global demand for both food and biofuel and biodiversity (26).Accounting rules should

feedstocks. Good public policy will ensure consider the full life cycle of biofuels produc-

that biofuel production optimizes a bundle tion, transformation, and combustion.

of benefits, including real energy gains, Unless new technologies and life-styles

greenhouse-gas reductions, preservation of are adopted globally over the coming

biodiversity, and maintenance of food secu- decades, the massive projected increases in

rity. Present legislation in the United States global energy and food consumption will

takes partial steps in the right direction by greatly elevate atmospheric greenhouse-gas

specifyingminimallyacceptablegreenhouse levels from fossil fuel combustion, land-

benefits for certain types of biofuels. Nota- clearing, and livestock production and will

bly, the U.S. 2007 Energy Independence and create immense biodiversity loss from habi-

Security Act states that cellulosic biofuels tat destruction and climate change. The qual-

(such as ethanol made from cellulose) must, ity of human life will be compromised. A

when both direct and indirect emission are central issue for the coming decades, then, is

taken into account, offer at least a 60% life- how the environmental impacts and potential

benefits associated with meeting the global demand for food and energy can be internalized into our economic systems (27). This is a complex question that cannot be addressed with simplistic solutions and sound bites. It needs a new collaboration between environmentalists, economists, technologists, the agricultural community, engaged citizens, and governments around the world.
References and Notes 1. National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of
Engineering, National Research Council, Liquid Transportation Fuels from Coal and Biomass: Technological Status, Costs, and Environmental Impacts (National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, 2009). 2. J. M. F. Johnson, A. J. Franzluebbers, S. L. Weyers, D. C. Reicosky, Environ. Pollut. 150, 107 (2007). 3. G. P. Robertson et al., Science 322, 49 (2008). 4. K. Anderson-Teixeira, S. Davis, M. Masters, E. Delucia, GCB Bioenergy 1, 75 (2009). 5. D. Tilman, J. Hill, C. Lehman, Science 314, 1598 (2006). 6. C. B. Field, J. M. F. Campbell, D. B. Lobell, Trends Ecol. Evol. 23, 65 (2008). 7. J. M. F. Campbell, D. B. Lobell, R. C. Genova, C. B. Field, Environ. Sci. Technol. 42, 5791 (2008). 8. W. W. Wilhelm, J. M. F. Johnson, D. L. Karlen, D. T. Lightle, Agron. J. 99, 1665 (2007). 9. E. D. Reinhardt, R. E. Keane, D. E. Calkin, J. D. Cohen, For. Ecol. Manage. 256, 1997 (2008). 10. B. Solomon, V. Luzadis, Eds., Renewable Energy from Forest Resources in the United States (Routledge, New York, 2009). 11. A. H. Heggenstaller, R. P. Anex, M. Liebman, D. N. Sundberg, L. R. Gibson, Agron. J. 100, 1740 (2008). 12. B. Dale, M. Allen, M. Laser, L. Lynd, Biofuel Bioprod. Bior. 3, 219 (2009). 13. E. Malézieux et al., Agron. Sustain. Dev. 29, 43 (2009). 14. B. Antizar-Ladislao, J. L. Turrion-Gomez, Biofuel Bioprod. Bior. 2, 455 (2008). 15. K. B. Cantrell, T. Ducey, K. S. Ro, P. G. Hunt, Bioresour. Technol. 99, 7941 (2008). 16. F. Danielsen et al., Conserv. Biol. 23, 348 (2009). 17. J. Fargione, J. Hill, D. Tilman, S. Polasky, P. Hawthorne, Science 319, 1235 (2008). 18. H. K. Gibbs et al., Environ. Res. Lett. 3, (2008). 19. M. O'Hare et al., Environ. Res. Lett. 4, (2009). 20. G. Piñeiro, E. G. Jobbágy, J. Baker, B. C. Murray, R. B. Jackson, Ecol. Appl. 19, 277 (2009). 21. T. Searchinger et al., Science 319, 1238 (2008). 22. D. A. Landis, M. M. Gardiner, W. van der Werf, S. M. Swinton, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 20552 (2008). 23. Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, Public Law 110-140, H.R. 6, 2007. 24. R. Dominguez-Faus, S. E. Powers, J. G. Burken, P. J. Alvarez, Environ. Sci. Technol. 43, 3005 (2009). 25. M. Wise et al., Science 324, 1183 (2009). 26. L. Firbank, Bioenerg. Res. 1, 12 (2008). 27. J. Hill et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 2077 (2009). 28. Individuals whose backgrounds span a broad range of perspectives gathered in Princeton, NJ, to exchange views about the sustainability of biofuels, food, and the environment. After considerable back-and-forth, we arrived at the consensus presented above. We are hopeful that colleagues charged with developing biofuels policies, who are likely to span a similarly broad range of views, will benefit from our deliberations. We thank the Carbon Mitigation Initiative at the Princeton Environmental Institute, supported by BP and Ford, for funding the workshop.
10.1126/science.1177970

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 325 17 JULY 2009
Published by AAAS

271

