TWLT20

The April Fools’ Day Workshop

on Computation Humour

PROCEEDINGS OF THE TWENTIETH

TWENTE WORKSHOP ON LANGUAGE TECHNOLOGY

AN INITIATIVE OF HAHACRONYM

European Project IST-2000-30039

APRIL 15-16, 2002

TRENTO, ITALY

Oliviero Stock, Carlo Strapparava,

and Anton Nijholt (eds.)

CIP GEGEVENS KONINKLIJKE BIBLIOTHEEK, DEN HAAG

Stock O., Strapparava C., Nijholt A.,

The April Fools’ Day Workshop on Computational Humour
Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 20

An initiative of HAHAcronym. European Project IST-2000-30039

O. Stock, C. Strapparava, A. Nijholt (eds.)
Italy, Trento, ITC-irst

ISSN 0929–0672

trefwoorden: computational humor, humor theory, computational linguistics, emotion modelling,

irony modelling, pragmatics, embodied agents

c(cid:1) Copyright of the papers remains with the authors

Book orders:
Ms. C. Bijron
University of Twente
Dept. of Computer Science
P.O. Box 217
NL 7500 AE Enschede
tel: +31 53 4893680 – fax: +31 53 4893503
Email: bijron@cs.utwente.nl

Druk- en bindwerk: Reprograﬁe U.T. Service Centrum, Enschede

Preface

These are the proceedings of the international April Fools’ Day Workshop on Computational Humour
that, despite its name, has been a serious and successful event. It was held in Trento on April 15-16,
20021. The workshop follows the successful International Workshop on Computational Humour held in
Enschede in 1996 and is an initiative of HAHAcronym 2 (IST-2000-30039), the ﬁrst European project about
computational humour.

The aims of the workshop were bringing together research results in the area of computational humour,
with an emphasis on the computational interpretation and generation of verbal humour. Scientiﬁcally, the
ﬁeld is a young area of investigation that poses some very challenging questions: what ’intelligence’ is
required for the skillful use of humour? How can modelling humour contribute to modelling intelligence ?
What role can humour play in making systems look more intelligent and enjoyable?

A number of research results on humour can suggest a computational treatment of the topic.
One assumption that underlies the research on computational humour is that in future human-machine
interaction, humans will demand a naturalness and effectiveness that requires also the incorporation of
models of possibly all human cognitive capabilities, including the handling of humour. We believe there
are many practical settings where humour will add value. Among them there are: business world ap-
plications (such as advertisement, e-commerce, etc. . . ); general computer-mediated communication and
human-computer interaction; increase in the friendliness of natural language interfaces, edutainment and
autonomous agents systems.

The program of the workshop has included a selection of six accepted papers, proposed by researchers in
Europe, North America, Japan; six invited talks by distinguished scientists in the ﬁeld; an intriguing after
dinner talk by Aaron Ben-Ze’ev, Rector of the University of Haifa; a panel concerned with the relation
between modelling of emotions and modelling of humour; demonstrations of running systems.

The Program Committee of the workshop was formed by:
• Salvatore Attardo (Youngstown University, USA)
• Kim Binsted (I-Chara, Japan)
• Douglas Hofstadter (Indiana University, USA)
• Anton Nijholt (University of Twente,The Netherlands)
• Andrew Ortony (Northwestern University, USA)
• Victor Raskin (Purdue University, USA)
• Willibald Ruch (Queens University, Belfast, UK)
• Oliviero Stock (ITC-irst, Italy) (chair)
• Carlo Strapparava (ITC-irst, Italy)

Our thanks go to all the participants, the people that submitted papers, and the prestigious invited speak-
ers, that have enthusiastically accepted the invitation - and even sent in some written contribution in time -
and foremost to the members of the Program Committee.

At the end, humour is something we need for our survival. For surviving with computers they will have
to demonstrate some humour capability themselves. This workshop has been an initial contribution in that
direction.

Oliviero Stock, Carlo Strapparava and Anton Nijholt

Trento, April 2002

1April 1st was not possible, as that day in 2002 is both Easter Monday and a day of Passover
2http://haha.itc.it

iii

Previous TWLT workshops

Previous TWLT workshops were

Tomita’s Algorithm: Extensions and Applications. 22 March, 1991.
Linguistic Engineering: Tools and Products. 20 November, 1991.
Connectionism and Natural Language Processing. 12 and 13 May 1992.
Pragmatics in Language Technology. 23 September, 1992.
Natural Language Interfaces. 3 and 4 June, 1993.
Natural Language Parsing. 16 and 17 December, 1993.
Computer-Assisted Language Learning. 16 and 17 June 1994.
Speech and Language Engineering. 1 and 2 December 1994.
Corpus-based Approaches to Dialogue Modelling. 9 June, 1995.

TWLT1,
TWLT2,
TWLT3,
TWLT4,
TWLT5,
TWLT6,
TWLT7,
TWLT8,
TWLT9,
TWLT10, Algebraic Methods in Language Processing. 6-8 December, 1995.
TWLT11, Dialogue Management in Natural Language Systems. 19-21 June, 1996.
TWLT12, Automatic Interpretation and Generation of Verbal Humor. 11-14 September 1996.
TWLT13, Formal Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, Twendial’98. 13-15 May 1998.
TWLT14,
TWLT15,
TWLT16, Algebraic Methods in Language Processing (AMiLP2000). 20-22 May 2000.
TWLT17,
TWLT18,
TWLT19,

Language Technology in Multimedia Information Retrieval. 7-8 December 1998.
Interactions in Virtual Environments. 19-21 May 1999.

Learning to Behave: Interacting Agents (CEvoLE1). 18-20 Oct 2000.
Learning to Behave: Internalising Knowledge (CEvoLE2). 22-24 Nov 2000.
Information Extraction in Molecular Biology. 11-14 Nov 2001.

For the contents of the previous proceedings, please consult the last pages of this volume.

iv

Contents

Invited Speakers

Formalizing Humor Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Salvatore Attardo (Youngstown University, USA)

Optimal Innovation and Pleasure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

Rachel Giora (Tel Aviv University, Israel)

Frame Blends, Analogies, and Humor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Douglas Hofstadter (Indiana University, USA)

Computational Humor and Ontological Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

Victor Raskin (Purdue University, USA)

The Structure of Forced Reinterpretation Jokes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

Graeme Ritchie (Edinburgh, Scotland)

Computers with a Personality? Lessons to be Learned from Studies of the Psychology of Humor . . . . 57

Willibald Ruch (Queens University, Belfast, UK)

Invited After Dinner Speaker

Humour in Online Romantic Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

Aaron Ben-Ze’ev (University of Haifa, Israel)

Regular Talks

Generation of Idiom-based Witticisms to Aid Second Language Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

Justin McKay (Binsted-McKay, Tokio, Japan)

Real and Fictional Ridicule. A Cognitive Approach for Models of Humour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89

Francesco Mele (Istituto di Cibernetica, CNR, Napoli, Italy)

Embodied Agents: A New Impetus to Humor Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

Anton Nijholt (University of Twente, The Netherlands)

A Formalism for Misapprehended Identities: Taking a Leaf Out of Pirandello . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113

Ephraim Nissan (University of Greenwich, UK)

Humorous Agent for Humorous Acronyms: The HAHAcronym Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

Oliviero Stock, Carlo Strapparava (ITC-irst, Trento, Italy)

The Verbal/Non-verbal Distinction: Still and O-pun Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

Chris Vernour, Michael Levinson, Greg Lessard (Queen’s University, Canada)

v

Formalizing Humor Theory

Salvatore Attardo

Youngstown State University
Youngstown, OH 44555, USA

attardo@cc.ysu.edu

Abstract

This paper assumes familiarity with the Semantic Script Theory of Humor (SSTH; Raskin
1985) and the General Theory of Verbal Humor (GTVH; Attardo and Raskin 1991). All
unexplained acronyms are deﬁned therein. It also assumes a general knowledge of the research
on humor in linguistics, as reviewed in Attardo (1994).

1 Why have a Formal Theory?
In Raskin and Attardo (1994), we introduced the argument that humor theory would beneﬁt
from being confronted with computational treatments because providing a formal, algorithmic
treatment of the subject forced clarity, well-deﬁniteness, and in general all implicit parts of an
argument to the surface, so to speak. More in general, computability approximates quite well
formality, in the meta-epistemological sense intended. In what follows I assume without futher
argument this point.

It should be noted that I am not claiming the equivalence of computability and formality,
for the obvious reason that some formal systems are non-computable, for example because they
involve recourse to inﬁnity.

2 How Formal is Humor Theory?
The research on the linguistics of humor has come under ﬁre for not being suﬃciently formal(ized)
to be eﬀectly evaluable. While in some cases this charge is correct, in others it is equivalent to
the proverbial throwing away the baby with the bath water. A survey of the research on humor
in linguistics will be found in Attardo (1994).

In this paper I will argue that signiﬁcant parts of the linguistics of humor are suﬃciently
formal for any empirical veriﬁcation, while stopping short of axiomatization (mostly on historical
grounds). Speciﬁcally, I will look at two issues: the crucial deﬁnition of “script” in Raskin (1985)
and the attempt at formal description of a class of logical mechanisms (LMs) in Attardo et al.
(forth.). I will also look brieﬂy at the ﬁrst implementation of Jape (Binsted and Ritchie 1997), in
light of the previous discussion. A longer paper, including discussion of other implementations of
Jape and of other computational humor systems, is in preparation.

3 Scripts
Cognitively a script is an organized complex of information “about” something (typically, a lexical
item, but not exclusively, since there are obviously non-lexicalized concepts). There is a signiﬁcant
literature on scripts, frames, and other such semantic “objects” reviewed in Raskin (1985) and
Attardo (1994, 2001), among others. We will not refer to it, except to note that a script, in the
sense used in this paper, is roughly similar to a frame.

A script is deﬁned in mathematical terms as a domain of an unlabeled directed graph (Raskin
1985b: 308). Technically, the semantic network of script-based semantics is a multigraph (i.e.,
several edges may link two vertices). No theoretical problem comes from this simpliﬁcation. To

be fair, very little actual work in script-based semantics has been done in the formalism of graph
theory, although ontological semantics (Nirenburg and Raskin forth.) is expressed in a formalism
deﬁned by a Bachus-Naur form. Most day-to-day work in script-based semantics is done using
a simpliﬁed, easy to process, slot-and-ﬁller formalism, reminescent of lexical-functional grammar
(e.g., Raskin 1985a), or in LISP pseudocode (Raskin et al. 1994a/b). On more work in graph-
theoretic terms, see of course section (4), below.

In other words, if every simple element of meaning (I am evasive on the exact nature of the
simplex semantic “atoms” because much inter-theoretical strife has gone into identifying them; for
lack of a better term “concepts,” “lexemes,” or “semantic features” may be used) is represented as
a vertex in a graph, and a semantic relationship between any two simplex elements is represented
as the two elements being adjacent in the graph, then a script is the resulting set of vertices
and hedges connecting the adjacent vertices. Hedges can be labeled so as to emphasize certain
semantic relationships, typically used in script/frame theory, such as ISA, partonymy, etc.

Under this deﬁnition, the obvious issue becomes the delimitation of each individual script: in
other words, since every concept is somewhow related to every other (indirectly, to be sure!) since
it is intelligible, theoretically a script for dog would include information on mandolin. Raskin
(1985: 81) notes that a script is a “domain” within the general graph. Not much more deﬁnition
is necessary. One can advocate, as I have done (Attardo 1994), a spreading activation model
which will decrease the activation of nodes of the graph as one moves progressively away from
the central node (the lexical “handle” of the script, for those which have one) and it appears
the psychologically at least, spreading activation is a passable model of actual human processing.
However, the solution to the apparent problem is much simpler: in reality, the “boundaries” of the
“individual” script are uninteresting because we “reify” scripts for pedagogical purposes. In actual
understanding/processing we operate with dynamic, constantly changing, often “ad hoc” concepts
(consider what the script for “occasional Monday night football pizza” must look like). Formally,
graph theory takes care of things very elegantly. Stipulation that only directly linked nodes may
be included in the script for a given “handle” will immediately determine the size/shape of the
domain. Larger domains may be carved out by stipulating n-degrees of linking: if V is the set of
vertices, V : {a, b, c} and E the set of edges, e = ab ∈ E (1-degree of linking), if bc ∈ E, but ac is
not, then a-c is a 2 degree link, etc.

There are many issues in script-theory that we cannot address, due to lack of space, such as
the diﬀerent kinds of scripts, the diﬀerent ways that scripts can be activated during processing,
and many others. Raskin (1985) and Attardo (1994, 2001) provide discussion of several of these
issues. However, we will brieﬂy address the issue of saliency in scripts.

3.1 Saliency Issues in Scripts
In Attardo et al. (forth.), we argue in some detail against the idea that scripts are sets (although
one may choose to represent them as such for illustrative reasons) for the simple but important
reason that scripts are not random collections of elements (as sets are). Scripts, quite to the
contrary, are organized. A common way to conceptualize one aspect of the organization of scripts
is a slot-ﬁller pairs, with a (small) number of “service” or “metalinguistic” slots (such as “agent,”
“time,” “location,” etc.) which provide the conceptual organization of the script. For example, a
verb-like concept will have an “agent” slot, a “time” slot, and possibly a “patient” or “recipient”
slot, etc.

The organization of scripts does not end here: further ordering is introduced by the presence
of events and subevents, presupposed events, goals, etc. Consider the script for alimony which
presupposes the following, obviously organized, events: marriage, divorce, court order, payment
from the agent to the former spouse. In other words, (some, mostly verbal) scripts “tell a story”
(Raskin et al. 1994a/b) which is organized along a timeline.

Even further organization is provided, on a diﬀerent plane, by saliency eﬀects within the script.
Raskin (1985: 82) notes that some parts of the script domain are “emphasized” to indicate their
centrality. In Attardo et al. (forth.), we use the notion of “foregrounding” which we represent as
a proper subset of the script, or more eﬀectively as links to a special “foreground” node.

2

Foregrounding or saliency is particularly important in humor theory, because I have argued
that it may be the key to better understanding the complex issues surrounding the notion of
“oppositeness” in the SSTH. I will return brieﬂy to this in section (5), below. On saliency and
humor, see Giora (1991).

3.2 Discovery Procedures for Scripts
In contrast to most “formal” theoretical linguistic work, script-based semantics has actual imple-
mentable discovery procedures for its constructs, and does not have to rely on unconstrained and
notoriously unreliable “native speaker intuition.” Script-based semantics considers a script as an
hypothesis on the semantic content of a lexical item (ignoring non-lexical scripts, i.e., scripts that
do not correspond to any lexical item in a given language, for simplicity in this context). In a
very Popperian fashion, the current state of the script is considered merely as not (yet) proven
false by evidence, which will come form further uses of the lexeme in a given text. When the
speaker (or the NLP system) encounters a sentence containing the targeted lexeme its script is
activated and reassessed on the basis of any new information provided by the new context. If the
script is found to be defective (i.e., missing some information, or containing information that is
faulty) it is updated as needed. Alternatively, the speaker (or the NLP system) may reject the
new information (i.e., decide that the information embodied in the script is more reliable than the
new, contrasting information).

From a diﬀerent, but complementary perspective,the following is Raskin’s original formulation

of this principle:

The inclusion of an element of semantic information in a script is justiﬁed if a sentence
can be found, such that it contradicts this element and is semantically deviant for this
reason alone (1985b: 311)

Thus far we have shown that script-theory is falsiﬁable, with respect to the contents of the
scripts. How formal is script-theory, then? Formalization is of course an independent metric from
falsiﬁably (it is trivial to construct formal but unfalsiﬁable theories). Certainly script-theory, with
very few exceptions, one of which discussed immediately below, is not presented in any axiomatic
form. The reasons for not doing so, strike me as follows: 1) there exists a risk of premature
formalization, the history of syntactic theory in the past 30 years is a looming caveat to the eﬀect
that elaborating a sophisticated formalism is no guarantee that one’s theory will succeed even in
describing an artiﬁcially delimited subdomain of the ﬁeld, let alone provide a complete description
of its object. 2) in a sense, the axiomatic method (provide axioms and rules for the generation of
theorems) is not very appropriate to the discovery procedures of the lexicon. The lexicon is more
like the set of axioms that are fed to the generative process. 3) in another sense, the lexicon is a
very large set of items, whereas typically axioms are kept to a small number and rules generate
large amounts of theorems.

Of course, a theory can be formal, while not being formalized. What matters is of course that
one’s theory be formalizable in principle. Under this light, the SSTH is deﬁnitely a formal theory of
semantics. Some of its aspects may still need work, to be sure, but which theory doesn’t? Having
established that formal(izable) nature of the SSTH, let’s turn to its descendent, the GTVH.

4 The GTVH in Graph Theory
The GTVH assumes and incorporates the SSTH, while signiﬁcantly expanding it. Some aspects of
the GTVH may be completely intractable formally, at least at present (consider that the GTVH
includes narrative aspects, situational aspects, and aggression-targeting aspects, for example).
However, the two higher-level knowledge resources, script opposition and logical mechanism, may
be described more formally. Attardo et al. (forth.) endeavors to do so. What follows is a (much)
shortened version of the argument presented therein.

As the reader of Raskin (1985) will recall, the SSTH claims that a joke presents two features:
• a full or partial overlap between two scripts, and

3

• that the two scripts are (locally) antonymous (“opposed”)

We now proceed to formulate these concepts in the theory of graphs.

4.0.1 Script overlap
Two scripts (graphs) S1 and S2 are said to be overlapping iﬀ they share at least an edge (e) and
two vertices adjacent to e. Or, in other words, if there exists a subgraph G, such that G ⊂ S1&S2
or to put it diﬀerently G = S1 ∩ S2.

We now need to introduce a speciﬁcation, to disallow trivial overlaps. Let us consider the

infamous doctor’s wife joke (1):

(1) “Is the doctor at home?” the patient asked in his bronchial whisper. “No,” the doctor’s

young and pretty wife whispered in reply. “Come right in.” (Raskin 1985: 100)

Since both the patient visiting the doctor and the lover visiting his wife are humans and they
both are agents of the actions they respectively perform, according to the deﬁnition above, the
two scripts would overlap. In fact, any scripts about any human doing something would trivially
overlap with them. Even worse, scripts come with “service” slots and subslots, which for example,
record coreferences between slots, time-stamp actions, etc. All scripts share them and therefore
all scripts would trivially overlap.
We know, however, that scripts come with foregrounded parts. So all we need to do is restrict
the deﬁnition above so that the subgraph G = S1 ∩ S2 include a path which includes at least one
“focus” vertex (we can think of this as a label or as an actual vertex which links to the focused
vertices). Figure (1) shows a fragment of the graph, with the overlapping parts, some of which
are in focus and some of which are opposed (semantically).

human

doctor

(out-of-focus overlap)

(opposition)

(overlap)

human

lover

have sex

visit

F

visit

partner

cure

patient

F = focus

Figure 1: A fragment of the graph for joke (1). Only the vertices (scripts) are labeled.

An issue that should be kept in mind is that overlap can be considered as a mapping of a
vertex onto itself (i.e., a loop). We can avoid using loops, by representing twice the vertex, or
by representing the vertex in the intersection part of a Venn diagram (in other words, the vertex
occurs in both graphs (sets)).

4.1 LM
We can now move on to the LM of a joke. We can describe it is an isomorphic mapping between
two graphs G1 → G2. Signiﬁcantly, the isomorphic mapping may not be present in the graphs,
but be nonetheless “implied” by it or “forced” upon it. Consider the following example, which is
the title of Devlin (1993): The Joy of Sets. Let us represent as a simpliﬁed graph Devlin’s title
as a chain (Bollob´as 1998: 80) or path (Harary 1969: 13), in which each of the words of the title
is a vertex (Figure 2) and in parallel we represent the title of Comfort (1972) The Joy of Sex.

4

the

joy

g1

g2

h1

h2

the

joy

of

g3

h3

of

s e t

s

mathematics

g4

g5 g6 g7

h4

h5 h6 h7

g8

h8

s e k s

intercourse

Figure 2: Chains for The Joy of Sets/Sex

Assume that the words of the titles (the analysis could be done at the morphemic or phonemic
level, of course) are themselves subgraphs (g1, g2, g3, ..., gn) of a graph G (The Joy of Sex) and H
(The Joy of Sets). It is clear that the parallelism between the two paths imposes a mapping G → H
or H → G.1 However, the mapping stops short at the vertices g6 (cid:5)→ h6.2 We claim that it is
precisely the spurious extension of the mapping to g8 → h8 that constitues the (local logic, playful)
resolution of the incongruity of a parallelism between set theory and sexual intercourse. The reader
may be puzzled by our choice to illustrate the notion of mapping LM by a spurious example, but
he/she need only recall that LMs are not necessarily real resolutions of the incongruity, but may be
merely playful, pretend resolutions. The next section presents examples of non-entirely spurious
mappings.

4.1.1 Further Examples of LMs Represented in Graphs

woman

it
(penis)

rubbing/

putting in

poorbox

dollars

sex

money

Figure 3: Graph for joke (2): false analogy LM.

False analogy Consider joke (2)

(2) A married man goes to confessional and tells the priest, “I had an aﬀair with a woman
- almost.” The priest says, “What do you mean, ‘almost’?” The man says, “Well, we got
undressed and rubbed together, but then I stopped.” The priest replies, “Rubbing together
is the same as putting it in. You’re not to go near that woman again. Now, say ﬁve Hail

1In fact, the two graphs overlap, see above.
2Actually, it continues up until the third phoneme (g/h5), and is reestablished in the fourth (g/h7), but we choose
to ignore this last fact. We simpliﬁed the phonetic representation, for ease of drawing. The dotted lines represent
the inferred links to the scripts mathematics and intercourse, as well as the parallelism-imposed mapping sets→
sex.

5

Mary’s and put $ 50 in the poor box.” The man leaves confessional, goes over and says his
prayers, then walks over to the poor box. He pauses for a moment and then starts to leave.
The priest, who was watching him, quickly runs over to him and says, “I saw that. You
didn’t put any money in the poor box!” The man replied, “Well, Father, I rubbed up against
it and you said it was the same as putting it in!” (randomjoke)

which can be represented (in part) in ﬁgure (3).
In (3) we see two scripts intercourse and
penance (in this case, instantiated as the oﬀering of money to the poor). The scripts are not
fully represented (since that would be unwieldy), but rather they are alluded to3 by the two circles
(the left circle stands for the intercourse script, while the right one stands for penance. The
intersection/overlap of the two scripts are the nodes rubbing and putting in which (the joke tells
us) are locally4 equivalent. We then get a mapping of woman onto poorbox via the isomorphism
between poorbox, dollars, and rubbing / putting in (not represented in the picture) and
woman, it = penis and rubbing / putting in (also, not represented in the picture). The
picture does, however, represent the mapping woman → poorbox, and it = penis→ dollars.
Note that rubbing / putting in is mapped onto itself. Picture (3) also represents the opposition
between it = penis and dollars and (by extension, indicated by the arrows) between sex
and money. Thus (3) represents the two scripts overlapping, in opposition, and their logical
mechanism.

Parallelism From the preceding discussion, it follows that the parallelism LM is the prototypical
case of mapping LMs. Indeed this is the case. Consider joke (3).

(3) A wife is like an umbrella. Sooner or later one takes a cab. (Freud 1905: 93)

We can represent the parallelism as a directed graph and if we introduce the convention that
empty circles are scripts not occurring in the text (private and public, which are arrived at
inferentially), the result is ﬁgure (4), in which we see the two parallelizing predications of the text
and the resulting “triangulation” which allows to deduce the double parallelism of the joke: A wife
is to a prostitute, what an umbrella is to a cab, i.e., the private form of a commodity. Therefore,
it follows that a wife is like an umbrella (and a prostitute is like a cab).

wife

umbrella

(prostitute)

cab

Figure 4: Graph for joke (3): parallelism LM.

Space prevents further exempliﬁcation and discussion, but I think that it should be clear that
(some) LMs are amenable to formalization. Given their abstract nature and their complexity, this
bodes well for the ultimate goal of formalizing the GTVH entirely.

5 Jape
We now turn extremely brieﬂy to a concrete example of application of humor theory ot computa-
tional matters. Jape is a punning riddle generator (Binsted and Ritchie 1997). It generates riddles
of the kind:

3The reader will recall that scripts can be represented as sets for illustrative purposes.
4Cf. Raskin’s “local” antonymy (Raskin 1985: 108) and Attardo (1997) for discussion.

6

(4) What do you get when you cross breakfast food with a murderer? A cereal killer.

The components that make up Jape are:

1. The lexicon: “store(s) general (non-humor oriented) syntactic and semantic information”
(Binsted and Ritchie 1997: 44) it consists of 59 words and 21 NPs (Binsted and Ritchie
1997: 58).

2. Homophone base: list of homonyms and homographs.

3. six schematas (more semantic) “The fact that there is anything amusing or bizzarre about
the question-answer pair is caused by the choice of lexemes related in particular ways, and
this is the responsibility of the schema” (Binsted and Ritchie 1997: 40)

4. fourteen templates (more syntactic) “There is no essentially humorous knowledge encoded

in the set of templates.” (Ibid.)

5. “a post-production checker, which applies some simple heuristics to sift out some of the more

obvious non-jokes” (my emphasis, SA) (Binsted and Ritchie 1997: 43).

Binsted and Ritchie (1997: 68-69) are fairly negative (but not completely so) about the rele-
vance of humor research for their computational modeling of humor. Mostly they object of the
lack of formalization of the resources postulated by humor theory and to their unconstrained “AI-
complete” nature (which makes actual implementation impossible or impractical). Both of these
claims have some elements of truth. However, the arguments presented in this paper should have
allayed at least some of these objections.

Let us turn to the relevance of Jape toward humor theory. Binsted and Ritchie (1997: 70)
note that their “model does not emphasize the same features of jokes structure” as the GTVH.
Speciﬁcally, they claim SO “is not even represented in [their] model” (Ibid.). They conclude:
“Either script opposition is not actually very important in question-answer punning riddles, or
one script opposition is implicit and ﬁxed for all such jokes” (Ibid.).

So, which is it? A few lines before the discussion of SOs and Jape quoted above, Binsted
and Ritchie state the in their examples “there is no strong evidence for the two scripts to be
opposed—they need only be diﬀerent” (Binsted and Ritchie: 1997: 70). This is a telling statement.
In Attardo (1997) and Attardo et al. (forth.), I have argued that the complex issue of deﬁning
local antonymy (Raskin’s 1985 deﬁnition of “oppositeness”) should be handled along the lines of a
“semantic axis.” This is not the place to go into the details of this issue (see Attardo et al. forth.),
but suﬃce it to say that there are foregrounded and backgrounded aspects of the script/frame.

Now, according to Binsted and Ritchie (1997: 61), Jape’s output suﬀered signiﬁcantly from
failing to account for this fact (the volunteers who produced the lexical entries being untrained
in lexical semantics, presumably).
In their example, the lexical entry for boar includes as a
link the Act-verb sniff which while true (apparently) is not foregrounded (this resulted in a
humorous text that was judged poorly formed: “what do you use to sniﬀ a drilling tool: a wild
bore” [bore/boar]). Incidentally, Binsted and Ritchie (1997: 61) reveal even less knowledge about
Sus Scrofa than the present author has, when they claim that boars do not “typically” sniﬀ. I am
pretty sure that the typical boar sniﬀs, having a snout, more or less as much as it breathes, or
eats. The problem of course is not typicality, but foregroundedness: sniﬃng is a possible physical
activity of most animals with breathing apparatus and is not especially foregrounded, the way
length of the neck is foregrounded (at default) for giraﬀes. Presumably boars have other hog-like
foregrounded aspects of their being or behavior.

To be fair, this is a very complex area, as foregrounding is not a static aﬀair: work on saliency
(e.g., Giora 1991) has shown that contextual pressure may alter (even radically) the foregrounded
parts of a script/frame. I am afraid we are still far away from a complete understanding of these
issues. However, it is already clear that, whatever was wrong in the failed joke quoted in Binsted
and Ritchie (1997: 61) had to do with a faulty SO: by establishing an opposition between non-
foregrounded parts of the scripts, the SO fails to function (possibly, because “sniﬃng” simply fails
to activate the script for “boar” at the right time).

7

Furthermore, provided that some sort of “semantic axis” requirement is respected (i.e., that
the opposition is between foregrounded or salient portions of the scripts/frames, at the time of
the opposition) I tend to think that indeed mere diﬀerence is all that is required semantically for
incongruity (i.e., being the complementary set, cf. Attardo 1997). So, summing up, Jape is in
substantive agreement with the SO deﬁnition and in fact it seems likely that implementing a more
speciﬁc SO mechanism would have prevented some of Jape’s misﬁres.

Let us conclude with an observation that seems to have escaped Binsted and Ritchie: namely
that all question-answer punning riddles share a LM, namely the Cratylistic association between
signiﬁer and signiﬁed that is present in all homophonic or paronymic puns (see Attardo 1994: ch.
4 for details). Thus we see that Jape, far from being at odds with the GTVH, is in fact largely
congruent with it.

References

Attardo, Salvatore. (1994). Linguistic Theories of Humor. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.

—. (1997). “The semantic foundations of cognitive theories of humor.” Humor: International

Journal of Humor Research. 10-4. 395-420.

—. (2001). Humorous Texts. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.

Attardo, Salvatore and Victor Raskin. (1991). “Script theory revis(it)ed: joke similarity and joke
representation model.” Humor: International Journal of Humor Research. 4-3/4. 293-347.

Attardo, Salvatore, Christian F. Hempelmann and Sara Di Maio. (Forth.) Script oppositions and
logical mechanisms: modeling incongruities and their resolutions. HUMOR: International
Journal of Humor Research.

Binsted, Kim and Graeme Ritchie. (1997). Computational rules for generating punning riddles.

HUMOR: International Journal of Humor Research. 10:1. 25-76.

Bollob´as, B´ela. (1998). Modern Graph Theory. New York, NY/Berlin: Springer.

Comfort, Alex (ed). (1972). The Joy of Sex; a Cordon Bleu guide to lovemaking. New York,

Crown.

Devlin, Keith J. (1993). The Joy of Sets : Fundamentals of contemporary set theory. New York :
Springer. Rev. ed. of: Fundamentals of contemporary set theory. 1979. New York: Springer.

Diestel, Reinhard. (1997). Graph Theory. New York, NY: Springer.

Giora, R. (1991) On the cognitive aspects of the joke. Journal of Pragmatics, 16:5. 465-485.

Harary, Frank. (1969). Graph Theory. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.

Raskin, Victor. (1985a). Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.

—. (1985b). Script-based semantics: a brief outline. Quaderni di Semantica. 6:2. 306-313.

Raskin, Victor and Salvatore Attardo (1994). Non-literalness and non-bona-ﬁde in language. An
approach to formal and computational treatments of humor. Pragmatics and Cognition. 2:1.
31-69.

Raskin, Victor, Salvatore Attardo and Donalee H. Attardo. (1994a). Augmenting Formal Se-
mantic Representation for NLP: The story of SMEARR” Machine Translation. 9, pp. 81-98.
Reprinted in Bert Peeters (ed.) The lexicon-encyclopedia interface. Amsterdam/New York:
Elsevier, 2000. As Augmenting linguistic semantics descriptions for NLP: Lexical knowledge,
encyclopedic knowledge, event structure. 463-481.

8

Raskin, Victor, Salvatore Attardo and Donalee H. Attardo. (1994b). ”The SMEARR Semantic
Database: An Intelligent and Versatile Resource for the Humanities” in D. Ross and Brink
(eds.), Research in Humanities Computing. 3, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 109-124.

9

Optimal Innovation and Pleasure

∗

Rachel Giora

Linguistics

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv 69978

Israel

giorar@post.tau.ac.il

1 On the Role of Salience and Novelty in Aesthetics: The Optimal

Innovation Hypothesis

When asked which of the stimuli in (context-less) quartets like (1-4) they liked best, subjects
selected the third option as most pleasing. Next came the ﬁrst, followed by the second. Least
likable was the fourth (Kronrod, 2001; Kronrod et al. 2000):

(1) Body and soul.
(2) Bodies and souls
(3) Body and sole
(4) Bobby and Saul

When asked which of the pairs (in 5) they liked best, subjects rated (5a/c) as more pleasing than
(5a/b) (Elnatan, 2000, 2002; Giora, Kronrod, Elnatan and Fein, 2001):

(5a) You don’t know your right from left?
(5b) The Comprehensive Lexicon will teach you whatever you don’t know
(5c) Buy The Comprehensive Guide for the Political Factions in Israel.

How do (1-4) and (5a/b-a/c) diﬀer? What could account for the gradability in their likability and
pleasurability? As shown by Kronrod (2001), Kronrod et al. (2000), and Giora et al. (2001), and
see also Giora (in press, Chapter 7), the factor that accounts for their pleasurability is optimal
innovation: novelty that allows for the recoverability of the familiar. Pleasure, it seems, hinges on
recognizing the familiar in the novel (see also Freud, 1905; Mukarofsk´y, 1932/64, 1978; Shklovsky,
1917/1965).

(2) was rated as second most familiar:

Indeed, the various stimuli vary on a familiarity scale: (1) was rated as most familiar:

it
is a common, ﬁxed expression.
it is a variant version
of (1), but such that preserves its meaning. Third came (3), which will be termed ’optimally
innovative’: like (2), it feeds on the familiar (1), but it also conveys an extra, unfamiliar sense.
The item in (4), however, was rated least familiar:
it is, in fact, entirely new. Though akin to
(1) in rhythm, shape, and sound, meaning-wise it is a drastic diversion. Unlike (2) and (3), it
does not echo the familiar stimulus1. Similarly, (5a/b) was rated as most familiar: it instantiates
the salient, idiomatic interpretation; (5a/c), however, was rated as less familiar:
it is optimally
it invites a less salient, literal interpretation, without dispensing with the
innovative (see 7):

∗

I am grateful to Mira Ariel, Salvatore Attardo, Albert Katz, Orna Peleg, and Noa Shuval for their very helpful

comments.

1Indeed, the quartets were constructed in such a way so as to contain a familiar source (1) and variations (2-4)
diverging from the source in varying degrees. As conﬁrmed by readers’ ratings, (2) is the variation most similar
to (1), involving just a minimal change. Mid-position is occupied by (3). Least similar to (1) is (4), involving two
changes (see Kronrod, 2001; Giora, Kronrod et al., 2001)

salient interpretation. Contra the received view (Brinker, 1988), then, it is not pure novelty (4)
that accounts for pleasure, but optimal innovation–innovation that resides in familiarity (3, 5a/c):

(6) The optimal innovation hypothesis

If a stimulus is optimally innovative it would be rated as more pleasurable than either a familiar
stimulus or a purely innovative stimulus.

(7) Optimal innovation

What stimulus would count as optimally innovative?
A stimulus would be optimally innovative if it involves
(a)
but
(b)

a novel response to a familiar stimulus,

such that would also allow for the automatic recoverability of a salient response
related to that stimulus so that the similarity and diﬀerence between the novel
and the salient would be assessable (see also Giora, in press, Chapter 7).

For a response (e.g., a meaning) to be salient, it should be foremost on our mind due to factors such
as experiential familiarity, frequency, conventionality, or prototypicality (see Giora, 1997, in press,
Chapter 2). Salient responses get activated automatically upon encounter of a familiar stimulus,
regardless of context ﬁt. To the extent that a linguistic innovation (body and sole) allows the
comprehender an insight into some salient meanings (body and soul) while promoting new ones,
it is optimally innovative.

By deﬁnition, then, the notion of optimal innovation excludes familiar stimuli (1, 5a/b): famil-
iar stimuli do not meet any of the requirements in (7). However, it also excludes innovations such
as variants of such stimuli (2) as well as pure innovations (4). Variations and variants (A single
piece of paper, which stems from A piece of paper) do not meet the ﬁrst requirement (7a above).
Though they involve a slight change, this modiﬁcation does not result in a novel response (as
opposed to e.g., A peace of paper). Neither are pure innovations optimal, as they do not meet the
second requirement (7b above): no familiar response is recoverable so as to become instrumental
in constructing the novel response (Y2K, fax, grok; spandy-wear).

As illustrations of optimal innovations, consider the following examples. Sofa so good–the
name of a London shop–constitutes a literal pun. It introduces a novel meaning that recommends
its goods (furniture). Yet it does not dispense with the salient meaning of the string (So far so
good). Similarly, the stimulus Her wedding ring is a ”sorry we’re closed” sign conveys a novel,
metaphoric meaning (non-receptiveness to courtship). This, however, involves the salient, literal
meaning that gets activated automatically (Pexman, Ferretti & Katz, 2000). A novel irony such as
read my lipstick is optimally innovative too. While allowing for a new meaning to emerge, ridiculing
the speaker on account of her femininity, it still invokes the salient (suspicion/lie) meaning of the
familiar irony Read my lips. Jokes such as How do you get holy water? Boil the hell out of it
are also optimally innovative. They are instances of novelty that resides in salience. They harp
on old, salient strings (curse), involving a slight twist (see Attardo, 2000) that results in a novel
interpretation of the salient (nonliteral) meaning.
In the same way, the interplay between the
salient (body and soul) and the innovative (body and sole) accounts for the optimal innovation. Or
consider a visual example: Ariel Sharon’s portrait ((8) by Piven (1999), carving the current Israeli
prime minister (salient response) out of bloody minced meat (novel response), thus alluding to his
murderous and voluptuous nature.

Note that according to the optimal innovation hypothesis, it is neither literality nor ﬁgurative-
ness that accounts for the pleasure induced, but some salience imbalance: the surprising discovery
of the novel in the salient or the salient in the novel.
It is not a sheer surprise, then, that is
pleasing, but a somewhat novel response that could evoke a salient response or could be assigned
to a salient response though it did not come to mind immediately (see also Giora, 1991).

12

(8) ”Arik Sharon”: An opti-
mally innovative visual stimu-
lus

2 Testing the Optimal Innovation Hypothesis
In our lab, we further examined aspects of the optimal innovation hypothesis (Elnatan, 2002;
Giora et al., 2001; Kronrod et al., 2000). We demonstrated that stimuli rated most pleasurable
(3) were indeed optimally innovative: they involved processing the familiar stimuli from which
they derive (7b) and more (7a). Using reading times, we showed that familiar stimuli (1)
took less time to read following the most pleasurable innovation (3) than following the least
pleasurable innovation (4), suggesting that the most pleasurable innovations meet requirement
(7b) while least pleasurable innovations do not, attesting to the role of salience in inducing
pleasure. Complementarily, we showed that innovative interpretations (9d) rated online as highly
pleasurable following the idiomatic expression (9a) also took longer to read following this context
than following a context that does not require such an interpretation (9b), but somewhat shorter
than following an unrelated control context (9c). Compared to deriving the salient interpretation
only, the innovative interpretation (9d) is more eﬀortful, apparently because it involves accessing
the salient response and more, thus meeting the optimal innovation criteria (7a-b). It is, however,
less eﬀortful than trying to make sense of an interpretation that is incoherent and does not involve
any familiar meaning (9c) and does not induce pleasure:

(9)

a. You don’t know your right from left?
b.
c.
d. Buy The Comprehensive Guide for the Political Factions in Israel.

If you want to familiarize yourself with the political situation in Israel,
If you are the type that sings in the shower,

In Giora, Zur & Fein (in prep), we tested the optimal innovation hypothesis with regard to visual
stimuli. We showed that visual stimuli rated most pleasurable (11) occupied mid position on the
familiarity scale and involved the familiar (7b) and more (7a). Least pleasurable were stimuli
rated as least familiar (12). Mid position on the pleasurability scale was occupied by stimuli rated
as highly familiar (10). It is salience then that accounts for pleasurability, and recognizing the
salient in the innovative is most pleasurable.

Taken together, such ﬁndings support the view that it is neither pure innovation nor familiarity
alone that account for aesthetic judgments. Rather, it is optimal innovation–novelty that allows
an insight into some salient response–that is most pleasurable. Indeed, optimal innovations (3,
9a/d, 11) are more pleasurable than familiar stimuli (1-2, 9b/d, 10). Though they share similar
familiar responses, they also involve unfamiliar responses. Optimal innovations (3, 11) are also

13

(10) Familiar visual stimulus

(11) Optimally innovative vi-
sual stimulus

(12) Highly innovative visual stimulus

more pleasurable than pure innovations. Though both involve novel responses, only optimal
innovations further involve familiar responses. Pleasure, then, is a function of both salience and
innovativeness.
It is the surprise experienced in suddenly discovering some novelty where it is
least expected, or the gratiﬁcation in discovering the familiar in the novel.

Indeed, familiarity (though less so excessive familiarity) is known to be a factor in pleasure
or liking (on the various aesthetic eﬀects of mere exposure, see Bornstein & D’Agostino, 1992;
Harrison, 1977; Kunst-Wilson & Zajonc, 1980; Zajonc, 1968, 1980, 2000, and see also our ﬁndings
above). It is not the most familiar, then, that is least enjoyable, but rather the most novel that is
least pleasing. Pleasure, however, resides half way between high salience and high novelty.

3 On Recognizing the Novel in the Salient: The Case of Jokes
Jokes are considered paradigmatic in inducing aﬀect. Are they optimally innovative? Consider
the following example:

(13) War doesn’t determine who’s right but who’s left.

The text in (13) meets the requirements in (7). It involves an innovative sense (just-survive) of
the collocation right-left while invoking salient meanings (just, political orientations). It is quite
plausible to assume that upon encountering right, the comprehender accesses the salient meaning
(just) which, when left is encountered, is reinterpreted as political orientation. Eventually, the
less salient meaning of left (survive) of right-left is accessed, ridiculing the previous responses.

14

The structure of most jokes is such that it keeps us attending to the salient response until the
punchline point where a reversal is enforced allowing for the recognition of the novel. The pleasure
derivable from this joke hinges on recognizing the innovative in the salient.

3.1 Theoretical background
Jokes are probably among the most amusing, funny, and laughable texts. Most theories of joke
comprehension focus on one type of jokes–semantic jokes that involve double entendre2. Looking
into this genre, most theorists discussed jokes in terms of contextual incompatibility, which triggers
a search for the resolution of that incongruity. According to Attardo (1994, 1996a,b, 2000, 2001),
Attardo, Attardo, Baltes and Petray (1994), processing a joke begins with processing one sense
(the ’just’ meaning of the ambiguous word right) which is retained up to the point (left) at
which the initial interpretation no longer makes sense. At this point, termed the disjunctor, the
interpretation process is disrupted. If the disruption is minimal, it aﬀects reinterpretation of the
initial sense, resulting in a diﬀerent/opposed sense (which would now be ’a political orientation
and then ’just and alive’). If it is more than minimal, the comprehender may dismiss the text
as ill formed. Attardo and his colleagues assume Raskin’s (1985) view of jokes as centering on
opposition relations obtaining between two senses/scripts.

For Coulson and Kutas (1998a,b, and see also Coulson, 2001: 77-82), it is script-shifting
(termed ’frame-shifting’) that accounts for joke comprehension (see below). Compared to al-
ternative surprise endings that do not involve script or frame shifting, jokes’ endings are costly
processing-wise precisely because of the need to switch from one script or frame to another.

Curc´o (1995, 1996a,b, 1998) assumes a diﬀerent processing model whereby a key assumption
that is weakly manifest (involving the ’political orientation’ meaning of right & left), becomes
strongly manifest upon encounter of the ’target assumption’ (involving the ’remain alive/’survive’
meaning of left). The incongruity between the two assumptions triggers this shift from weak
to strong manifestation and makes the joke work. Such a view thus assumes that the initial
interpretation of the ambiguity involved is retained for contrastive purposes.

De Palma and Weiner (1992), Giora (1991), and Weiner (1996) posit that the structure of jokes
is categorial (`a la Rosch, 1973), starting with the most prototypical (salient) member of the set (of
things that war determines such as who wins - the right or the wrong) and ending with a marginal
(less salient) member (who remains alive). Such a view suggests that a humorous ’surprise’ does
not rely on a stark diﬀerence between two interpretations. Rather, it depends on the likelihood
of the less accessible/less-salient interpretation to be relevant to and included within the category
proposed initially. A humorous surprise, then, does not constitute an entirely unthinkable option
(Giora, 1991), but only a less salient one–one that should not but which nevertheless has escaped
our attention because of our salience prone mind.

Giora (1991, 1995, in press, Chapter 6), however, further proposed that joke comprehension
involves attenuation of the salient, but contextually incompatible meaning (the ’political orienta-
tion’ interpretation of right & left) following the disjunctor point. For the joke to get through, the
(salient) meaning activated initially should be suppressed, at least momentarily, and replaced by
the (less salient) appropriate sense (The suppression hypothesis; see Gernsbacher & Robertson,
1995 for a similar view, and see Colston, Giora & Katz, 2000, and Vaid, Hull, Gerkens, Heredia,
& Martinez, 2000 for supportive results discussed in Appendix 5).

3.2 The Role of Salience and Context in Joke Comprehension
Most jokes make up a discourse that best exposes our tendency to opt for the salient, most
probable concept ﬁrst. Note how we are caught entirely oﬀ guard when we realize that a person
who has a drinking problem is, in fact, one who spills liquid all over himself while drinking (Flying
High by Abrahams, Zucker & Zucker, 1980). Jokes’ pleasurability, then, hinges on discovering the

2The jokes dealt with here either include polysemous or ambiguous interpretations. Polysemies involve related
meanings; ambiguities involve unrelated meanings. According to Attardo et al. (1994), such jokes are the most
common ones and highly typical among verbal jokes (as opposed to referential jokes, the most common type of
joke).

15

novel in the familiar. The stimulus invites the comprehender to process a more salient, familiar
meaning ﬁrst (’drinking alcohol excessively’) only to make her discover that a less salient, seemingly
unthinkable meaning makes more sense.

To let our salience-prone mind go astray, the initial context of a joke is usually unambiguous,
compatible with the salient meaning, so that this interpretation is retained exclusively up until
the punchline, at which point a sudden incongruity forces a reinterpretation. The following joke
(taken from Coulson & Kutas, 1998b) may serve to illustrate the collaboration between salience
and context:

(14) By the time Mary had had her fourteenth child,

she’d ﬁnally run out of names to call
her husband.

The salient meaning of names is associated with ’proper names’. In addition, the most plausible
interpretation of name calling in the context of childbirth is also associated with ’proper names’.
Furthermore, the most plausible interpretation of ’running out of names’ in the context of the
birth of a fourteenth child is further supportive of the ’proper names’ interpretation. Salience and
contextual information harmonize here: contextual information is highly supportive and predictive
of the salient meaning of the polysemous word. The punchline, therefore, comes as a ’total’
surprise.

Revisitation of salient meanings–discovering novelty in the familiar (7a-b)–rather than mere
surprise ending (7a) may indeed be a major factor in accounting for the largely acknowledged
diﬃculty and pleasurability of joke interpretation.
Indeed, as shown by Coulson and Kutas
(1998b), other forms of discourse involving less salient, unexpected items, which do not require
reinterpretation of salient meanings, have been found to be less demanding and less funny. For
instance, in their study, nonjoke texts (15a), having an equally unpredictable (low cloze proba-
bility) ending as jokes (15b), diverging from jokes in that they do not involve reinterpretation (of
salient concepts), were faster to read than jokes (15b) and judged as less pleasurable:

(15) By the time Mary had had her fourteenth child, she´d ﬁnally run out of names to call

her
(a) Nonjoke ending: oﬀspring
(b)

Joke ending: husband

Crucially, then, for a joke to be enjoyed (understood as a joke), it should involve recognizing
novelty in salient concepts3.

In sum, most semantic jokes make up an optimal innovation. They involve recognizing the novel
in the familiar. The assumption that in addition, they further involve suppressing the familiar
should wait further research (see Appendix 5).

4 On Recognizing the Novel in the Salient: The case of Noncon-

ventional Irony

Given the optimal innovation hypothesis (6), only novel or less-familiar ironies will be discussed
here, since only they meet the requirements for optimal innovativeness (7a-b). By contrast, con-
ventional ironies such as wise guy, or tell me about it, embedded in irony-inviting contexts, would
not aﬀect humor or pleasure, because they do not meet the requirement in (7a): no novelty is in-
volved in their decoding. Indeed, with the exception of Giora (in press) and Giora & Fein (1999b),
most of the literature on humor dealt with less familiar irony only.

Unlike jokes, irony relies entirely on context for its optimal innovativeness. The various theories
on irony would, therefore, diverge with regard to the role context plays in irony comprehension.

3Not all jokes conform to the salient-less salient course of interpretation. When they don’t, the contextually
appropriate meaning derived initially needs to be revisited at the punchline position. It is hypothesized, however,
that such reinterpretation will be less surprising as a result.

16

4.1 Theories of Irony Comprehension
The ﬁeld of irony research has received an immense boost in the last decade. For an extensive
review of the ﬁeld (which is beyond the scope of this chapter) see Attardo (2000) and Giora (1998,
2001, in press). Here I brieﬂy sketch contemporary views of how we understand irony vis `a vis the
context in which it is embedded. Three major approaches dominate the ﬁeld: (i) ’the direct access
view’, which counters (ii) ’the traditional, standard pragmatic model’, and (iii) ’the graded salience
hypothesis’ that counters both. It is only according to the graded salience hypothesis and standard
pragmatic model, however, that irony is optimally innovative and hence pleasing. According to
the direct access view, however, irony should be treated as pure innovation whose decoding is
entirely context dependent and involves only its innovative sense, and hence less pleasing.

4.1.1 The Interaction-based, Direct Access Views
The interactionist, direct access view assumes that a constraining context aﬀects comprehension
primarily: a strong context governs processing signiﬁcantly, aﬀecting linguistic processes very
early on. Consequently, in a rich and supportive context, irony comprehension need not involve a
contextually incompatible (e.g., literal) stage at all. Rather, context should activate the contex-
tually appropriate (ironic) interpretation exclusively so that only that meaning becomes available
for further processes. In a strong context, then, irony comprehension should proceed seamlessly,
and should not diﬀer from processing equivalent literal language (see ’the relevance-theoretic
account’ and ’the allusional pretense view’). Equal reading times of items embedded in literally
and ironically biasing contexts support this view (see Gibbs, 1986, but see Giora, 1995 for a
critique; Giora, Fein & Schwartz, 1998; Schwoebel, Dews, Winner and Srinivas, 2000 for diﬀerent
ﬁndings). According to the direct access view, then, the sarcastic target in (16) should not be
more pleasurable than the nonsarcastic target in (17):

(16) Billy and Joe were long-time pals. But one time when Billy was away on a business

trip, Joe slept with Billy’s wife, Lynn. When Billy found out about it afterwards,
he was upset. He confronted Joe and said to him:
[Sarcastic target] ”You are a ﬁne friend.”

(17) Billy and Joe were long-time pals. One time Billy was in desperate need of money.
His car had broken down and he needed $300 to ﬁx it. So, he asked Joe for a loan.
Joe said he could lend Billy the money. This made Billy happy and he said to Joe,
[Nonsarcastic target] ”You are a ﬁne friend.”

4.1.1.1 The relevance theoretic account
The relevance theoretic account of irony (Gibbs, 1986; Jorgensen, Miller & Sperber 1984; Sperber
& Wilson 1981, 1986/95; Sperber 1984; Wilson & Sperber 1992) is consistent with some aspects of
the direct access hypothesis. Basically, it assumes that utterance interpretation relies on context
for its decoding. According to Sperber and Wilson, context is generally not given in advance,
but is searched for as part of the interpretation process. As a result, processing irony (19) need
not diﬀer from processing a nonironic utterance (18). Speciﬁcally, irony is an ”echoic interpretive
use in which the communicator dissociates herself from the opinion echoed with accompanying
ridicule or scorn” (Wilson & Sperber 1992: 75). While its processing involves disengaging from
an echoed opinion, or from what it assumes (Curc´o, 2000), processing an equivalent nonironic
utterance involves endorsing an echoed opinion. In both, then, there is an echoic allusion to be
picked up which is invited by context (Sperber & Wilson 1986/95: 239):

(18)

(19)

a. He: It’s a lovely day for a picnic.
[They go for a picnic and the sun shines.]
b.
a. He: It’s a lovely day for a picnic.
[They go for a picnic and it rains.]
b.

She: (happily): It’s a lovely day for a picnic, indeed.

She: (sarcastically): It’s a lovely day for a picnic, indeed.

17

4.1.1.2 The allusional pretense view
Kumon-Nakamura, Glucksberg and Brown (1995) proposed a more general theory of discourse
irony. According to the allusional pretense view, irony alludes to or reminds the addressee of what
should have been–of an expectation or a norm that went wrong (see also Kreuz & Glucksberg,
1989). To enable the addressee to appreciate the allusion, irony involves pragmatic insincerity, thus
allowing various speech-acts to be ironic. For example, when a car driver says I just love people
who signal when turning when the car ahead of her makes a turn without signaling, the speaker
alludes to a social norm or expectation to signal upon turning, while simultaneously pretending
to compliment the errant driver. Such view of irony assumes that irony comprehension involves
activating the linguistic meaning of what is said in order to assess its sincerity and derive the
ironic or nonironic interpretation, depending on the context. Thus, in any given situation, there
is a decision to be made whether what is said is intended sincerely (i.e., literally) or insincerely
(i.e., ironically). In this way, ironic and literal interpretations are equally aﬀected by contextual
information (Glucksberg, 1995).

The assumption that context plays a primary role in comprehension so that processing does
not involve an incompatible phase views irony as pure innovation which does not expect to induce
aﬀect.

4.1.2 The standard pragmatic models
According to the various versions of the standard pragmatic model, processing involves an initial
literal stage which, at times, will have to be revisited by late context eﬀects (as in the case of
irony). Such an approach might be more consistent with the optimal innovation hypothesis,
provided the literal response to be revised is a familiar response.

4.1.2.1 The traditional view
The traditional view, notably, Grice (1975) and Searle (1979), assumes restricted contextual eﬀects.
According to this view, context aﬀects comprehension at a late stage, only following linguistic
processes, and only if these processes do not result in context ﬁt. Thus, if I say What a lovely
day for a picnic on a stormy day, my addressee would ﬁrst compute the literal meaning of the
statement, then reject it as the intended meaning and replace it with an alternative, contextually
appropriate meaning. According to the traditional view, then, understanding nonliteral language
involves a sequential process. The ﬁrst stage is literal and obligatory, and the second stage is
nonliteral and optional, induced by contextual information. In Gricean (1975, pp. 46ﬀ) terms, the
initial process involves a breach of a norm (primarily the Quality maxim). According to Attardo
(2000), the violation should be minimally disruptive, though perceivable as disturbing contextual
appropriateness. The overt, least disruptive violation is a signal for the addressee to reject the
literal meaning as the intended meaning and derive the speaker’s intention (dubbed ’particularized
conversational implicature’) which should replace the inappropriate interpretation. In contrast,
literal language involves initially just one process. Therefore, understanding literal and nonliteral
language should diﬀer, with nonliteral language requiring a double take. Longer reading times
found for utterances embedded in ironically vs.
literally biasing contexts support the standard
pragmatic model (Giora et al., 1998; Schwoebel, Dews, Winner & Srinivas, 2000).

Consistent with the modular view (Fodor, 1983), which proposes that the contextually
inappropriate meanings activated during the ﬁrst initial access phase should be suppressed only
subsequently, the standard pragmatic model assumes that the contextually incompatible literal
meaning of irony should be suppressed and replaced by a contextually compatible ironic meaning.
Thus, What a lovely day for a picnic said on a stormy day is rejected as contextually incompatible
and replaced by its approximate opposite–What a lousy day for a picnic.
In this view, then,
irony comprehension involves a suppression process at the second integration phase. It therefore
diﬀers from processing its equivalent literal interpretation. This suppression assumption, how-
ever, has not gained empirical support (see Giora, in press; Giora & Fein, 1999b; Giora et al., 1998).

4.1.2.2 The relevant inappropriateness assumption

18

Attardo (2000) provides a more general account of irony than the traditional view by going
beyond the maxim violation condition posited by Grice (1975). According to Attardo, irony
need not violate any maxim. Rather, while assuming the Relevance maxim (for the second,
integration phase), it should breach contextual appropriateness ostensibly at the initial phase, so
that the comprehender may detect the intended violation and derive the ironic interpretation. For
example, when, in a drought-stricken area, one farmer says to another Don’t you just love a nice
spring rain? the utterance may be true, yet inappropriate, given the situation of utterance (it
is not raining). According to Attardo, violation of contextual appropriateness includes violation
of both sincerity and cultural norms or expectations (assumed necessary for irony interpretation
by the allusional pretense, see above) and more (e.g., deictic inappropriateness). Indeed, optimal
innovations involve a minimal disruption or change–one that does not obscure the familiar
response while inviting a novel response.

4.1.2.3 The joint pretense view
The joint pretense view (Clark & Carlson, 1982; Clark & Gerrig, 1984; Clark, 1996) is also inspired
by the Gricean view (Grice, 1978). It assumes a speaker who pretends ”to be an injudicious person
speaking to an uninitiated audience; the speaker intends the addressee of the irony to discover the
pretense and thereby see his or her attitude toward the speaker, the audience, and the utterance”
(Clark & Gerrig, 1984: 12; for a similar view see Boulton as quoted in Booth, 1974: 105). By saying
What a lovely day for a picnic on a stormy day, the ironist assumes the identity of another speaker
addressing a gullible audience. The present addressee, however, is supposed to take delight in
recognizing both the pretense and the intended attitude of ridicule toward the pretending speaker,
the audience, and the utterance. According to Clark (1996: 368), joint pretense is conceived of
as a staged communicative act (see also Haiman, 1998; Kotthoﬀ, 1998) where the actual speaker
is also an implied speaker performing a sincere communicative act toward an implied addressee
who is also the actual addressee. Both actual participants are intended to ”mutually appreciate
the salient contrasts between the demonstrated and actual situations”, so that if asked, the actual
speaker would deny meaning for the actual addressee what the implied speaker means for the
implied addressee.

According to this view, irony is a two-layered act of communication in which the literal (which
is in most cases the salient) meaning is activated and retained by both the speaker and the
addressee, who reject it as the intended meaning though they pretend otherwise.

4.1.2.4 The tinge hypothesis
The tinge hypothesis (Dews, Kaplan & Winner, 1995; Dews & Winner, 1995, 1997a, 1999) as-
sumes that irony is used to mute the intended negative criticism. The positive literal meaning
of irony (That was really funny said on a mean joke) tinges the addressee’s perception of the
intended meaning. Similarly, the negative literal meaning of ironic compliments (It’s a tough life
said to someone on vacation) mitigates the positively intended meaning. Dews and Winner and
their colleagues assume that the contextually incompatible, literal meaning of ironic remarks is
processed at some level and interferes with the intended meaning. Following Long and Graesser
(1988), they propose a dual-process model ”in which comprehension may occur after the recogni-
tion of an incongruity or simultaneously” (Dews & Winner, 1997: 405). According to the tinge
hypothesis, then, the literal meaning of irony is activated initially, either before or alongside the
ironic meaning, and is retained in order to dilute the implicit criticism or compliment. Using a
Stroop like interference paradigm, Dews and Winner tested this hypothesis. They asked subjects
to judge the intended (rather than the literal) meaning of ironic utterances and recorded their
responses. If utterances are shown to take longer to be judged as positive or negative relative to
their literal interpretations, this suggests that the contextually incompatible, literal meaning is
accessed automatically, interferes with the process, and slows it down. Consistent with the tinge
hypothesis, ironies such as What a lovely day for a picnic were judged as less aggressive than
their literal counterpart What a lousy day for a picnic and took longer to be judged as positive
or negative relative to their literal interpretations. Dews and Winner concluded that, unlike lit-
eral language, irony comprehension involves an obligatory, contextually incompatible, literal phase

19

(Dews et al., 1995; Dews & Winner, 1997; Winner, 1988)4.

4.1.3 The graded salience hypothesis
Contra the interactionist view, and partly following Fodor’s (1983) modular assumptions, the
graded salience hypothesis assumes distinct mechanisms, linguistic and contextual, that run in
parallel without interacting initially (Giora, 1997, 1999, in press; Giora & Fein, 1999b; Giora, Fein
& Schwartz, 1998; Giora, Peleg, & Fein, 2001; Peleg, Giora & Fein, 2001, in press). The linguistic
(lexical) mechanism is a bottom-up, encapsulated machinery that is sensitive only to linguistic
information. In contrast, the contextual mechanism involves top-down processes that are sensitive
to both linguistic and extra-linguistic knowledge. Unlike the traditional modular assumption
(Fodor, 1983), however, the graded salience hypothesis assumes that the encapsulated, lexical
access mechanism is ordered: more salient meanings–coded meanings foremost on our mind due
to conventionality, frequency, familiarity, or prototypicality–are accessed faster than and reach
suﬃcient levels of activation before less salient ones. According to the graded salience hypothesis,
then, coded meanings would be accessed upon encounter, regardless of contextual information
or authorial intent. Coded meanings of low salience, however, may not reach suﬃcient levels of
activation to be visible in a context biased toward the more salient meaning of the word (but see
Hillert & Swinney, 2001 for a diﬀerent view).

Contextual, top-down processes may also aﬀect comprehension immediately. A constraining
and highly predictive context may avail meanings on its own accord very early on. Nevertheless, it
would not penetrate lexical access. Though it has a predictive role that may speed up derivation
of the appropriate meaning, it would not obstruct inappropriate, coded meanings upon encounter
of the lexical stimulus. Indeed, contextual information may be strong and even faster than lexical
processes, so much so that it may avail meanings even before the relevant stimulus is encountered,
fostering an impression of direct access. This may be particularly true when the stimulus is
placed at the end of a strong sentential context, after most information has been accumulated
and integrated, allowing eﬀective guessing and inferential processes. However, these inferential
processes do not interact with lexical processes but run in parallel (Giora et al., 2001; Peleg et al.,
2001, in press). As shown in Giora et al. and Peleg et al., assuming a simultaneous operation of
the encapsulated, linguistic mechanism and the integrative, central system mechanism allows the
graded salience hypothesis to predict when contextual information may be faster than, coincidental
with, or slower than linguistic processes. Unlike the traditional views, then, the graded salience
hypothesis does not always predict slower contextual eﬀects that result in sequential processes.
Neither does it assume (as Grice, 1975 does) that activation of a whole linguistic unit should be
accomplished before contextual information comes into play. Rather, across the communication
path, context and linguistic eﬀects run in parallel, with contextual information availing meanings
on its own accord, aﬀecting only the end product of the linguistic process.

As illustration, consider the processes involved initially in trying to make sense of What a lovely
day for a picnic said on a stormy day. According to this view, upon encounter, the processor would
automatically retrieve the salient (literal) meaning of lovely (’nice’) from the mental lexicon.
However, given simultaneous top-down processes, this process will not result in contextual ﬁt.
This accidental mismatch between lexical (salient) and contextual (novel) meanings will result in
an optimally innovative ironic interpretation. If said on a sunny day, however, the automatically
retrieved, lexical meaning will achieve contextual ﬁt, with no novelty involved. The graded salience
hypothesis, then, would predict longer reading times for an utterance embedded in an ironically
than in a literally biasing context. Note, however, that irony need not build on a salient literal
meaning. Its salient meaning can also be ﬁgurative as when the conventional metaphor Children
are precious gems can be used ironically, or when a conventional irony is used innovatively (Read
my lipstick). In such cases, it is also some nonliteral meaning that should be processed initially

4However, though over-polite requests that were perceived as ironic were rated less rude than their (nonironic)
under-polite counterparts, they were not rated as less insulting (Kumon-Nakamura, Glucksberg & Brown, 1995).
According to some accounts, irony may be a politeness strategy without muting the criticism.
In fact Colston
(1997) and Toplak & Katz (2000) argue that irony is used to enhance rather than dilute condemnation.

20

on account of its salience (cf. Pexman et al., 2000). Thus, if ironies and literals diﬀer processing-
wise, it is not the literal-nonliteral dichotomy that accounts for their diﬀerence, but the salience-
nonsalience continuum.

The indirect negation view of irony (Giora, 1995) supplements that graded salience hypothesis
with regard to integration processes. According to this view, irony is a form of negation that does
not make use of an explicit negation marker. Often, an aﬃrmative (What a lovely day for a picnic
said on a stormy day) rather than a negative (What a lousy day for a picnic said on a sunny day)
expression is used to implicate that a speciﬁc state of aﬀairs is diﬀerent or far from the taken for
granted, expected (or more desirable) state of aﬀairs made explicit by the expression. Such a view
assumes that irony comprehension involves activating the salient, often literal meaning initially.
However, it does not assume that the indirectly negated meaning is suppressed and replaced by
its opposite, as suggested by the traditional account. Rather, irony entertains both the explicit
and derived messages, so that the dissimilarity between them may be computed. By saying What
a lovely day for a picnic on a stormy day, the ironist points out the extent to which the criticized
object (weather) has fallen short of expectations, and is far from being ’lovely’. The indirect
negation view thus predicts that the explicit (often) literal meaning of irony activated initially
would be retained for purposes of irony interpretation.

As in the case of the standard pragmatic view, longer reading times of nonsalient (ironic) versus
more salient (literal or nonliteral) items and longer response times to nonsalient (ironically) related
than to salient (literally or nonliterally) related probes support the graded salience hypothesis
(Giora, Fein & Schwartz, 1998; Giora & Fein, 1999a; Pexman et al., 2000; Schwoebel et al., 2000).
In addition, demonstrated retention rather than suppression of the salient (often) literal meaning
of irony supports the direct negation view (see ﬁndings in Giora, Fein & Schwartz, 1998; Giora &
Fein, 1999b). Empirical evidence, then, supports the graded salience hypothesis and the indirect
negation view, and questions the direct access and standard pragmatic models. It shows that,
contra the direct access view, salient meanings get activated regardless of context. It further shows
that, contra the standard pragmatic model, salient meanings get activated regardless of literality.
Diverging from the traditional pragmatic model, it also shows that salient but inappropriate
meanings are not suppressed as irrelevant but retained for further processes.

The graded salience hypothesis and indirect negation view and the various versions of the
standard pragmatic model, which assume that irony involves processing (aspects of) its literal
interpretation, predict that unfamiliar irony will be more pleasurable than its more familiar literal
interpretation. Given the optimal innovation hypothesis (7), the graded salience hypothesis further
predicts that unfamiliar irony will be more pleasurable than familiar irony (Read my lips vs. Read
my lipstick) and that familiar metaphor (Children are precious gems) will be less pleasurable
than its nonsalient ironic interpretation (invited by an irony inducing context). These predictions
remain to be validated.

5 Conclusions

What stimuli would incur liking or pleasure? Is it the familiar that is most likable? Is it total
novelty that is most pleasing? Is it the ﬁgurative that is most enjoyable? The optimal innovation
hypothesis predicts that optimal innovation–novel stimuli allowing an insight into the familiar–will
be appreciated as most pleasurable, regardless of ﬁgurativity.

Findings indeed show that it is optimal innovation that is judged as most pleasing (Giora, in
press, Giora, Kronrod et al., 2001; Giora et al., in prep; Kronrod et al., 2000). And though it is
costly, because it involves entertaining multiple interpretations simultaneously, optimal innovation
is rewarding. On some accounts, its reward is even long-lasting (see Berg & Lippman, 2001; Derks,
Gardner, & Agarwal, 1998; Gardner, J. B., & Agarwal Gibbs, 1986; Kreuz, Long & Church, 1991;
Lippman & Dunn, 2000; Mcaninch, Austin, & Derks, 1993; Schmidt, 1994; Schmidt & Williams,
2001; Unger, 1996; Vangiﬀen, & Maher, 1995 on humor and its eﬀect on memory and see also
Darling & Civikly, 1987; Kaplan & Pascoe, 1977; McMorris, Urbach, & Connor, 1985; Powell &
Andresen, 1985; Ziv, Gorenstein, & Moris, 1986 on the eﬀects of humor on retention of materials).

21

Appendix A

The theory of joke comprehension proposed here and elsewhere (Giora, 1991) assumes that un-
derstanding an optimally innovative discourse such as jokes involves a reinterpretation process in
which a salient response to a key word or expression is accessed initially and retained until the
disjunctor position. Following this position, it is suppressed to allow for a less salient (but globally
compatible) response to emerge. At this point, the initial response has no role in constructing the
intended response. Rather, it may stand in the way and interfere with comprehension. According
to the retention/suppression hypothesis (Giora, in press), meanings are retained as long as they
are conducive to the interpretation process but discarded if they interfere with comprehension
(cf. Gernsbacher, 1990).
Indeed, comprehenders who are less able at suppressing salient but
incompatible meanings have been shown to be poor comprehenders (Gernsbacher, 1990, 1994).

Colston, Giora & Katz (2000) tested the suppression hypothesis, aiming to show that the
meaning activated initially is suppressed later on, at oﬀset of the punchline sentence. Results
indeed demonstrate that the meaning of the key word, assumed to be salient, was available
immediately after oﬀset of the key word (at the end of the ﬁrst line, see [a] below). Similarly, after
oﬀset of the second segment (b), its levels of activation were still marginally signiﬁcant. However,
at the ﬁnal punchline position (c), the initially activated meaning was no longer available: It
was no more activated than the unrelated probe, suggesting that, at this point, it underwent
suppression.

(a) My friend asked me to look at his ear*
(b)
(c)

but it was covered with butter*
and salt.*
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
probes (displayed at *)

Vaid et al. (2000) report similar results. They tested one-liner jokes (I still miss my ex but my aim
is getting better) which were displayed for 4500 ms. They showed that 150 ms after oﬀset of the
joke, only the probe related to the contextually appropriate meaning was primed (’hate’), whereas
the salient meaning (’love’) related to the ambiguous word (miss) was not. These results are
consistent with the suppression hypothesis, suggesting that after a suﬃciently long delay allowing
for joke processing to be complete, the salient but contextually inappropriate meaning of the
ambiguous word was deactivated.

The suppression hypothesis may indeed account for other ﬁndings regarding joke comprehen-
sion. Given that suppression comes with a cost (Gernsbacher, 1990), the suppression hypothesis
predicts that an interpretation process that does not require suppression would be less costly than
one that requires such a process. This prediction is consistent with the ﬁndings in Coulson and
Kutas (1998b) discussed earlier. Consider, again, example (15) above. While both husband and
oﬀspring were shown to be similarly unpredictable or probable given the preceding context (hav-
ing cloze probability of 4% and 2% respectively), only husband would trigger suppression of the
salient meaning of (’proper’) name so that a less salient concept (’epithets associated with insult’)
be activated. In contrast, though oﬀspring is a low probability ending, suppressing the originally
highly salient meaning of name is not required. On the contrary, like the probable ending ’child’,
oﬀspring involves retaining the notion of ’proper name’ with which it is consistent, since, like
’child’, it represents the same salient concept, only by means of an unexpected word. No wonder
it took less time to process than husband. True, cloze probability is tailored to detect context
predictive eﬀects. However, in the speciﬁc studies discussed, it also indexes salience (see Giora, in
press, Chapter 6 for a full discussion).

Or, consider another example (taken from Coulson & Kutas, 1998b):

22

(d) He is so modest he pulls down the shade to change his

Joke ending: mind
Nonjoke ending: jacket
Conventional ending: clothes

According to the suppression hypothesis, for the joke to get through, the salient meaning of change
(’replace a material object ’, ’take oﬀ cloths’), which is also the one invited by the context (having
a cloze probability of 42%), has to be suppressed so that the more novel, less salient meaning of
change (’change of an immaterial object’), having a cloze probability of 6%), be evoked. Though
changing a jacket is a less salient, less frequent expression compared to ’changing clothes’ (having
a cloze probability of 3%), it need not involve suppressing the salient (’physical replacement’)
meaning of change, because it is an extension of that self-same meaning. The nonjoke ending,
then, is not an optimal innovation: no novel sense or concept was involved here. Indeed, subjects
took less time to read the nonjoke (jacket) than joke (mind) ending.

Findings from event-related brain potentials lend further support to the hypothesis that joke
comprehension involves suppression. In another study, Coulson and Kutas (1998a and see also
Coulson, 2001) compared event-related brain potentials recorded from the scalp as participants
read joke and nonjoke sentences. The diﬃculty of integrating a given word into an established
context is correlated with N400 amplitude. N400 amplitude is largest for items with low cloze
probability such as semantic anomalies, and smallest for easily integrated items with high cloze
probability such as best completions. Accordingly, the suppression hypothesis predicts that joke
comprehension would involve N400 amplitude to a greater extent than nonjokes. It also predicts
that the eﬀect would be greatest for jokes involving highly salient meanings compared to those
involving less salient meanings, since salient meanings are harder to suppress (Giora, in press).
Moreover, it predicts that this eﬀect would be more pronounced among good than among poor
comprehenders who are deﬁcient at suppression (cf. Gernsbacher & Robertson, 1995).

Findings in Coulson and Kutas (1998a) indeed serve to support the suppression hypothesis.
They show that jokes elicited larger N400 components than nonjokes (ending with similarly cloze
probability items), and that this eﬀect was greatest where highly salient meanings were involved.
Furthermore, they showed that this pattern was most pronounced among participants whose per-
formance on the comprehension questions suggested they understood most of the jokes, suggesting
that they suppressed the incompatible, though salient meaning (for a detailed discussion see Giora,
in press, Chapter 6).

For Coulson and Kutas (Coulson, 2001; Coulson & Kutas, 1998a,b), however, these ﬁndings
support the hypothesis that joke comprehension involves a ’frame-shift’. Frame shifting occurs
when elements of a given message-level representation are mapped onto a new frame. Jokes, they
contend, are deliberately constructed to suggest one frame while evoking elements also consistent
with another. The notion of frame shifting is not inconsistent with the assumption of the graded
salience hypothesis concerning joke comprehension. It is plausible to assume that a word meaning
involves activating its unmarked contextual information or frame. Moreover, jokes do not always
hinge on explicit word meanings but rather on frame anticipation. Though the following joke
requires the accessing of a less salient reading of something as referring to humans, contextual
information derived from the ’frame’ plays a crucial role in its initial interpretation (as ’a drink’):

(e) When I asked the bartender for something cold and full of rum, she recommended her

husband.

Recall however that optimal innovations require an extra processing eﬀort compared to familiar
responses, because they involve processing the salient and more. Findings in Coulson and Ku-
tas, therefore, may not speak to the issue of suppression and may only demonstrate that jokes
are optimal innovations. Even the ﬁnding that good comprehenders invest more eﬀort than poor
comprehenders in processing jokes might be only indicative of poor comprehenders’ limited abil-
ity to entertain multiple messages on account of limited mental resources (see Miyake, Just &
Carpenter, 1994).

23

References
Attardo, S. (1994). Linguistic theories of humor. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Attardo, S. (1996a). Humor. In J. Verschueren, J-O ¨Ostman, J. Blommaert, & C. Bulcaen (Eds.),

Handbook of Pragmatics (pp. 1-18). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

Attardo, S. (1996b). Humor theory beyond jokes: The treatment of humorous texts at large. In J.
Hulstijn and A. Nijholt (Eds.), Automatic Interpretation and Generation of Verbal Humor.
IWCH ’96. Twente Workshop on Language and Technology 12 (pp. 87-101). Enschede:
University of Twente.

Attardo, S. (2000). Irony as relevant inappropriateness. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 793-826.

Attardo, S. (2001). Humorous texts: A semantics and pragmatics analysis. Berlin: Mouton De

Gruyter.

Attardo, S., Attardo, D. H., Baltes, P., & Petray, M. J. (1994). The linear organization of jokes:

analysis of two thousand texts. Humor, 7, 27-54.

Berg, E. M. & Lippman, L. G. (2001). Does humor in radio advertising aﬀect recognition of novel

product brand names? Journal of General Psychology, 128, 194-202.

Bornstein, R. F., & D’Agostino, P. R. (1992). Stimulus recognition and the mere exposure eﬀect.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 545-552.

Brinker, M. (1988). Aesthetics as the theory of criticism. Tel Aviv: Broadcast university/The

Ministry of Defense, Israel.

Brisard, F., Frisson, S., & Sandra, D. (2001). Processing unfamiliar metaphors in a self-paced

reading task. Metaphor and Symbol, 16, 87-108.

Colston, H. L. (1997). Salting a wound or sugaring a pill: The pragmatic functions of ironic

criticism. Discourse Processes, 23, 25-45.

Colston, H. L., Giora, R., & Katz, A. (2000, July). Joke comprehension: Salience and context

eﬀects. Paper presented at The 7th International Pragmatics Conference, Budapest.

Coulson, S. (2001). Semantic leaps. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Coulson, S., & Kutas, M. (1998a). Frame-shifting: Event-related brain response to jokes. Paper

submitted for publication.

Coulson, S., & Kutas, M. (1998b). Frame-shifting and sentential integration. Paper submitted for

publication.

Curc´o, C. (1995). Some observations on the pragmatics of humorous interpretations: a relevance

theoretic approach. UCL Working papers in Linguistics, 7, 27-47.

Curc´o, C. (1996a). The implicit expression of attitudes, mutual manifestness, and verbal humor.

UCL Working Papers in Linguistics, 8, 89-99.

Curc´o, C. (1996b). Relevance theory and humorous interpretations. In N. Hulstijn, & A. Nijholt
(Eds.), Automatic interpretation and generation of verbal humor (pp. 53-68). Twente:
University of Twente.

Curc´o, C. (1998). Indirect echoes and verbal humor. In V. Rouchota, & A. H. Jucker (Eds.),
Current issues in relevance theory (pp. 305-325). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.

Curc´o, C. (2000). Irony: negation, echo and metarepresentation. Lingua, 110, 257-280.

24

Darling, A. L., & Civikly, J. M. (1987). The eﬀect of teacher humor on student perceptions of

classroom communicative climate. Journal of Classroom Interaction, 22, 24-30.

De Palma, P., & Weiner, J. E. (1992). Accessibility and knowledge representation. Proceedings of

COLING ’92, 1121-1125.

Derks, P., Gardner, J. B., & Agarwal, R. (1998). Recall of innocent and tendentious humorous

material. Humor-International Journal of Humor Research, 11, 5-19.

Dews, S., & Winner, E. (1997). Attributing meaning to deliberately false utterances: The case
of irony. In Ch. Mandell, & A. McCabe (Eds.), The problem of meaning: Behavioral and
cognitive perspectives (pp. 377-414). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Dews, S., & Winner, E. (1999). Obligatory processing of the literal and nonliteral meanings of

ironic utterances. Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 1579-1599.

Elnatan, I. (2000). Enticement: Aesthetic eﬀects of conventional versus innovative uses of lan-

guage. Unpublished paper, Tel Aviv University (in Hebrew).

Elnatan, I. (2002). Degree of innovation and pleasure rating. Unpublished MA thesis, Tel Aviv

University (in Hebrew).

Freud, S. (1905/1960). Jokes and their relation to the unconscious. New York: Norton.

Gibbs, R. W. Jr. (1986). On the psycholinguistics of sarcasm. Journal of Experimental Psychology:

General, 115, 3-15.

Gibbs, R. W. Jr. (in press). A new look at literal meaning in understanding what is said and

implicated. Journal of Pragmatics.

Giora, R. (1991). On the cognitive aspects of the joke. Journal of Pragmatics 16, 465-486.

Giora, R. (1995). On irony and negation. Discourse Processes, 19, 239-264.

Giora, R. (1997). Understanding ﬁgurative and literal language: The graded salience hypothesis.

Cognitive Linguistics, 7, 183-206.

Giora, R. (1998a). Irony. In: J. Verschueren, J-O ¨Ostman, J. Blommaert, & C. Bulcaen (Eds.),

Handbook of pragmatics (pp. 1-21). Amsterdam: Benjamins.

Giora, R. (1998b). When is Relevance? On the role of salience in utterance interpretation. Revista

Alicantina de Estudios Ingleses, 11, 85-94.

Giora, R. (1999). On the priority of salient meanings: Studies of literal and ﬁgurative language.

Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 919-929.

Giora, R. (2001).

Irony and its discontent.

language: In honour of Elrud Ibsch (pp. 163-182). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

In G. Steen, & D. Schram (Eds.), Psychology of

Giora, R. (in press). On our mind: Salience, context and ﬁgurative language. New York: Oxford

University Press.

Giora, R., & Fein, O. (1999a). On understanding familiar and less-familiar ﬁgurative language.
Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 1601-1618. (Special issue on ’Figurative and literal language’,
ed. by R. Giora).

Giora, R., & Fein, O. (1999b). Irony: Context and salience. Metaphor and Symbol, 14, 241-257.

Giora, R., & Fein, O. (1999c). Irony comprehension: The graded salience hypothesis. Humor, 12,

425-436.

25

Giora, R., Fein O., & Schwartz, T. (1998). Irony: Graded salience and indirect negation. Metaphor

and Symbol, 13, 83-101.

Giora, R., Kronrod, A., Elnatan, I., & Fein, O. (2001, July). The role of salience in aesthetic
creativity. Paper presented at the Eleventh Annual Meeting of The Society for Text and
Discourse. The University of California, Santa Barbara.

Giora, R., Peleg, O., & Fein, O. (2001, May). Resisting contextual information: You can’t put a
salient meaning down. Paper presented at the international workshop Towards an Experi-
mental Pragmatics. The University of Lyon.

Giora, R., Zur, A., & Fein, O. (in prep). Degree of innovation and pleasure rating of visual stimuli.

Tel Aviv University.

Haiman, J. (1998). Talk is cheap: Sarcasm, alienation, and the evolution of language. Oxford:

Oxford University Press.

Harrison, A. A. (1977). Mere exposure. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social

psychology (Vol. 10, pp. 610-646). New York: Academic Press.

Kaplan, R., & Pascoe, G. C. (1977). Humorous lectures and humorous examples: some eﬀects

upon comprehension and retention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 69, 61-65.

Keysar, B., Shen, Y., Glucksberg, S., & Horton, S. W. (2000). Conventional language: How

metaphorical is it? Journal of Memory and Language, 43, 576-593.

Kreuz, J. R., Long L. D. & Church B. M. (1991). On being ironic: Pragmatic and mnemonic

implications. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 3(6), 149-162.

Kronrod, A. (2001). On the role of salience in optimal innovation: Aesthetics as a function of the

old/new ratio. Unpublished MA thesis. Tel Aviv University.

Kronrod, A., Giora, R., & Fein, O. (2000, September). Creative writing: The optimal creative
innovation in ﬁxed expressions. The EARLI special interest group writing conference 2000.
University degli Studi di Verona.

Kumon-Nakamura, s. Glucksberg, S., & Brown, M. (1995). How about another piece of the
pie: The allusional pretense theory of discourse irony. Journal of Experimental psychology:
General, 124, 3-21.

Kunst-Wilson, W. R. & Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Aﬀective discrimination of stimuli that cannot be

recognized. Science, 207, 1019-1024.

Lippman, L. G. & Dunn, M. L. (2000). Contextual connections within puns: Eﬀects on perceived

humor and memory. Journal of General Psychology, 127, 185-197.

Miyake, A., Just, M. A., & Carpenter, A. P. (1994). Working memory constraints on the resolution
of lexical ambiguity: Maintaining multiple interpretations in neutral contexts. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33, 175-202.

Mcaninch, C. B., Austin, J. L., & Derks, P. L. (1993). Eﬀect of caption meaning on memory for

nonsense ﬁgures. Current Psychology-Research & Reviews, 11, 315-323.

McMorris, R. F., Urbach, S. L., & Connor, M. C. (1985). Eﬀects of incorporating humor in test

items. Journal of Educational Measurement, 22, 147-155.

Mukarovsk´y, J. (1932/1964). Standard language and poetic language. In P. L. Garvin (Ed.), A
Prague School reader on esthetics, literary structure, and style (pp. 17-30). Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press.

26

Mukarovsk´y, J. (1978). Structure, sign and function. Yale University Press.

Peleg, O., Giora, R., & Fein, O. (2001). Salience and context eﬀects: Two are better than one.

Metaphor and Symbol, 16, 173-192.

Peleg, O., Giora, R., & Fein, O. (In press). Contextual strength: The whens and hows of context

eﬀects. In I. Noveck & D. Sperber (Eds). Experimental Pragmatics. Palgrave.

Pexman P., Ferretti, T., & Katz, A. (2000). Discourse factors that inﬂuence irony detection during

on-line reading. Discourse Processes, 29, 201-222.

Piven, H. (1999). Piven, Avodot 1990-1999 (Piven, Works 1990-1999). Tel Aviv: Am Oved.

Pexman P., Ferretti, T., & Katz, A. (2000). Discourse factors that inﬂuence irony detection during

on-line reading. Discourse Processes, 29, 201-222.

Powell, J. P., & Andresen L.W. (1985). Humour and teaching in higher education. Studies in

Higher Education, 10, 79-90.

Raskin, V. (1985). Semantic mechanisms of humor. Dordrecht: Reidel.

Rosch, E. H. (1973). On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of language (pp. 111-144). New
York: Academic Press.

Shklovsky, V. (1917/1965). Art as technique. In L. T. Lemon & M. J. Reis (Eds. and Trans.),
Russian formalist criticism: Four essays, 3-57. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Schmidt, S. R. (1994). Eﬀects of humor on sentence memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:

Learning Memory and Cognition, 20, 953-967.

Schmidt, S. R. & Williams, A. R. (2001). Memory for humorous cartoons. Memory & Cognition,

29, 305-311.

Steinhart, E. & Kittay, E. F. (1998). Metaphor.

In J. L. Mey (Ed). Concise encyclopedia of

pragmatics (pp. 576-581). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Toplak, M., & Katz, A. N. (2000). On the uses of sarcastic irony. Journal of Pragmatics, 32,

1467-1488.

Unger, L. S. (1996). The potential for using humor in global advertising. Humor-International

Journal of Humor Research, 9, 143-168.

Utsumi, A. (2000). Verbal irony as implicit display of ironic environment: Distinguishing ironic

utterances from nonirony. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 1777-1807.

Vaid, J., Hull, R., Gerkens, D., Heredia, & R., Martinez, F. (Novermber, 2000). The time course
of script activation in verbal humor processing: Preliminary evidence. Poster presented at
the 41st annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans.

Vangiﬀen, K., & Maher, K. M. (1995). Memorable humorous incidents: gender, themes and setting

eﬀects. Humor-International Journal of Humor Research, 8, 39-50.

Weiner, J. E. (1996). Why is a riddle not like a metaphor? In J. Hulstijn and A. Nijholt (Eds.),
Automatic interpretation and generation of verbal humor (pp. 111-119). IWCH ’96. Twente
Workshop on Language and Technology 12. Enschede: University of Twente.

Yus, F. (1998). A decade of relevance theory. Journal of Pragmatics, 30, 305- 345.Zajonc, R. B.
(1968). Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
9, 1-27.

27

Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preference need no inferences. American Psychologist,

35, 151-175.

Zajonc, R. B. (2000). Closing the debate over the independence of aﬀect. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.),
Feeling and thinking: The role of aﬀect in social cognition (pp. 31-58). Cambridge, United
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

Ziv, A., Gorenstein, E. & Moris, A. (1986). Adolescents’ evaluation of teachers using disparaging

humour. Educational Psychology, 6, 37-44.

28

Frame Blends, Analogies, and Humor

Douglas Hofstadter

Center for Research on Concepts and Cognition

Indiana University
Bloomington, U.S.A

dughof@cs.indiana.edu

Abstract

Analogy is usually seen as a correspondence between the internal structures of two
cleanly separated situations or ”mental spaces”. In fact, however, when humans use
analogy, most of the time the two spaces are blurred in subtle manners. Such a blurring
of distinct situations is termed by some a ”frame blend”, by others a ”blended space”.
Many blended spaces, though in some sense incoherent, seem completely normal, and
often they provide the most natural way of expressing some complicated or subtle idea.
Sometimes, however, blended spaces are shockingly incongruous, and this incongruity
is the source of humor. I will show some cartoons taken from a newspaper, in which
the humor is totally dependent on the strangeness of the blend made. Then I will
show how each cartoon can be ”tweaked” in various manners, making its blend of
spaces vary in several diﬀerent dimensions. It is interesting to ask oneself if a very
good cartoonist always intuitively hits the optimal blend of spaces. From this I will
move into more formal or abstract domains in which analogies and frame blends can
be constructed, and I will show how humor, or at least a humor-like eﬀect, can arise in
an entirely formal domain when blending is done in a suﬃciently incoherent manner.
I will also map some standard jokes onto very abstract caricatures of them, in order
to show how one and the same humorous phenomenon can arise in two vastly diﬀerent
domains. Finally, I will conclude with the challenge of trying to ”translate” jokes from
one domain into another, preserving their essence.

Quo Vadis Computational Humor? 

 

Victor Raskin 

Purdue University 

West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-1356 USA 

vraskin@purdue.edu 

Abstract 

 

 
The paper reviews the state of the art in computational humor and proposes a practical problem- and 
application-oriented approach to it, based on the ontological semantic approach to comprehensive and 
enriched  text  meaning  representation.  This  approach  minimalizes  the  gap  between  the  need  to  base 
computational humor on top of a fully-developed NLP system and the current state of the art in NLP. 
The paper also urges the field to  expand the range  of its application and to  go for them and for the 
funds to implement them competitively and aggressively. 
 
Keywords: computational humor, natural language processing, text meaning representation, business 
applications 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
This paper is a follow-up, five and a half years later, of the original Twente International Worrkshop 
on  Computational  Humor  paper  (Raskin  1996).  In  fact,  the  title  of  this  paper  is  borrowed  from  a 
section title of that paper. The earlier paper addressed three issues: 
 
• the  need for basing computational  humor on a well-defined  formal rigorous theory and the script-
based semantic theory of humor (SSTH: Raskin 1985) and its extension/revision, the general theory of 
verbal humor (GTVH: Attardo and Raskin 1991, Attardo 1994), as the prime candidates for this role; 
(cid:127)  the  feasibility  of  computational  humor  before  the  general  problem  of  natural  language  processing 
(NLP), including full meaning representation, has been largely solved; 
(cid:127) the ontological-semantic basis for all work in computational humor. 
 
 
Significant progress can be reported  on all  of these “fronts.” In humor theory, not  only has 
the approach gained  more  currency and supporters (and some  very useful  detractors) but it has also 
been successfully extended to longer and more complex texts (Attardo 2001, Ermida 2002). A further 
extension and revision of GTVH is currently underway (Attardo and Raskin 2003). In NLP, the task 
of full meaning representation has been demonstrated to be much more feasible, and while problems 
remain,  the  disconnect  between  the  needs  of  computational  humor  and  what  NLP  can  provide  has 
been significantly minimalized. The ontological semantic approach, the theoretical and computational 
implementation  of  the  early  notion  of  script  in  SSTH,  has  been  much  elaborated  upon  and  now 
supports  a  multiplicity  of  higher-end  applications.  The  situation  is  much  more  favorable  for  a  full-
steam implementation of real-life, non-toy computational humor systems. 
 
This  paper  briefly  outlines  the  state  of  the  art  in  computational  humor  and  focuses  on  the 
ontological semantic support for its  development and  implementation. Section 2, the central part of 
the  paper,  draws  heavily  on  Nirenburg  and  Raskin  (2002),  the  forthcoming  major  statement  on  the 
approach, and I would like to thank my co-author for his kind permission to use some jointly achieved 
results here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

WHY COMPUTATIONAL HUMOR? 

STRONG AND WEAK AI HYPOTHESES 

BRIEF HISTORY OF COMPUTATIONAL HUMOR 

 
 
1  
 
1.1 
 
There are two major motivations for doing something new in research: 
 
(cid:127) the Everest, “because it’s there,” motivation; and 
(cid:127) the “imperative of usefulness.” 
 
There  are  more  academic  ways  of  referring  to  these  approaches,  the  method-oriented  and  problem-
oriented  approaches,  respectively  (cf.  Nirenburg  and  Raskin  1996,  2001).  According  to  the  first  of 
these, a researcher realizes that his or her favorite method, developed for solving a certain problem, is 
portable to a different field, and he/she rushes into the field with a “ready-made” solution. There is no 
particular  concern  for  the  necessity  of  such  an  application  and,  at  least  initially,  not  much 
understanding of the actual needs of the field. Both SSTH and the first effort in computational humor 
(Raskin and  Attardo 1994), were  clearly  method-oriented: the former being an  offshoot of a formal 
semantic  theory  in  linguistics  and  the  latter  an  extension  of  that  theory  and  of  the  computational 
semantic  experience  to  humor  research.  LIBJOG,  a  pretty  valueless  toy  system,  or  rather  family  of 
systems, for generating bad light-bulb jokes, spawned a number of more elaborate toy systems (see, 
for instance, Binsted and Ritchie 1997), varying only in the authors’ optimism about their results and 
volume  of  claims  about  them.  Raskin  (1996)  was,  in  fact,  an  attempt  to  apologize  for  introducing 
something that could  only provide  entertainment and  smugness  for the systems’ authors rather than 
anything useful for either of the two fields, NLP and humor research. Stock (1996), however, smartly 
and forcefully saved computational humor and established it as a potentially serious field by outlining 
a number of edutainment and, later (Stock and Strapparava 2002), other useful applications, whose list 
is still growing, thus putting the field on a firm and respectable problem-oriented foundation. 
 
1.2 
 
The  reasons  many  scholars  feel  justified  in  using  the  method-oriented  approach  are  not  always  as 
frivolous as they were made to sound in the previous section. There is a constant built-in justification 
for that kind of thing in all cognitive areas: one can always claim that this is yet another approach to 
understand how the human mind works. This is the standard theoretical underpinning of all artificial 
intelligence (AI) and computational-system work: if we design a system that emulates successfully a 
human intellectual activity, we may then hope to catch a glimpse into the workings of the mind. 
 
A formal or computational theory may or may not make a claim that it is a model of a natural 
process.  The  most  well-known  claim  of  this  sort  is  the  “strong  AI  hypothesis”  which  sees  AI  “as 
relevant to psychology,  insofar as [it takes] a computational approach to psychological phenomena. 
The essence of the computational viewpoint is that at least some, and perhaps all, aspects of the mind 
can be  fruitfully  described for theoretical purposes by using computational  concepts”  (Boden 1981: 
71-72). Under the “strong AI thesis” (the formulation by the philosopher John Searle 1980: 353; see 
also Searle 1982a; cf. Searle 1997), “the appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the 
sense  that  computers  given  the  right  programs  can  be  literally  said  to  understand  and  have  other 
cognitive states,” a claim that Searle ascribes to Turing (1950) and that forms the basis of the Turing 
Test. We agree with Moody (1993: 79), that “[i]t is an open question whether strong AI really does 
represent a commitment of most or many researchers in AI.” So instead of modeling the mind itself, 
under  the  “weak  AI  thesis”  “the  study  of  the  mind  can  be  advanced  by  developing  and  studying 
computer models of various mental processes” (Moody, 1993: 79-80). 
 
 
 
 

 

32

 
 
It is very easy to slip from the weak to the strong thesis. Even before it started happening in 
AI  on  a  mass  scale  during  its  1980s  triumphant  march  to  the  current  oblivion,  Chomsky  had 
proceeded in the 1960-70s from a moderate claim that the native speaker must have internalized in his 
or  her  mind  some  such  rules  as  those  in  transformational  generative  grammar  to  the  extreme  claim 
that the native speaker must have internalized that particular grammar, as defined by Chomsky at the 
moment  (see  Raskin  1976  for  a  detailed  critique  of  this  dangerous  slippage  and  for  the  pertinent 
references). 
The  weak  thesis  must  then  be  the  theoretical  justification  of  computational  humor:  the 
 
systems must help us gain insights into the nature of humor as it is handled by the mind, but do they? 
The  description  of  LIBJOG  in  Attardo  and  Raskin  (1994)  and  some  discussion  there,  as  well  as 
Raskin  (1996),  make  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  system  is  devoid  of  any  intelligence  in  the 
computational  sense  and  is  operated  on  manually  compiled  lists  of  targeted  groups  and  their 
purportedly  matching  laughable  traits,  thus  providing  no  further  understanding  of  the  mechanisms 
underlying the jokes than the obvious intuitive hypothesis behind the lists. The same can be repeated 
of JAPE, the Binsted and Richie toy system for generating cross jokes. The experiment showing that 
human subjects cannot differentiate between the awful jokes generated by humans and the awful jokes 
generated by the system proves exactly nothing: bad jokes are bad jokes because they are based on a 
superficial formula rather than on deep meaning and contextual subtlety. One of the reasons the toy 
systems are unable to provide insights into the humorous mechanisms inside the mind is that they do 
not sit on top of a full-meaning NLP system while humor in the mind most definitely does (and some 
bad jokes do not have to). 
 
1.3  APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTATIONAL HUMOR 
 
Short  of  theoretical  justification,  computational  humor  must  then  be  justified  in  terms  of  its 
applicability  for  practical  purposes.  The  mature  Stock  hypothesis  is  well  expressed  in  the 
advertisement for this Workshop on its Web site. The following applications are listed there: 
 
(cid:127) business world applications (such as advertis[ing], e-commerce, etc...); 
(cid:127) general computer-mediated communication and human-computer interaction;  
(cid:127) increase the friendliness of natural language interfaces;  
(cid:127) edutainment and autonomous agents systems. 
 
These are pretty inclusive, and there is no need to get into particulars here, especially since some of 
those are proprietary and competitive: in fact, all of us in the business should be encouraged to go out 
and  compete against  each  other, inventing and selling new applications  in  order to  enrich  ourselves 
and the field. I would like to add two more types of applications to the list and comment briefly on 
them: 
 
(cid:127) customer acceptance enhancement; and 
(cid:127) humor detection. 
 
The  first  class  of  applications  encourages  customers  to  accept  an  unpopular  product  by  rewarding 
them with humor, in any form of delivery, we are discussing at this Workshop. Information security 
comes to mind as a prime candidate domain for this endeavor. We have moved NLP forcefully into 
the  business  of  information  assurance  and  security  (IAS)  with  our  work  in  natural  language 
watermarking  and  tamper-proofing  as  well  as  downgrading  (see  Raskin  1999,  Raskin  et  al.  2001, 
2002;  Atallah  et  al.  2001).  In  IAS,  the  main  problem  is  not  the  scarcity  of  systems  protecting 
computer networks but rather the resistance, amounting to deception and sabotage, on the part of the 
system administrators, to acquiring the  necessary knowledge and to  making the  necessary  efforts to 
install  and  maintain  those  IAS  systems.  The  humor  interface  and/or  other  humor  deliverables  may 
reward the complying sysadmins and cajole them into accepting the IAS protection measures. 
 
 

 

33

ONTOLOGICAL SEMANTICS AT THE SERVICE OF COMPUTATIONAL  
HUMOR 

 
 
The  second  class  of  applications  is  even  more  interesting,  in  a  way,  because  it  involves 
analysis rather than generation. Most computational  humor applications, like the initial toy systems, 
involved automatic generation of jokes. In humor detection, an application will search for humor, for 
instance,  with  the  purpose  of  cleaning  the  text  up,  excluding  the  possibility  of  any  humorous 
perversion  of  the  text,  for  instance,  in  a  presidential  address,  diplomatic  note,  or  any  othr  deadly 
serious  business.  As  politicians  well  know,  there  is  hardly  anything  that  is  humor-proof  but  many 
speeches open themselves widely to abuse by satirists. On the other hand, the same humor-detection 
applications can be used to determine the vulnerable spots in a text to be denigrated, e.g., in a political 
campaign, and then to work in conjunction with humor generation to create appropriate and effective 
humor. 
 
2 
 
 
2.1  GENERAL OVERVIEW OF ONTOLOGICAL SEMANTICS 
 
Ontological  semantic  applications  include  machine  translation  (MT),  information  extraction  (IE), 
question  answering  (QA),  general  human-computer  dialog  systems,  text  summarization  and 
specialized applications combining some or all of the above with additional functionality (e.g., advice 
giving systems). Of course, such applications are attempted without ontological semantics, or, for that 
matter,  without  any  treatment  of  meaning  at  all.  If,  however,  these  applications  are  based  on 
ontological  semantics,  then  any  kind  of  input  to  the  system  (an  input  text  for  MT,  a  query  for  a 
question  answering  system,  a  text  stream  for  information  extraction,  etc.)  first  undergoes  several 
stages  of  analysis  (tokenization,  morphological,  syntactic,  semantic,  etc.—see  Chapter  8  below  for 
details)  that,  in  the  case  of  success,  in  the  end  generate  the  meaning  of  a  text,  “text  meaning 
representation” or TMR. The TMR serves as input to specialized processing relevant for a particular 
application.  For  example,  in  MT,  the  TMR  needs  to  be  translated  into  a  natural  language  different 
from the one in which the input was supplied. The program that carries this task out is usually called 
text generator. In IE, TMRs are used by the special rules as sources of fillers of IE template slots. In 
question answering, the TMR presents the proximate meaning of the user’s query. The QA processor 
must  first  understand  exactly  what  the  user  wants  the  system  to  do,  then  find  the  necessary 
information either in the background world knowledge sources (most often, Fact DB, but sometimes 
the  ontology  or the  lexicons) and then  generate a well-formed answer. Needless to say, all  of those 
applications  combine  and  recombine  the  same  modules,  with  some  variation,  and  all  of  those, 
including whole applications, can be used for various computational humor purposes. 
 
The  static  knowledge  sources  include  the  language-dependent  ones—the  rules  for  text 
tokenization,  detecting  proper  names  and  acronyms  and  other  preprocessing,  “ecological”  tasks  for 
morphological, syntactic and ontological semantic analysis. The information for the latter three types 
of  analysis  resides  largely  in  the  lexicons  of  the  system,  though  special  rules  (e.g.,  syntactic 
grammars)  are  separate  from  lexicons.  In  the  current  state  of  ontological  semantics,  onomasticons, 
repositories  of  proper  names,  are  separated  from  regular  lexicons.  The  language  independent  static 
knowledge  sources  are  the  ontology  and  the  fact  database  (Fact  DB).  The  ontology  contains 
information  about  how  things  can  be  in  the  world  while  the  Fact  DB  contains  actual  facts,  that  is, 
events that took place or objects that existed, exist or have been reported to exist. In other words, the 
ontology  contains  concept  types,  whereas  the  Fact  DB  contains  remembered  concept  tokens,  or 
instances. Onomasticons contain information about words and phrases in natural language that name 
remembered concept instances. These concept instance names are also recorded as property fillers in 
Fact  DB  frames.  Note  that  the  Fact  DB  also  contains  other,  unnamed,  concept  instances.  More 
detailed  descriptions  of all the static  knowledge sources are  given  in Nirenburg and Raskin  (2002), 
Chapter 7.  
 
 

 

34

In  most  applications  of  ontological  semantics,  a  side  effect  of  the  system’s  operation  is 
 
selective  augmentation  of  the  Fact  DB  with  the  elements  of  TMRs  produced  during  input  analysis 
stage. This way, this information is remembered and made available for future use. It is in this sense 
that  we  can  say  that  ontological  semantic  applications  involve  learning:  the  more  they  operate,  the 
more world knowledge they record, the better quality results they may expect. 
  
2.2  MEANING REPRESENTATION IN ONTOLOGICAL SEMANTICS 
 
2.2.1  Meaning Proper and the Rest 
 
Consider the following text as input to an ontological-semantic processor.  

(1) 

Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S.  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan. 

 
In  “Computerese,”  that  is,  in  the  form  that  we  expect  that  a  semantic  analyzer  would  be  able  to 
process and represent the above text, the latter will be glossed, for example, as follows:  

(2) 

A spokeseperson for the company called Dresser Industries made this statement: Dresser  
Industries expects that imports into the US from Japan will decrease through large capital  
investment for the purpose of expanding the manufacturing potential in the US; the  
expenditure precedes expansion, which precedes reduction, and all of them take place after  
the statement. 

 

 

 
In  a  somewhat  more  formal  fashion,  the  meaning  of  (1)  glossed  in  (2)  can  be  seen  to  include  the 
following meaning components: 
 
(3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

that Dresser Industries is a phrase, moreover, a set phrase, a proper name; 
that it is the name of a company; 
that this name is used in the original text metonymically—the company name, in  
fact, stands for its unnamed spokesperson(s); 
that the spokesperson made a statement (that is, not a question or a command); 
that the company (once again, metonymically) has a certain belief, namely, an  
expectation; 
that the scope of the expectation is the reduction of imports into US from Japan; 
that the reduction of imports is expected to take place through capital  
investment; 
that the purpose of the investment is to increase the capacity for manufacturing  
in the United States; 
that United States refers to a nation, the United States of America, and Japan  
refers to another nation, Japan; 
that the object of manufacturing, that is left unnamed in the original text is most  
likely to refer to goods; 
that the decrease occurs in the amount of goods that the United States imports  
from Japan; 
that the time at which reduction of imports occurs follows the time of investment  
which, in turn, preceded the expansion of manufacturing capacity; 
that the time at which the statement was made precedes the time of investment; 
that what is expanded is not necessarily the actual manufacturing output but the  
potential for it. 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
 
(iv) 
(v) 
 
(vi) 
(vii) 
 
(viii) 
 
(ix) 
 
(x) 
 
(xi) 
 
(xii) 
 
(xiii) 
(xiv) 
 

 

35

 
The set of expressions in (3) can be viewed as the meaning of (1). In fact, this is the level at which 
text  meaning  is  defined  in  the  current  implementation  of  ontological  semantics.  However,  it  is 
important to understand that there may be alternative formulations of what constitutes the meaning of 
(1)  or, for that  matter, of any text, and  it  is clear that humorous  interpretations  will have their  own 
needs. So, it seems appropriate at this point to discuss the general issue of how exactly to define text 
meaning. It might come as a surprise that this is not such an easy question! One attempt at making the 
idea of meaning better defined is the introduction of the notion of literal meaning (cf., e.g., Hausser 
1999:20). Thus, we could have declared that what we represent in our approach is the literal meaning 
of texts. However, this decision meets with difficulties because the notion of literal meaning may not 
be  defined  sufficiently  precisely.  For  instance,  (3)  can  be  construed  as  the  literal  meaning  of  (1). 
However,  under  a  different  interpretation,  deciding  to  resolve  the  organization-for-employee 
metonymy in (3.iii) and (3.v) may be construed as going beyond literal meaning. (3) can be seen as 
the literal meaning of (1) if one agrees that Dresser Industries, being a company, cannot actually be 
the agent of saying. If this constraint is lifted, by allowing organizations to be agents of speech acts, 
then  the  literal  meaning  will  not  require  the  resolution  of  metonymy.  In  other  words,  this  kind  of 
literal meaning will be represented by eliminating (3.iii) and (3.v) from (3). In fact, if this approach is 
adopted  throughout,  the  concept  of  metonymy  will  be  summarily  dispensed  with  (Mahesh  1996; 
Section 8.4.2). As the concept of literal meaning can be understood in a variety of ways, we found it 
unhelpful for defining which kinds of information belong in text meaning and which remain outside 
it,  while  still  possibly  playing  a  role  (of  background  knowledge  used  for  inference  making  in 
reasoning applications) in text processing in a variety of applications. Computational humor requires 
even more attention to processing non-literal meaning that the state of the art provides at this time (cf. 
Nirenburg and Raskin 2002, Chapter 8). 
 
We  have  just  considered  a  possibility  of  representing  the  meaning  of  (1)  using  less 
information  than  shown  in  (3).  It  is  equally  possible  to  view  an  expanded  version  of  (3)  as  the 
meaning of (1). One example of such expansion would add statements in (4) to the list (3): 
 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4.i) is known as a(n existential) presupposition for (1). (4.ii) is an entailment of (1). Should they be 
considered integral parts of the meaning of (1)? Information in (4.iii) and (4.iv) is inferred from (1) on 
the basis of general knowledge about the world. For example, (4.iii) relies on the belief that if it is not 
stated  otherwise,  it  is  strongly  probable  that  Dresser  Industries  also  plans  to  participate  in  the 
expansion  of the  US  manufacturing capacity. It  is  noteworthy that, unlike for (4.i) and (4.ii), (4.iii) 
and (4.iv) are not expected to be always true.  
 
Let us explore a little further what this actually means. One way of approaching the task of 
determining  the  exact  meaning  of  a  text  is  by  using  the  negation  test,  a  typical  linguistic  tool  for 
justifying an element of description by showing that its exclusion leads to some sort of deviance, for 
instance,  a  contradiction  (see,  e.g.,  Raskin  1985).  Indeed,  the  negation  of  any  element  of  (3) 
contradicts  some  component  of  the  meaning  of  (1).  We  may  take  this  as  an  indication  that  each 
element  of  (3)  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  meaning  of  (1).  But  is  it  correct  to  say  that  any  statement 
whose negation contradicts (1) is a necessary part of the meaning of (1)? Let us consider a few more 
cases.  
 
It is easy to see why are (5.1) and (5.2) are contradictory. Each of them consists of (1) and the 
negation  of  one  of  the  component  clauses  of  (1).  Obviously,  the  contradiction  results  from  the  fact 
that the negated component is an integral part of the meaning of (1).  
 
 

that the company Dresser Industries exists; 
that Dresser Industries has an opinion on the subject of reducing imports from  
Japan; 
that the most probable source of investment that would lead to the expansion of  
the US manufacturing capacity is either Dresser Industries itself or a joint venture  
of which it is a part; 
that the goal of reducing imports is a desirable one. 

(i) 
(ii) 
 
(iii) 
 
 
(iv) 

 

36

(5) 

(i) 

(ii) 

 

Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of US  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan, and Dresser Industries did  
not say it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of US manufacturing  
capacity will reduce imports from Japan 
Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of US  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan, and Dresser Industries said it  
does not expect that major capital expenditure for expansion of US manufacturing  
capacity will reduce imports from Japan 

Similarly, contradictory statements  will result from adding the  negations  of (4.i) and (4.ii) to (1), to 
yield (6.i) and (6.ii): 
 
(6) 

(i) 

Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S.  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan, and Dresser Industries does  
not exist; 
Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S.  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan, and Dresser Industries has no 
opinion on whether major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S. manufacturing  
capacity will reduce imports from Japan 

(ii) 

 
The source of contradictions in (6) is different, however, than the source of contradictions in (5). The 
statements added in (6) do not negate anything directly stated in (1). They negate a presupposition and 
an entailment of (1), respectively: if it is not presupposed that Dresser Industries exists, (1) makes no 
sense; if it does not follow from (1) that Dresser Industries has an opinion on the subject of imports 
from  Japan,  (1)  does  not  make  sense,  either.  As  we  can  see,  the  negation  tool  fails  to  distinguish 
between  the  actual  elements  of  the  meaning  of  (1),  on  the  one  hand  and  the  presuppositions  and 
entailments  of  (1),  on  the  other.  This  outcome  gives  us  two  alternatives—either  to  include 
presuppositions and entailments in the meaning of (1) (or, by extension, of any statement) or to ignore 
the results of the negation test in this case.  
 
This  distinction  turns  out  to  be  problematic  for  people  as  well.  Thus,  delayed  recall 
experiments  (Chafe  1977)  show  something  that  trial  lawyers  have  always  known  about  witness 
testimony, namely, that people never recall exactly what was said—only the gist of it—and that they 
routinely confuse the presuppositions and entailments of a statement with what the statements actually 
assert.  The  distinction  may,  however,  be  quite  important  in  those  NLP  applications  where  it  is 
important to distinguish between  what is  conveyed by the text  directly and  what is present only by 
implication, and computational humor is prominently among those applications. For example, at the 
text  generation step of  machine translation,  what  must be translated is the actually  made statements 
and not what they presuppose or entail, the reason being the assumption that the readers will be able 
to recreate all the implications that were present but not overtly stated in the original text. 
 
(1) yields (7.i) and (7.ii) that are somewhat odd but not contradictory: 
 
(7) 

The  negation tool does,  however,  work  well for (4.iii) and (4.iv). Adding their negations to 

(i) 

Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S.  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan, and it is not the case that  
Dresser Industries or a joint venture of which it is a part are the most probable source  
of investment in the US manufacturing capacity. 
Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S.  
manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan, and the goal of reducing  
imports is not a desirable one. 

(ii) 

 
We conclude that the reason  for the absence  of contradictions in (7)  is that (4.iii) and (4.iv) do not 
negate  any  elements  of  the  meaning  of  (1).  In  general,  we  assume  that  if  adding  the  negation  of  a 
statement  to  another  statement  is  not  contradictory,  then  the  former  statement  does  not  constitute  a 
part of the meaning of the latter statement. One can also say then that there are no contradictions in 
(7) because (4.iii) and (4.iv) are possible but not necessary entailments from (1).  

 

37

Many more such possible statements can be inferred from (1) based on the ontological entry 

 
 
for CORPORATION and related concepts and scripts, such as DO-PUBLICITY, for instance:  
 
(8) 
 
 
 

that Dresser Industries has headquarters; 
that it has employees; 
that it manufactures particular products and/or particular services; 
that the addressee of the statement by the spokesperson of Dresser Industries was the  
general public; 
that the statement has been, most probably, made through the mass media, etc. 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

(v) 

 
 
Even  more  inferences  can  be  made  from  (1)  based  on  the  general  understanding  of  goals  that 
organizations and people typically pursue as well as plans that they use to attain those goals: 
 
(9) 

(i) 

that there is a benefit for Dresser Industries in expanding the US manufacturing  
capacity 
that capital investment is a plan toward attaining the goal of expanding  
manufacturing capacity; 
that this goal can play the role of a step in a plan of attaining the goal of reducing  
imports; or 
that Dresser Industries knows about suing mass media as a plan for attaining a variety  
of goals. 

 

 

 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

 
All  the  inferences  in  (7  -  9)  are  not  “legal”  (cf.  Charniak  and  McDermott  1985:21)  deductions  but 
rather abductive, defeasible, negatable inferences. It is for this reason that none of them are included 
in the specification of the meaning of (1). The distinction between meaning proper, on the one hand, 
and  presuppositions,  entailments  and  inferences,  on  the  other,  may  not  be  as  important  for  NLP 
applications whose results are not intended for direct human consumption, e.g., for text data mining 
aiming  at  automatic  population  of  databases.  People,  however,  are  capable  of  generating 
presuppositions,  entailments  and  inferences  on  the  fly  from  a  brief  message.  Indeed,  brevity  is  at  a 
premium in human professional and business communication. Text meaning or even condensed text 
meaning  are,  thus,  the  central  objects  of  manipulation  in  such  common  applications  as  machine 
translation and text summarization, respectively. Clearly, presupposition,  entailment, and inferences 
have a greatly enhanced role to play in humorous texts. 
 
For computers, brevity of the kind to which we are referring has little real physical sense in 
these days of inexpensive storage devices and fast indexing and search algorithms. What is difficult 
for computer systems is precisely making reliable and relevant inferences. Therefore, spelling out as 
many inferences as possible from a text and recording them explicitly in a well-indexed manner for 
future  retrieval  is  essential  for  supporting  a  variety  of  computational  applications,  especially  for 
computational humor. 
 
It is important for a computational semantic theory to provide the means of supporting both 
these precepts—of brevity and of explicitness. A representation of text meaning should be as brief as 
possible, if it is to be the source for generating a text for human consumption. The knowledge about 
both the building blocks of the  meaning representation and the types of inferences that are possible 
from a particular text meaning should be stored in an accessible fashion. These kinds of knowledge 
are interchangeable with the change of inputs—what was a part of text meaning for one source text 
may  end  up  being  a  source  of  inference  for  another.  Any  computational  semantic  application  must 
support  this  capability  of  dynamically  assigning  some  of  the  resident  knowledge  to  direct  meaning 
representations and reserving the rest for possible inferences. In ontological semantics, these goals are 
achieved through interrelationship among text meaning representations (TMRs), the lexicons and the 
ontology.  
 
 
 
 

 

38

2.2.2  TMR IN ONTOLOGICAL SEMANTICS 
 
Meaning  of  natural  language  texts  is  represented  in  ontological  semantics  as  a  result  of  a 
compositional  process  that  relies  on  the  meanings  of  words,  of  bound  morphemes,  of  syntactic 
structures and of word, phrase and clause order in the input text. The meanings of words reside in the 
lexicon and the onomasticon (the lexicon of names). The bound morphemes (e.g., markers of Plural 
for  nouns)  are  processed  during  morphological  analysis  and  get  their  meanings  recorded  in  special 
rules,  possibly,  added  to  classes  of  lexical  entries.  Information  about  dependency  among  lexical 
elements  and  phrases,  derived  in  syntax,  helps  to  establish  relationships  of  semantic  dependency. 
Word and phrase order in some languages play a similar role.  
 
It is clear then that the knowledge necessary for ontological semantic analysis of text should 
include  not  only  the  lexical  material  for  the  language  of  the  text  but  also  the  results  of  the 
morphological  and  syntactic  analysis  of  the  input  text.  Let  us  follow  the  process  of  creating  an 
ontological-semantic TMR using the example in (1), repeated here as (10).  
 
(10)  Dresser Industries said it expects that major capital expenditure for expansion of U.S.  

manufacturing capacity will reduce imports from Japan. 

 
English  is  a  morphologically  impoverished  language,  but  morphological  analysis  of  (10)  will  still 
yield some non-trivial results: 

Part of Speech 

Features 

Root 
Dresser Industries  
say 
it  

expect 

that  
major  
capital  
expenditure  
for  
expansion  
of  
U.S.  
manufacturing  
capacity  
reduce  

Phrase Proper 
Verb 
Pronoun 

Verb 

Binder 
Adjective 
Noun 
Noun 
Preposition 
Noun 
Preposition 
Acronym 
Verb 
Noun 
Verb 

Number: Singular 
Tense: Past 
Number: Singular; Person: 
Third 
Tense: Present; Number: 
Singular; Person: Third 
 
 
Number: Singular 
Number: Singular 
 
Number: Singular 
 
Number: Singular 
Form: Gerund 
Number: Singular 
Tense: Future (will marks this 
in the text) 
Number: Plural 
 
 

Noun 
Preposition 
Noun Proper 

import 
from  
Japan 
 
Results of syntactic analysis of (10) can be represented in the following structure (which is modeled 
on the f-structure of LFG (e.g., Levin 1991): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

39

verb 

root    of 

capacity 

 
noun 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

say 
verb 
past 

reduce 
verb 
future 

expenditure 
noun 

dresser industries 
phrase-proper 

noun 

cat    
modifier major 
 

 

root  dresser industries 
cat 

phrase-proper 

root    expect 
cat 
tense  present 
subject  
 
 
root 
 
cat 
 object    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

root  
cat 
tense 
subject  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
object   
 
 
 
 
 

(11) 
root      
cat 
tense 
subject    
 
 
comp      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We will now use the results of the morphological and syntactic analysis presented above in building a 
TMR for (10). TMRs are written in a formal language with its own syntax specified in Nirenburg and 
Raskin (2002), Section 6.4. For pedagogical reasons, at many points in our presentation here, we will 
use a somewhat simplified version of that language and will build the TMR for (10) step by step, not 
necessarily in the order that any actual analyzer will follow. 
 
The first step in ontological semantic analysis is finding meanings for heads of clauses in the 
syntactic representation  of  input. In  our  example, these are say,  expect and reduce.  As  we  will see, 
they all will be treated differently in TMR construction. In addition, the TMR will end up containing 
more event instances than there are verbs in the original text. This is because ontological semantics is 
“transcategorial” in that meanings are not conditioned by part of speech tags.  

root   
cat  
modifier   capital 
 
 
 
oblique   root    
cat   
 
object    
 
cat  
 
 
oblique   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 imports 
root  
cat  
noun 
oblique    root    
 
 
 

cat   preposition 
object root  
 
 
 
 
  
 

cat  
modifier root u.s. 
 

adjective 
 cat  
 
for 
preposition 

cat  
modifier 
 
 
 

root   manufacturing 
verb 

root   expansion 
noun 

from 

 
preposition 

root   japan 
noun-proper 

cat   
object    
  

 

cat  

cat  phrase-proper 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40

; as in  Spencer said a word 

 
Specifically,  in  (1),  the  nouns  expenditure  and  expansion  occupying  the  syntactic  positions 
corresponding typically to heads of noun phrases, are mapped into instances of event-type concepts in 
the TMR.  
In (12), we present the syntactic-structure (SYN-STRUC) and semantic-structure (SEM-STRUC) 
 
components of the entry for say in the ontological semantic lexicon of English. The meaning of say 
instantiates  the  ontological  concept  INFORM.  The  representation  of  this  concept,  shown  in  (13), 
contains a number  of properties (“slots”),  with a specification  of  what type of  object can be a legal 
value (“filler”) for each property.  
 
(12)  
say-v1 
  syn-struc 
1   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  sem-struc 
1 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 
inform 
 

; both syntactic structures have the same  
; semantic structure, 
; ‘^’ is read as ‘the meaning of,’ and 
; the variables provide mappings between  
; syntactic and semantic structures 

root   say        
cat   v 
subj  root   $var1 
cat   n 
 
root   $var2 
obj 
 
cat   n 
root   say        
cat   v               
subj  root   $var1 
 
cat   n 
comp root    

 
inform 
 
 
 
agent  value  ^$var1   
 
 
theme value ^$var2   
 
 
 

; as in Spencer said  that it rained 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

$var2 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

definition 
 
is-a  
agent  
theme  
instrument  
beneficiary  
 

or set of persons”  

“the event of asserting something to provide information to another person 
 
assertive-act  
human  
event 
communication-device 
human  

value 
value 

agent  
theme  

So far, then, the nascent TMR for (1) has the form: 
 
(14)      
inform-1 
 
 
 
The  arbitrary  but  unique  numbers  appended  to  the  names  of  concepts  during  ontological  semantic 
processing identify instances of concepts. The numbers themselves are also used for establishing co-
reference relations among the same instances. At the next step of semantic analysis, the process seeks 
to establish whether fillers are available in the input for these properties. If the fillers are not available 
directly,  there  are  special  procedures  to  try  to  establish  them.  If  these  recovery  procedures  fail  to 
identify the filler but it is known that some filler must exist in principle, the special filler UNKNOWN is 
used.  

__________ 
__________ 

 

41

The TMR at this point looks as illustrated in (15).  

agent   value  
theme   value 

Dresser Industries 
__________ 

The  AGENT  slot  in  (14)  cannot  be  filled  directly  from  the  text.  The  reason  for  that  is  as 
 
follows. The procedure for determining the filler attempts to use the syntax-to-semantics mapping in 
the  lexicon  entry  for  say,  to  establish  the  filler  for  the  particular  slots.  The  lexicon  entry  for  say 
essentially states that the meaning, ^$var1, of the syntactic subject of say, $var1, should be the filler 
of  the  AGENT  slot  of  INFORM.  Before  inserting  a  filler,  the  system  checks  whether  it  matches  the 
ontological constraint for AGENT of INFORM and discovers that the match occurs on the RELAXABLE-
TO facet of the AGENT slot, because Dresser Industries is an ORGANIZATION. Note that the ontological 
status  of  DRESSER  INDUSTRIES  is  that  of  a  (named)  instance  of  the  concept  CORPORATION—see 
Nirenburg and Raskin (2002), Section 4.2.1 for a discussion of instances and remembered instances.  
 
 
(15) 
inform-1 
 
 
 
The theme slot in (14) requires a  more complex treatment. The  complement  of say  in the syntactic 
representation (11) is a statement of expectation. According to a general rule, the direct object of the 
syntactic  clause  should  be  considered  as  the  prime  candidate  for  producing  the  filler  for  THEME. 
Expectation,  however,  is  considered  in  ontological  semantics  to  be  a  modality  and  is,  therefore, 
represented  in  TMR as  a  property  of  the  proposition  that  represents  the  meaning  of  the  clause  that 
modifies  it  syntactically.  Before  assigning  properties,  such  as  this  modality,  we  will  first  finish 
representing the basic meanings that these properties characterize. Therefore, a different candidate for 
filling  the  theme  property  must  be  found.  The  next  candidate  is  the  clause  headed  by  reduce. 
Consulting  the  lexicon  and  the  ontology  and  using  the  standard  rules  of  matching  selectional 
restrictions yields (16): 
 
(16) 
inform-1 
 
    
decrease-1 
 
 
Continuing along this path, we fill the case roles THEME and INSTRUMENT in (16), as well as their own 
properties and the properties of their properties, all the way down, as shown in (17): 
 
(17) 
inform-1 
 
 
decrease-1 
 
 
 
import-1 
 
 
 
 
expend-1 
 
 
 
 

agent  
theme  
source   
Japan 
destination  value  USA 

value  unknown 
value  money-1 
 
value 

agent  
theme   
import-1 
instrument   value  expend-1 

value  unknown   
value 

agent   
theme   

value   Dresser Industries 
value  decrease-1 

agent  value   Dresser Industries 
theme  value  decrease-1 

 

value  unknown 
value  unknown 
value 

agent   value  unknown 

agent 
theme 
 
purpose 

amount  value > 0.7 

 
increase-1 

 

42

value  unknown 
value  manufacture-1.theme 

value  unknown 
agent      
theme       value  unknown 
location 

value  USA 

increase-1 
agent  
 
 
theme  
manufacture-1 
 
 
 
 
Some elements of (17) are not self-evident and require an explanation. First, the value of the property 
AMOUNT of the concept MONEY (which is the meaning of capital in the input) is rendered as a region 
on an abstract scale between 0 and 1, with the value corresponding to the meaning of the word major. 
The  same  value  would  be  assigned  to  other  words  denoting  a  large  quantity,  such  as  large,  great, 
much, many, etc. The meanings of words like enormous, huge or gigantic would be assigned a higher 
value,  say,  >  0.9.  THEME  of  INCREASE  is  constrained  to  SCALAR-OBJECT-ATTRIBUTE  and  its 
ontological descendants, of which AMOUNT is one. The filler of the THEME of increase-1 turns out to 
be the property AMOUNT itself (not a value of this property!) referenced as the THEME of manufacture-
1, rendered in the familiar dot notation.  
 
Now that we have finished building the main “who did what to whom” semantic dependency 
structure,  let  us  add  those  features  that  are,  in  ontological  semantics,  factored  out  into  specific 
parameterized properties, such as speech act,  modality, time  or co-reference. The top proposition in 
(18)  reflects  the  speech  act  information  that  in  the  text  (1)  is  not  expressed  explicitly,  namely,  the 
speech  act  of  publishing  (1)  in  whatever  medium.  The  speech  act  introduces  an  instance  of  the 
ontological concept AUTHOR-EVENT (see also Nirenburg and Raskin 2002, Section 6.5).  
 
(18) 
author-event-1 
agent value unknown 
 
theme value inform-1 
 
time   
 
 
 
 
 
inform-1 
 
 
 
 
 
begin) 
 
decrease-1 
value  unknown 
agent   
 
theme   
 
 
instrument    
 
time   
 
 
 
 
 
import-1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

agent   
theme  
source   
destination  value  USA 
time   
 
 

(> inform-1.time-end) (> expend-1.time-begin) (> import-1.time-begin) 
< import-1.begin-time 

unknown 
(< decrease-1.time-begin) (< import-1.time-begin) (< reduce-1.time-

agent  value  
theme value decrease-1 
time   
 
 

time-begin 
time-end 

(> inform.time-end) (< expend-1.begin-time) 
unknown 

value  unknown 
 
 

value unknown 
value Japan 

(< expend-1 

.time-begin) (< increase-1.time-begin) 

> inform-1.time-end 
unknown 

 

time-begin 
time-end 

 
 

value import-1 
value expend-1 

 

Dresser Industries 

 

 

 

 

time-begin 
time-end 

time-begin 
time-end 

 
 

 

43

 
 
 
 

time-begin 
time-end 

agent   
theme  
time   
 
 

time-begin 
time-end 

 
 

 
 

value  unknown 

value  USA 

value  
value  
 
value  

unknown 
money-1 

amount  value > 0.7 
increase-1 

type   
value  
scope  

potential  
1 
 
decrease-1 

value  unknown 
 

value manufacture-1.theme 

> inform.time-end 
< increase-1.begin-time 

 

agent     
theme    
 
purpose  
time   
 
 

time-begin  > inform.time-end 
time-end 

unknown 

;this is the meaning of expects in (10) 
;this is the maximum value of potential 

(> inform.time-end) (< manufacture-1.begin-time) 
unknown 

 
expend-1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase-1 
 
 
 
 
 
manufacture-1 
 
agent  
theme value unknown 
 
location 
 
time   
 
 
 
 
 
modality-1 
 
 
 
modality-2 
type     
 
value    
 
 
scope    
co-reference-1 
 
co-reference-2 
 
 
The time property values in each proposition, all relative since there is no absolute reference to time 
in the input sentence, establish a partial temporal order of the various events in (1): for example, that 
the time  of the statement by Dresser Industries precedes the time of reporting. The  expected  events 
may only take place after the statement is  made. It is not clear, however, how the time  of reporting 
relates  to  the  times  of  the  expected  events  because  some  of  them  may  have  already  taken  place 
between the time of the statement and the time of reporting.  
Inserting  the  value  UNKNOWN  into  appropriate  slots  in  the  TMR  actually  undersells  the 
 
system’s capabilities. In reality, while the exact filler might not be indeed known, the system knows 
many  constraints  on  this  filler.  These  constraints  come  from  the  ontological  specification  of  the 
concept in which the property that gets the UNKNOWN filler is defined and, if included in the TMR, 
turn it into what we define as extended TMR (see Nirenburg and Raskin 2002, Section 6.7). Thus, the 
AGENT of import-1 is constrained to U.S. import companies. The AGENT of expend-1 is constrained to 
people  and  organizations  that  are  investors.  The  AGENT  of  increase-1  and  manufacture-1  is 
constrained to manufacturing corporations. The THEME of import-1 and manufacture-1 is constrained 
to GOODS (the idea being that if you manufacture some goods then you do not have to import them). 
The facts that Dresser Industries is a company  while  Japan and  USA are countries are stored  in the 
onomasticon.  
 
 
 

potential    
1  
manufacture-1 

increase-1.agent 

manufacture-1.agent 

import-1.theme 

manufacture-1.theme 

;this is the meaning of capacity in (10) 

 
 

 

 

44

CONCLUSION 

2.3  ONTOLOGICAL SEMANTIC RESOURCES 
 
The resources of ontological semantics, publicly available, provide a much richer and more accurate 
meaning representation of natural language text than WordNet. The reason for that is simple: 
WordNet was never intended for this purpose, and it has been used in NLP primarily because it is 
there and because it can be extended without any direct semantic analysis, something that most NLP 
groups fear and try their best to avoid. Ontological semantics was created specifically for the purpose 
of meaning representation in the process of costly semantic analysis performed by 3 tiers of experts 
with the help of a sophisticated toolbox of semi-automatic acquisition interfaces, optimally combining 
the native speakers’ semantic competence with automatic procedures of its representation. There is no 
doubt that the amount of sophistication required for humor analysis can only be met by extending 
ontological semantic resources. 
 
3 
 
It is a good time for computational humor. We are, hopefully, past the stage of useless toy systems. 
We are much close to implementing a full and comprehensive text meaning representation system 
based on ontological semantics. We have gained a more realistic view of how much this research can 
actually tell us about the mind. We have gained maturity to see the important role of applications in 
supporting this important research. We have no more excuse to waste time on any more “bags of 
tricks” to gert a computational system to do something visible but useless. It is time to get to work. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Atallah, M., and V. Raskin 2001. Natural language watermarking: Design, analysis, and a proof-of-
concept implementation.” In: Ira S. Moskowitz (ed.), Information Hiding. Berlin-New York: 
Springer Verlag, 2001, pp. 185-199. 
Attardo, S. 1994. Linguistic Theories of Humor. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Attardo, S. 2001. Humorous Texts: A Semantic and Pragmatic Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 

Attardo, S., and V. Raskin 1991. Script Theory Revis(it)ed: Joke Similarity and Joke Representation 
Model. Humor 4:3-4, pp. 293-347. 
Attardo, S., and V. Raskin 2003. General Theory of Verbal Humor. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. In 
Preparation. 

Binsted, K., and G. Ritchie 1997. Computational rules for punning riddles. Humor 10:1, pp. 25-76. 
Boden, M. A. 1981. Minds and Mechanisms: Philosophical Psychology and Computational 
Models. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Charniak, E., and D. McDermott 1985. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley. 

Ermida, I. 2002. Superscripts and the Humor of Narratives. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Department of 
English, University of Minho, Minho, Portugal. 
Hausser, R. 1999. Foundations of Computational Linguistics. Berlin: Springer. 
Levin, L. S. 1991. Syntactic Theory and Processing. In: K. Goodman and S. Nirenburg (eds.), KBMT-
89: A Case Study in Knowledge-Based Machine Translation, San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 49-
70. 
Mahesh, K. 1996. Ontology Development for Machine Translation: Ideology and Methodology. 
Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science MCCS-96-292, New Mexico State University: 
Computing Research Laboratory. 

 

45

Moody, T. C. 1993. Philosophy and Artificial Intelligence. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Nirenburg, S., and V. Raskin 1996. Ten Choices for Lexical Semantics. Memoranda in Computer and 
Cognitive Science MCCS-96-304, New Mexico State University: Computing Research Laboratory. 

Nirenburg, S., and V. Raskin 2001. Choices in Lexical Semantic Theory. Computational Intelligence 
17:1, pp. 157-177. 
Nirenburg, S., and V. Raskin 2002. Ontological Semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Forthcoming. Prefinal Draft at: http://crl.nmsu.edu/Staff.pages/Technical/sergei/book/index-
book.html. 

Raskin, V. 1976. Generation and performance. Theoretical Linguistics 181, pp. 45-61. 
Raskin, V. 1985. Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. Dordrecht-Boston-Lancaster: Reidel. 

Raskin, V. 1996. Computer implementation of the general theory of verbal humor. In: J. Hulstijn and 
A. Nijholt (eds.), Automatic Interpretation and Generation of Verbal Humor. International 
Workshop on Computational Humor, IWCH ’96. Twente Workshop on Language Technology, 
TWLT 12, Enschede, NL: University of Twente, pp. 9-19. 

Raskin, V. 1999. Natural language processing and information assurance and security. Paper 
delivered at ITC-irst, Trento, Italy. 
Raskin, V., M. J. Atallah, C. J. McDonough, and S. Nirenburg 2001. Natural language processing for 
information assurance and security: An overview and implementations. In: M. Schaefer (ed.), 
Proceedings of NSPW-2000, New York: ACM Press, pp. 51-65. 
Raskin, V., and S. Attardo 1994. Non-literalness and non-bona-fide in Language: An approach to 
formal and computational treatments of humor. Pragmatics and Cognition 2:1, pp. 31-69. 

Raskin, V., C. F. Hempelmann, K. E. Triezenberg, and S. Nirenburg 2002. Ontology in information 
security: A useful theoretical foundation and methodological tool.” In: V. Raskin and C. F. 
Hempelmann (eds.), Proceedings: New Security Paradigms Workshop 2001, New York: ACM 
Press, 2002, pp. 67-73. 

Searle, J. R. 1980. Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, pp. 417-457. 
Reprinted in: D. R. Hofstadter and D. C. Dennett (eds.), The Mind’s I, New York: Bantam, 1981. 

Searle, J. R. 1982. The myth of the computer. The New York Review of Books, April 29, 3-6. 
Searle J. R. 1997. The Mystery of Consciousness. Including exchanges with Daniel C. Dennett 
and David J. Chalmers. New York: A New York Review Book. . 

Stock, O. 1996 ‘Password Swordfish’: Verbal humor in the interface. In: J. Hulstijn and A. Nijholt 
(eds.), Automatic Interpretation and Generation of Verbal Humor. International Workshop on 
Computational Humor, IWCH ’96. Twente Workshop on Language Technology, TWLT 12, 
Enschede, NL: University of Twente, pp. 1-8. 

Stock, O., and C. Strapparava 2002. HAHAcronym: Humorous agents for humorous acronyms. In this 
volume. 
Turing, A. 1950. Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind 59, 434-460. Reprinted in: A. R. 
Anderson (ed.), Minds and Machines, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964, 4-30. 

 

46

The Structure of Forced Reinterpretation Jokes ∗

Graeme Ritchie

Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

Edinburgh, Scotland

g.d.ritchie@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

There is a very common type of joke, much discussed in the literature, in which the punchline
forces a reinterpretation of the preceding set-up. We sketch the discourse mechanisms which
would be needed to give an adequate account of these jokes. The aim is to illuminate the
internal workings of such jokes, and also to outline what linguistic and logical mechanisms
might be needed by a theory of joke structure.
Keywords: computational humour, ambiguity, jokes, incongruity-resolution

1 Aims
We take “computational humour” to refer to:

(a) the design, implementation and evaluation of programs which are capable of producing

humorous artefacts or behaviours;

(b) the design, implementation and evaluation of programs which are capable of responding

appropriately to humorous artefacts or behaviours;

(c) the use of computational concepts for studying and theorising about humour.

With the aiming of contributing to all three aspects of computational humour, we present an
analysis of a much-discussed class of jokes at a greater level of detail and formality than in pre-
vious work. This may illuminate the humorous phenomenon itself and also act as a basis for
implementations. Another aim is to clarify the basic concepts that humour research requires from
disciplines such as artiﬁcial intelligence and linguistics.

Although we shall introduce notions of “proposition”, “inference”, etc., it is important to
note that we are not putting forward a particular text-understanding model (or a logic), novel or
otherwise. We are stating the interface we need from such a model – i.e. the mechanisms it should
be able to support – but not the manner in which this is achieved.

This work is part of a larger programme to examine the delivery mechanisms used in jokes (i.e.
linguistic devices, pragmatic eﬀects, etc.) so as to clarify the role of these structuring techniques
in the presentation of jokes. That is, the longer term aim is to sort out which factors can be
attributed to the structure of jokes and which are inherent in the notions being conveyed.

2 The Class of Jokes
Many authors have remarked upon the fact that some jokes involve the following arrangement.
There is an initial text (the set-up) which has potentially more than one interpretation, although
one interpretation is more obvious than others. The end of the joke (the punchline) is in some way
incompatible with this obvious interpretation, but summons up one of the less obvious meanings;
(1) is an example.

∗

This work was carried out in the Language Technology Group, Department of Computing, Macquarie University,

Sydney, supported by a Research Fellowship from the Leverhulme Trust.

(1) A lady went into a clothing store and asked ‘May I try on that dress in the window?’

‘Well,’ replied the sales clerk doubtfully, ‘don’t you think it would be better to use the
dressing room?’

(Oaks, 1994)

Some authors have even gone so far as to imply that all jokes take this form (Dascal, 1985;
Dolitsky, 1992; Norrick, 2001), and it is at the heart of the SSTH (Raskin, 1985). Ritchie (1999)
suggested that a more detailed analysis of this class of joke would involve the following concepts:
M1: the ﬁrst (more obvious) interpretation of the set-up text
M2: the second (hidden) interpretation of the set-up text
M3: the meaning of the punchline.
M4: an interpretation formed by integrating the meaning of the punchline with M2.

The properties and relationships relevant to humour would then be:
Obviousness: M1 is more likely than M2 to be noticed by the reader.
Conflict: M3 does not make sense with M1
Compatibility: M3 does make sense with M2
Contrast: there some marked diﬀerence between M1 and M2 (or possibly M1 and M4).
Inappropriateness: M4 is inherently odd, eccentric or preposterous (Absurd), or deals with
matters not conventionally talked of openly, such as sexual or lavatorial matters, or forbidden
political sentiments (Taboo).

(This is a slight reﬁnement of the version in Ritchie (1999), where Contrast was called
Comparison). Notice the diﬀerence between Conflict and Compatibility, which may in
principle rely on a diﬀerent meaning of “does make sense with”, and not simply be opposites
or negations of each other. Conflict is the symptom that the punchline meaning does not ﬁt
in, thus signalling a need for reinterpretation; Compatibility describes the relationship between
punchline meaning and set-up meaning in the eventual resolution. These might rely on diﬀerent
semantic/discourse/inferential relations.

The current paper picks up that outline and formalises it in more detail.

3 Examining the Basic Concepts
3.1 Meanings and Interpretations
In Ritchie (1999), these jokes were referred to as sudden disambiguation jokes, and the various
interpretations of the set-up were regarded as linguistic meanings (as could be the case in (1)).
Consideration of a wider class of examples shows that this joke structure exists with “interpreta-
tions” which are something wider than linguistic meanings, as in (2).

(2) ‘Is the doctor at home?’ the patient asked in his bronchial whisper.‘No,’ the doctor’s young

and pretty wife whispered in reply.‘Come right in.’ (Raskin, 1985)

Intuitively, the above account does describe (2), in that the punchline triggers a reinterpretation
of the set-up. However, this joke does not involve linguistic ambiguity or two “meanings” in the
normal linguistic sense of the term; rather, it involves two ways that the audience (and one of
the characters in the joke) could make sense of the other character’s actions.
It is just about
possible to relabel this as “pragmatic ambiguity”, by claiming that there is ambiguity about the
interpersonal import of the query Is the doctor at home?, but this is a rather contrived argument,
since it would class any action which could have more than one outcome as “ambiguous”. The
diﬀerence in the two “meanings” of the query occurs at some higher level of the character’s plan,
and is not directly part of (for example) the illocutionary force of the utterance. Also, there are
other, often longer, instances of jokes where there is no way to label the confusion as linguistic
ambiguity. Jokes of this sort involve alternative interpretations for sequences of events within the
narrative, and ambiguous utterances are simply one kind of event open to multiple interpretation.
We shall therefore use the term forced reinterpretation, FR, rather than ‘sudden disambiguation’,
for this class of joke.

48

Related to this is the fact that understanding the text, and therefore the humour, requires
interpretation beyond the literal meanings of sentences, using some form of inference. Humour-
relevant properties (e.g. incongruity) may be in the inferred content rather than in the literal
meanings. Even in (1), the punchline don’t you think it would be better to use the dressing room?
does not directly state the idea that the lady had been suggesting using the window as a changing
room, but implies it (in some loose sense); that is, this is the overall interpretation when punchline
and (the less obvious meaning of) the set-up are taken together. Although we will use the term
inference to refer to this “ﬂeshing out” of the text’s meaning, it is not logical inference in the
normal sense (although it may include some valid deductions). It involves the ﬁlling-in of assumed
or likely connections or consequences of the literal meanings, comparable to the abduction of Hobbs
et al. (1993) and the script-based processing of Schank and Abelson (1977).

We shall adopt as a primitive type of item the proposition. This can be thought of as a fact or
hypothesis or statement, which could be formalised as a well-formed formula in a suitable logic.
For the moment, this is just a primitive notion. A set of propositions may be consistent, which
we also leave as a primitive concept. Being consistent is not central to our analysis. In particular,
(logical) consistency is not taken as related to incongruity, Conflict or Compatibility:
it is
merely a condition we impose upon sets of propositions inferred from a text.

The meaning of a sentence will be a set of propositions, the input to inference will be a set of

propositions, and the output of inference is discussed below.

3.2 Obviousness
Any logical (or quasi-logical) mechanism that is used to describe the imparting of information
during a joke should allow defeasible inferences, with non-monotonic eﬀects (Charniak and Mc-
Dermott, 1985). That is, we must be able to express the fact that certain propositions normally
(or by default) imply other propositions, but that these implications are not immutable in the
face of later information. The formal logic must allow what is sometimes referred to as belief-
revision (G¨ardenfors, 1988). We will build this into our formalisation in two places. Firstly, the
new information in each succeeding part of the text will be combined with previous propositions
P (cid:1) is the set of propositions produced by updating (in
using an update operator,
some suitable way) the existing set P with some new information P (cid:1). This is intend to encap-
sulate the normal operation used during incremental understanding of a text, and its deﬁnition
will depend on the precise knowledge-representation scheme adopted. That is, we delegate the
problem of normal (non-humour-related) belief-revision within a discourse to the architects of the
full language-understanding model. Also, there is an element of defeasibility in our handling of
Obviousness (which is perhaps closer to a notion of “salience” or “prominence”). Our “inference”
process will yield not one interpretation, but an ordered set of possible interpretations, where the
ordering reﬂects the degree of Obviousness. This ordered set will always contain a maximal
element, so that there is some notion of the “most obvious” interpretation.

, so that P

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

3.3 Conflict
In the sketch so far, the punchline can be recognised by the fact that it does not make sense
(Conflicts) with the current (most Obvious) interpretation of the preceding text. Neverthe-
less, it must be possible for at least the literal meaning of the punchline text to be interpreted
semantically (despite its lack of ﬁt with the textual context), or this Conflict would not be de-
tectable. Inspection of various examples, including (1) and (2), suggest that the diﬃculty involves
discourse coherence: a response does not seem to answer the question, or a character’s utterance
does not make complete sense with respect to the hitherto Obvious interpretation (cf. Jurafsky
and Martin, 2000, Sects 18.2, 19.4). That is, the Conflict relation should not be identiﬁed with
logical inconsistency, nor with the kind of semantic clash that results from violation of selectional
restrictions (e.g. applying a verb to a semantically unsuitable kind of object).
In this type of
FR joke, the punchline assumes a particular, hitherto hidden, perspective, giving an eﬀect very
much like the failure of a presupposition (van der Sandt, 1988). The audience, in these cases,
has to make sense of the punchline, by “working backwards” (cf. Hobbs et al. (1988, 1993)). In

49

our formal model (below) we shall approximate this by representing the literal meaning of a text
segment as having two components. As well as the core meaning (the set of propositions conveyed
by the segment) there will be felicity conditions, which are propositions which must be checked in
a suitable way against the current context before the core meaning can be considered. This gives
a crude model of discourse factors such as presupposition, focus maintenance, rhetorical structure,
etc., which we will encapsulate by saying that a set of propositions P can accommodate a set of
felicity conditions F C if there is no discourse incoherence. (The use of ‘accommodate’ is related
to our handling of Compatibility, below.)

Very little of the formalisation here depends on using an explicit set of felicity conditions to
check coherence, so it would be possible to enhance the model with some subtler notion of discourse
coherence, or with a more reﬁned notion of the types of ‘incoherence’ used in such jokes.

3.4 Compatibility
Once the punchline has been detected, there is then the question of how the meaning of the
punchline relates to the possible interpretations of the set-up. The usual account is to say that
the punchline evokes a less Obvious interpretation of the set-up.

In jokes where (we suggest) the Conflict relation which marks the punchline is discourse
incoherence, it also seems to be the case that the punchline is discourse coherent with a less
obvious interpretation of the set-up. That is, Compatibility is some form of discourse coherence.
For example, in (1), if the lady-character had intended to use the shop-window as a changing
room, then the clerk-character’s response would be completely coherent. That is, the Obvious
interpretation does not fulﬁl the punchline’s assumptions, but the less Obvious interpretation
does.

Related to this is the notion of accommodation, which has been discussed in the literature
alongside presupposition. When a piece of text presupposes some proposition (potential fact),
then there are various ways that the hearer of the text may react.
If the hearer believes the
proposition to be untrue, then he may not accept the text as comprehensible; if he believes the
proposition to be true, he will accept the text as comprehensible (even though he may dispute
the truth of the text itself); if he has no information one way or another about the truth of the
presupposed information, he may accept it as true, since the speaker appears to be assuming it.
This latter case – acceptance of presupposed material in the absence of conﬂicting knowledge – is
known as accommodation.

As well as occurring during routine text understanding, this eﬀect can be used in certain jokes.
If the joke-teller employs an character stereotype within the joke (e.g. a mean Scot, a stupid
Irishman), the hearer may, for the sake of the joke, accommodate this information, even if he/she
has not encountered the particular stereotype before. That is, accommodation allows the joke
either to convey the insulting message or to assume it, depending on the hearer’s state of belief.
We will introduce an accommodation operator (cid:2) to represent this absorption of assumptions

into existing knowledge.

3.5 Another Version of Conflict and Compatibility
There are other examples where neither Conflict nor Compatibility involve discourse coher-
ence. Consider example (3).

(3) John and his wife Mary were having a shower together in their upstairs bathroom when the
doorbell rang. Mary heard the bell, got out of the shower, wrapped a towel around her, went
downstairs, and opened the door. Their neighbor Charlie looked at her from the doorway,
and said, ‘Oh. I see that I got you out of the shower. Sorry about that.’ ‘That’s all right,’
Mary said, ‘What do you want?’
‘Not too much... my goodness you have beautiful skin. It’s so pink from the shower. Mary,
if I was to give you a hundred dollars, would you remove the towel from your upper body?’
Mary thought about it for a minute, ﬁgured why not, for a hundred bucks, and removed
the towel from her breasts. ‘Wow,’ Charlie exclaimed, ‘they are truly beautiful. Listen, for

50

another hundred bucks would you consider taking the towel all the way oﬀ?’
‘Why not,’ Mary thought, ‘that’s a lot of money,’ and she dropped the towel completely
to the ﬂoor. Charlie had a good look, complimented her again on her ﬁne looking body,
reached into his pocket, took out two hundred dollars, gave it to her, and left. As she got
back up stairs and was getting back into the shower, John asked her who was at the door.
‘Just Charlie,’ she said, as she started to rub his back. ‘Charlie, eh,’ said John, ‘Did he give
you the two hundred dollars he owed me?’

(from www.jokes2000.com)

In this example, the ﬁnal (punchline) utterance does not presuppose any particular interpretation
of preceding events. It simply provides new information which causes the audience to reinterpret
those events. It is not clear what signals that a punchline has arrived – perhaps the ending of the
text.

In terms of Compatibility, what seems to be happening is that the new information renders
one of the (hitherto) less Obvious interpretations more Obvious, making it now the most Obvi-
ous. That is, if we assume that interpreting the set-up results in a set of possible interpretations,
ordered by their Obviousness, then the content of the punchline, taken together with the set-up,
yields a diﬀerent ordering.

Notice that many jokes where the punchline is signalled by discourse incoherence also involve
linguistic ambiguity, whereas (3) does not. It is not clear if this is signiﬁcant; that is, whether FR
jokes which rely on linguistic ambiguity in the set-up always make use of discourse incoherence
to indicate the arrival of the punchline. (The converse does not hold, as (2) seems to use the dis-
course incoherence device but not linguistic ambiguity.) The evidence here suggests that discourse
incoherence is not universally present as a punchline marker.

4 A Formalisation
We will now attempt to set out a relatively precise statement of the FR class of jokes, expanding
the remarks in section 3 into a fuller formalisation.

4.1 Relativity
The status of a text as a joke (and also its degree of funniness) is always relative to some body of
knowledge: cultural knowledge, social context, personal beliefs of the joke audience, etc. We will
therefore include in our formalisation a structured entity called an joke-interpreter. This is not
intended in any way as a realistic model of a human listener; rather, it is a bundling together of
the miscellaneous factors relative to which a joke is to be interpreted or judged. A joke-interpreter
will be taken as consisting of the following two components:

Linguistic Knowledge. We shall abstract over the details of linguistic levels, etc., and simply
stipulate that the Linguistic Knowledge must somehow furnish a text-to-semantics mapping
M, which takes two arguments – a text string and a set of propositions – and returns a set,
ordered by their Obviousness, of literal meanings. A literal meaning will be a pair of sets
of propositions, where the ﬁrst of the pair is a (possibly empty) set of felicity conditions
for that sentence (i.e. presupposed facts which must match the context if the sentence is
to be coherent in the discourse), and the second set represents the core meaning of the
sentence (i.e. what is being asserted, queried or ordered by the sentence). Informally, the
second argument to M (the propositions) will represent the knowledge (beliefs, etc.) that the
audience uses when semantically analysing the text so far. Each of the meanings returned
by M corresponds to a bare meaning of the sentence, without further inference or contextual
reasoning. (We ignore here any linguistic notions of temporary discourse structures, such as
might be used for processing pronoun references; the simplifying abstraction here is that we
are interested only in the result after such transient data items have been used and disposed
of.)

Persistent beliefs. This is a set P B of propositions, representing knowledge/beliefs about the
world, including cultural assumptions, social prejudices, etc. These items are referred to as

51

‘persistent’ rather than ‘permanent’ because they are subject to change, but they typically
survive across diﬀerent instances of joke-interpreting or story-hearing. (The analogy is with
persistent data structures in computer systems, which, although updatable, remain in the
system from one computing session to another.)

It is arguable that the inference mapping, I, should form part of the joke-interpreter, to make the
inference relation relative to the audience and context. However, for the moment we have left it
out, thereby assuming that formal inference is general.

4.2 Interpreting Texts
We shall assume that a joke text consists of the concatenation of one or more text strings T1, . . . Tn,
where each Ti is a suitable input to the text-to-semantics mapping M in the joke-interpreter
(roughly, it is a sentence or complete phrase). We envisage an arrangement whereby each Ti
is ﬁrst mapped to a set of possible literal meanings, inference is carried out on the most obvi-
ous of these, then the process continues from this state for the next Ti in sequence.
Initially,
M acts on T1 starting from P B (i.e. M(T1, P B)), producing an ordered set of candidate literal
meanings, (LM1, <), where each element of LM1 is of the form (F Cj
1 ), a pair consisting
of the felicity conditions and core meaning. The next step is to select (F Cmax
), the
maximum element of (LM1, <), which is the “most obvious” literal meaning. If P B can accom-
modate F Cmax
; that is
(cid:1)
I((P B (cid:2) F Cmax
’
is the “belief-update” operator.) As with the text-to-semantics mapping, we are positing that
inference produces an ordered set of results, reﬂecting the varying degrees of obviousness of the
interpretations of the given meaning; that is, I((P B (cid:2) F Cmax
) will be of the form
(R1, <) where R1 is a set of sets of propositions. The maximum element from this set, S1, is
then the interpretation so far of the text, and can be used as an input to the interpretation of
T2, in place of P B. In this way, interpretation proceeds segment-by-segment, with obviousness,
felicity conditions and inference involved at each step. (It might be helpful to assume that M is
suﬃciently subtle that it can take account of the relationship between F Ci and Si−1, to the extent
is unaccommodatable in Si−1 only if there is no alternative meaning of the textstring
that F Cmax
which can be accommodated in P B; that is, F Cmax
will normally be accommodatable unless all
the available literal meanings are unaccommodatable).

, then inference can take place, starting from (P B (cid:2) F Cmax
)

). (As stated earlier, ‘(cid:2)’ is the “accommodation” operator, and ‘

1, CM j

, CM max

CM max

CM max

CM max

1
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

1

1

)

1

(cid:1)

)

1

1

1

1

1

i

i

We can deﬁne this more precisely and less procedurally as follows.

Deﬁnition: An interpretation of a text T1, . . . Tn, relative to a joke-interpreter (M, P B), is a
set Sn of propositions such that there is a sequence of consistent sets of propositions S0, . . . Sn,
where:

(a) S0 = P B
(b) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, there is an element (F Cj

date F Cj
i .

i , CM j

i ) of M(Ti, Si−1) such that Si−1 can accommo-

(c) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Si is an element of I((Si−1 (cid:2) F Cj
i )
That deﬁnition allows for the literal meaning used at each step and the inferences drawn from
that meaning to be less than maximally obvious: any item of the relevant set may be chosen. The
next deﬁnition is more speciﬁc.

CM j

i ).

(cid:1)

Deﬁnition: The most obvious interpretation of a text T1, . . . Tn relative to (M, P B), is a set Sn
of propositions such that there is a sequence of consistent sets of propositions S0, . . . Sn, where:

(a) S0 = P B
(b) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Si−1 can accommodate F Cmax
where (F Cmax
(c) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Si is the maximum element of I((Si−1 (cid:2) F Cmax

element of M(Ti, Si−1).

)

i

i

i

, CM max

i

) is the maximum

(cid:1)

CM max

i

).

52

Any interpretation which is not the most obvious interpretation is said to be a less obvious
interpretation.
Notice that although each Si is stipulated to be consistent, there is no requirement that Si ⊆
Si+1 or that Si ∪ Si+1 be consistent, so there could be changes of facts at a step in the sequence,
if the accretion of information is non-monotonic.

4.3 Forced Reinterpretation Jokes
For simplicity, we assume that the punchline is the ﬁnal (nth) segment of the text, and adopt
all the notation of section 4.2 above. First, we shall formalise the condition we have referred
to as Conflict, assuming that this relies on some sort of presupposition failure or discourse
incoherence. We also assume here that this will involve the most obvious literal meaning of the
punchline. These deﬁnitions are relative to a joke-interpreter (M, P B).
Deﬁnition: A text T1 . . . Tn has punchline conﬂict in interpretation Sn−1 if:

(a) Sn−1 is the most obvious interpretation of T1 . . . Tn−1 based on a sequence S1, . . . , Sn−1
(b) Sn−1 cannot accommodate F Cmax

) is the maximum element of

where (F Cmax

, CM max

n

n

n

M(Tn, Sn−1).

Deﬁnition: A text T1 . . . Tn has punchline resolution with interpretation S

(cid:1)
n if:

(a) There is a less obvious interpretation S
(b) S

(cid:1)
n−1 can accommodate F Cmax
M(Tn, S
(cid:1)
n = I((S

(cid:1)
n−1);
n−1 (cid:2) F Cmax

CM max

(c) S

(cid:1)

).

)

n

n

n

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
n−1 of T1 . . . Tn−1, based on a sequence S

(cid:1)
n−1;
) is the maximum element of

(cid:1)
1, . . . , S

, where (F Cmax

n

, CM max

n

Deﬁnition: A text T constitutes a discourse-coherence misunderstanding, relative to to a joke-
interpreter (M, P B), if T has both punchline conﬂict and punchline resolution.

These deﬁnitions cater for the (wide) class of FR jokes in which both Conflict and Com-

patibility are based on discourse coherence.

To cover jokes such as (3), we need some further deﬁnitions. The idea will be to deﬁne a
situation where information extracted from the punchline (initially interpreted in the context of
the set-up) would, if inserted earlier in the text, have led to a diﬀerent interpretation of the
text: for example, if (3) had included the sentence Charlie owed John two hundred dollars at an
(cid:1)
n−1 which
early stage of the narrative. This involves having an interpretation sequence S
initially is the same as the original most obvious interpretation sequence, but has the punchline
information added at some intermediate point, with subsequent stages then making inferences
from that enhanced base of propositions.
Let T1 . . . Tn be a text. Suppose T1 . . . Tn−1 has a most obvious interpretation
Deﬁnition:
Sn−1 based on a sequence S1, . . . , Sn−1. Suppose that the maximum element of M(Tn, Sn−1)
is (F Cn, CMn) and CMn (the core meaning part) contains a set of propositions P such that the
following holds. There is a sequence of sets of propositions S

(cid:1)
n−1 such that

(cid:1)
1, . . . , S

(cid:1)
1, . . . , S

(cid:1)

n−1 (cid:6)= Sn−1

(a) S
(b) for some k, 1 ≤ k ≤ (n − 1):
(cid:1)
i;

(i) for 1 ≤ i < k, Si = S
(ii) S

(cid:1)
k is the maximum element of I(((S
where (F Cmax

, CM max

k

(iii) for k < i ≤ n − 1, S

) is the maximum element of M(Tk, S

k
(cid:1)
i is the maximum element of I((S

(cid:1)

k−1 (cid:2) F Cmax

k

)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

)

(cid:1)

P )

CM max
k
(cid:1)
k−1);
i−1 (cid:2) F Cmax
)
(cid:1)
i−1).

i

(cid:1)

(F Cmax

i

, CM max

i

) is the maximum element of M(Ti, S

Then T1 . . . Tn has punchline revision with interpretation S

(cid:1)
n−1.

53

CM max

i

), where

4.4 The Critical Ingredient
The deﬁnitions in section 4.3 above do not fully deﬁne FR jokes, or even subclasses of FR jokes,
because they do not demand any factor that will result in humour. These deﬁnitions characterise
misunderstandings, and not all misunderstandings are humorous. Jokes require something further,
perhaps Contrast or Inappropriateness. The deﬁnitions above oﬀer necessary conditions for
membership of these particular subclasses of FR jokes, but not suﬃcient conditions.

Conjecture:
In a text which constitutes a discourse-coherence misunderstanding or
has punchline revision, if the resulting interpretation is Absurd or Taboo, the text
constitutes a joke.

Of course, this defers as subsidiary research problems the deﬁnitions of Absurd and Taboo. Also,
even for this narrow class of joke, matters are more complex. Consider (4).

(4) While on a trip in a remote country area, Peter and Bob were caught in a blizzard. They
found a farmhouse and asked the occupant, a very attractive woman, if she could give them
accommodation. She agreed to put them up. Nine months later, Peter got a letter from
the woman’s attorney. He went to Bob and said, ‘Bob, do you remember that good-looking
‘Did you happen to go to her room in
woman at the farm we stayed at?’
‘Yes, I do.’
the middle of the night and have sex with her?’
‘Yes, I admit that I did.’
‘Did you use
my name instead of telling her your name?’ Bob blushed and said, ‘Yeah, I’m afraid I
did.’
(shortened from
www.jokes2000.com)

‘She just died and left me everything!’

‘Well, thanks!’ said Peter.

This joke has the same inferential pattern as (3). However, it is hard to argue that the “inter-
pretation” established by the punchline is somehow Absurd or Taboo. Intuitively, the audience
is led to expect an scenario which is mildly improper (accidental pregnancy and deception over
paternity) but then receives a less Taboo interpretation. There may be a case here for some form
of Contrast as the extra “kick” which transforms a mere change of interpretation into a joke.

5 Another Joke Class: Drawing Out Implications
Now that we have set out a formal account for FR jokes, we can start to examine other types of
joke from a similar perspective. We have already pointed out that the location of the incongruity
in an FR joke may not be the literal meaning, but some inference from there. There are also non-
FR jokes where inferring an incongruity seems to be the central joke-creating device. Example (5)
makes use of a common device in narrative jokes, misinterpretation by a character.

(5) On a US highway, a traﬃc cop sees a car puttering along at 22mph. Thinking this is abnormal
behaviour, he gets the car to stop, and he goes to speak to the driver. The occupants are four
old ladies. The driver says ‘Oﬃcer, I don’t understand. What seems to be the problem? I
was driving exactly at the speed limit! Look, there’s the sign – 22 mph’. The oﬃcer explains
to her that ‘22’ on the sign is the route number, not the speed limit. The woman smiles in
embarrassment. ‘Oh, thank you,’ she says, ‘It’s a good thing you didn’t see us a few minutes
ago, on Route 119.’

(shortened from www.jokes2000.com)

Although this joke involves misinterpretation by a character, it is not misinterpretation of in-
formation presented in the set-up, and revelation of this misinterpretation does not provide the
punchline, so it is not in our FR class of joke. The punchline supplies further information which
is not in itself humorous or incongruous, but which, through the provision of a simple statement,
permits the inference of an amusing consequence of the already-established misinterpretation.
There is a sense in which this inference, or something very similar to it, could be made, once
the misconception has been stated: driving at a speed numerically equal to the route number is
bound to result in some very high speeds (particularly in the countries such as the USA where
speeds are stated in miles per hour). However, the punchline both provides a concrete instance
of this possibility, and draws attention to that consequence. The fact that the driver-character’s

54

behaviour is based on a misconception is not central to the working of the joke. It is the general
rule adopted by this character, together with the punchline statement, which allows the inference.

Deﬁnition: Using all the terminology and notation set out earlier, a text T1 . . . Tn has a punchline
inference iﬀ:

(a) the text T1 . . . Tn−1 has a most obvious interpretation Sn−1;
(b) the maximum element of I((Sn−1 (cid:2) F Cmax

CM max

(cid:1)

n

which

)

n

) contains a set A of propositions

– are not a subset of CM max
– are not a subset of Sn−1 (i.e. prior to the punchline, they were not Obvious).

(i.e. they must be inferred);

n

As with the other “delivery mechanisms” in section 4, this deﬁnition merely describes a subclass of
natural language text, which could equally well be used for non-humorous discourse. Once again,
to reach the status of a joke, we require some further component, such as Absurdity.

Conjecture: In a text which has punchline inference, if the resulting proposition set (A
in the above deﬁnition) is Absurd or Taboo, the text constitutes a joke.

In this example, we are proposing that the idea of an old lady driving at 119mph is (suﬃciently)
Absurd. Implicit in our two Conjectures is the idea that an Absurdity may or may not be funny
in itself, but if presented using a suitable “delivery mechanism”, it is humorous (see section 6 below
for further remarks).

6 Discussion
We have not proposed any algorithms, nor have we oﬀered a software design. What we have
tried to show – in some detail – is how certain types of joke can be analysed in terms of a fairly
conventional text-interpretation mechanism, coupled with some (yet to be deﬁned) key notions of
Inappropriateness and Contrast. Our analyses of the joke classes here could form the basis of
a computational model, using suitable compromise modules for text-understanding and inference,
and some preliminary deﬁnition of Inappropriate (and perhaps Contrast). All of the basic
text-understanding facilities we have proposed (interpreting relative to a base of knowledge, using
inference at each step, having some notion of discourse coherence) are relatively uncontroversial.
Jokes of the sort considered here (and probably most “funny stories”) do not rely on special text
processing. They are normal texts in most respects, though with the slight abnormality that what
we have called ‘discourse-coherence misunderstanding’ jokes include as an integral part something
that would normally mark a text as pragmatically awkward or even ill-formed. Nevertheless, such
infelicities could occur in non-joke texts, with the hearer having to make an additional eﬀort to
understand them.

Even where we assume concepts which can be plausibly claimed to be linguistic notions (i.e.
not part of humour theory), the position is not simple.
‘Discourse coherence’ is far from being
a single, uniform, well-understood notion, involving as it does ideas of presupposition, topic and
focus, rhetorical structure, etc.

One of the many unﬁnished issues is the notion of Absurdity. Some examples of Absurdity
(such as the old lady driving at high speed) could be argued to be incongruity, since they involve
two ill-matched ideas being forced together. In that case, our sketch of these jokes could be loosely
characterised as involving “incongruity conveyed by a suitable delivery mechanism”. Even if we
allow ourselves to defer or delegate the deﬁnition of Absurd as one of the building-blocks for FR
(and other) jokes, we have to be careful that we are indeed referring to the same concept on all
occasions. Example (6) can be analysed as a ‘discourse-coherence misunderstanding’ joke.

(6) Why do birds ﬂy south in winter? It’s too far to walk.

For this to be a joke, it should, under our analysis, contain a further ingredient of Inappro-
priateness, probably Absurdity.
In this example, the (factually correct) punchline oﬀers a

55

(presumably incorrect) reason for the birds’ behaviour. In what sense is this Absurd? The image
of ﬂocks of birds trudging across continents might be Absurd, but that is only indirectly invoked,
as even the punchline assumes that this does not happen. Moreover, is this notion of Absurdity
similar to the geriatric racing in example (5)?

As noted earlier, the SSTH (Raskin, 1985) uses a variant of the FR picture to describe all
humour conveyed verbally. In spite of that, the formalisation proposed here is not redundant, for
three reasons. Firstly, the SSTH is still relatively ill-deﬁned, and therefore its exact predictions are
unclear. Secondly, the nub of the SSTH is a claim that the critical humorous element in a joke is
a particular form of what we have labelled Contrast (namely, script opposition), but we wish to
explore the workings of jokes without that theoretical (and as yet unproven) commitment. Thirdly,
SSTH also has a built-in commitment to a particular semantic view of language-processing, based
on scripts, and we wish to see how analyses can be framed without that prior assumption. In
a sense, the SSTH account and the analyses here are comparably underdeveloped: both depend
upon having a model of language-understanding (which SSTH intends to achieve using scripts),
and both propose a rather ill-deﬁned but crucial concept which creates humour, script-opposition
or Inappropriateness.

The formalisation presented here is still preliminary and tentative. To some extent, one of
the methodological goals of this outline is to stimulate debate at this level of detailed description.
Those who wish to contest these analyses are invited to respond using comparable formality and
precision, so that an investigation can proceed by informed argument.

References
Charniak, E. and McDermott, D. (1985). Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Addison-Wesley,

Reading, Mass.

Dascal, M. (1985). Language use in jokes and dreams: sociopragmatics vs. psychopragmatics.

Language and Communication, 5(2):95–106.

Dolitsky, M. (1992). Aspects of the unsaid in humor. HUMOR, 5(1/2):33–43.

G¨ardenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in Flux: Modeling the Dynamics of Epistemic States. MIT

Press, Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA.

Hobbs, J., Stickel, M., Appelt, D., and Martin, P. (1993). Interpretation as abduction. Artiﬁcial

Intelligence, 63:69–142.

Hobbs, J., Stickel, M., Martin, P., and Appelt, D. (1988). Interpretation as abduction. In Pro-

ceedings of 26th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 95–103.

Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J. (2000). Speech and Language Processing: an Introduction to Natural
Language Processing, Computational Linguistics and Speech Recognition. Prentice-Hall, New
Jersey.

Norrick, N. R. (2001). On the conversational performance of narrative jokes: toward an account

of timing. HUMOR, 14(3):255–274.

Oaks, D. D. (1994). Creating structural ambiguities in humor: getting English grammar to

cooperate. HUMOR, 7(4):377–401.

Raskin, V. (1985). Semantic Mechanisms of Humour. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Ritchie, G. (1999). Developing the incongruity-resolution theory.

In Proceedings of the AISB

Symposium on Creative Language: Stories and Humour, pages 78–85, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Schank, R. and Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Lawrence Erlbaum,

Hillsdale, N.J.

van der Sandt, R. (1988). Context and Presupposition. Croom Helm, London.

56

Computers with a Personality?

Lessons to be Learned from Studies of the Psychology of

Humor.

Willibald Ruch

School of Psychology

Queens University Belfast

Belfast BT7 1NN

N. Ireland, UK

w.ruch@qub.ac.uk

Abstract

The aim of the present paper is to highlight that research on humor remains remarkably
incomplete if individual diﬀerences are not considered. This also pertains to computational
approaches to humor which so far frequently neglected the fact that tastes are diﬀerent.
Irrespective of whether jokes are created by humans or a computer program they will not
always ﬁnd an appreciative audience and it might be fruitful to consider a ﬁt to the targeted
recipient. As a step into this direction research from the domain of personality and humor
appreciation will be reviewed, and the dimensions associated with whether or not a person
will ﬁnd humor funny will be described. Furthermore, approaches failed to consider the fact
that jokes might fail altogether and humans not only respond exclusively positively to humor
but the experiential world of the recipient is multidimensional. Therefore, testing the quality
of computer-generated humor should go beyond consideration of degree of “funniness”. A few
ways will be outlined and some studies exploring the response dimensions will be presented.

Keywords: Humor and Personality, Assessment of Humor, 3WD Humor Test of Personality

1 Introduction
Imagine the comedian who tells the same type of jokes and funny stories at all performances
irrespective of who invites him or her and who the audience is; whether it is on stage in a night
club, as a speaker on a companies annual meeting, at his parents wedding anniversary, to is
children, neighbors etc. How successful will he be? Won’t some audiences ﬁnd oﬀensive what
made others roar? If he does not want to oﬀend anybody—won’t the remaining sample of jokes
just be plain boring to many? Obviously, such a strategy would not be very successful, and thus
a comedian does just what we do, namely to tailor our attempts at humor to our audience. This
is done quite intuitively and no systematic study is known on how people actually do so.

If they know the audience well, they might base it on prior experience on what was found
funny and what not amusing at all. If not, it is still easy if you have time to “learn” the taste
of the audience. One can use quite diverse jokes initially and see which ones they like and which
ones they don’t. Then one can put this hypothesis to a test and see whether they actually laugh
at a joke that one chooses deliberately because it is similar to a prior successful one. Likewise,
one can take the prior failure with a bad joke and see whether one is equally unsuccessful with a
sister joke. Such a procedure will only work if we have the right taxonomy of jokes; i.e., a rationale
that tells which jokes are similar, if not interchangeable (i.e., equal for this given purpose). If the
predictions are all correct one can end the learning stage and from now on one has the capacity
to optimally serve the audience. But how often do we have a chance for such a trial and error

procedure? An audience may not be that patient and it might be better to start with a clear idea
of what will work out and what not.

If one does not have the chance to learn, one still does not need to rely solely on guessing,
as we can we infer preference from other salient features of the audience. Their current state,
for example; are they tired because your routine was set to the end of a tiring working day?
Then it might be better not to indulge too much into very sophisticated humor. But not only
are the transient emotional states important; more habitual factors, like gender, socio-economic,
ethnic background, are crucial. Indeed personality characteristics allow a much better prediction
of appreciation of humor that mood does. This has been known for a while; even poets can be
quoted on this (e.g., the saying by German philosopher and poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
”Men show their character in nothing more clearly than by what they think laughable.”), and
empirical research subsequently provided a scientiﬁc foundation for this.

So, what are the chances for the above-mentioned comedian to survive any audience, and even
get hired again? How are we perceived in everyday life by the audiences at out attempts to be
funny, be it our partner, friend, peers, or strangers? Probably each of us knows somebody who
repeatedly tells one type of joke, and we have formed some impression about him or her on this
basis.
Imagine somebody predominately telling jokes about inﬁdelity, or about homosexuality,
more than anything else and on diﬀerent occasions. What does this tell us about the joke teller?
Does he or she presumably have a negative attitude to those topics? That he has a problem with
this topic, maybe is in a conﬂict? Or, that this topic is no problem for the person so that he or
she can freely joke about it? Freud (1905) assumed that the super ego does not allow the direct
expression of certain impulses and consequently these topics get repressed. However, they may be
gratiﬁed in a disguised manner as occurs in jokes or dreams. Psychoanalysts therefore considered
jokes as a golden path to the conﬂict areas in the individual and asked them to tell their favorite
joke. We “communicate” needs and motivations through what we tell as jokes and through the
intensity of our reaction as an audience (Davis & Farina, 1970). Research has shown that Freud
was wrong in this respect (see below), but nevertheless, we have to consider that humor induces
emotions and audiences may develop ideas about the sender of a humorous communications.

Thus, a more complete view of the humor process should not only involve the analysis of the
humorous message but also the states and traits of sender and the receiver, and what they think
about each others before and after the massage was transmitted. Research has shown that on the
side of the sender factors like current mood and motivation, and enduring personality as well as
intellectual traits determine whether or not somebody will decide to encode humor, how well he or
she is able to do so, what the content or tendency will be, and whether or not considerations about
potential eﬀects on the audience exist, etc. (see anthologies by Chapman & Foot, 1977; Goldstein
& McGhee, 1972, McGhee & Goldstein, 1983, Ruch, 1998). Likewise, research demonstrated the
eﬀects on the side of the receiver. It is evident that degree of amusement depends on a variety of
factors, such as his or her traits, the current mood and motivational state of the receiver, physical
and social situational factors etc,. and it is also evident that the receiver generates a “picture”
about features of the sender (i.e., his or her personality, mood or motivations). How much of this
reality is considered in research on computational humor?

2 Computational and Human Humor
When I ﬁrst got aware of computational approaches to humor at an ISHS conference 10 years
ago feelings of awe, curiosity, puzzlement and skepticism alternated. Of course, being able to
emulate human behavior is very good proof that one has all the relevant factors under control and
understands the processes. So the pursuit of this line of research is a very fruitful one and it will
help to test our knowledge and eventually modify theories. It is beyond the scope of this paper to
review the approaches and to appraise the state of the art. Rather I would like to address some
new frontiers I consider important to consider and attain to in the future. I won’t restrict myself
to what is feasible right now, so some criteria might seem quite utopistic. And I want to add a
few general considerations regarding the narrowness or broadness of the scope of an approach to
humor research.

58

As mentioned above, I found it admirable to have programs generating humor and it is deﬁnitely
an achievement and a step in the right direction. Obviously, humans undergo an ontogenetic
development (McGhee, 1979). The ﬁrst attempts at humor among children may be moving and
highly appreciated by parents, but from a more objective and distant perspective they are not so
impressive. Spelling out a taboo word can lead to roaring laugher among youngsters, but children
who had already gone through this stage already won’t be impressed. Likewise, ﬁrst attempts at
retelling a joke might leave out the essentials in the punch line but it does not matter to peers
as sheer incongruity is funny. While children gradually learn what is essential to jokes, there is
still room for development as complexity increases and the contents change. Humor of 10 year-
olds still does not suﬃce to amuse older ones, say adolescents or adults. Obviously, programs
generating humor develop too but they will have a diﬀerent development. Earlier versions might
occasionally resemble the attempts made by children to generate humor, but not intentionally so.
Rather they appear to me as trying to emulate the humor of adults and just sometimes fail to do
so. A successful development will then be once the program is capable of producing humor that
is indistinguishable from the humor of adults. Before I come back to this point I would like to
say that it might be a very diﬃcult task to emulate the developmental stages of children’s humor
properly.

As a personality psychologist, I am more interested in the “personality” of the program gener-
ating humor, the sender, as well as the one of the receiver (if it happens that programs perceiving,
understanding, and responding to humor will be created). What personality do they have—or
better, what image of a personality to they create? Are they chauvinistic or sexist? Do they
move me because of their innocence or naivety? Are they reﬁned in their sense of humor and
intellectually entertaining? Do they share any funny idea they have whether or not I might like
it, or are they careful not to oﬀend me? Are they cheerful and upbeat, spreading good mood, or
are they sarcastic or bitter?

If we expose humans to humor from all existing programs, will they realize that the sources are
diﬀerent? What kind of impressions will they have about the sender (whether or not they are told
that the humor is computer-generated). So, does the perceived sense of humor of the personality
of the diﬀerent programs diﬀer? Whether or not they diﬀer—can programs deliberately appear
diﬀerent? Can they emulate diﬀerent senses of humor? Can they vary their mood and be a
grumpy, sarcastic, or cheerful joker on command? Can they deliberately express or suppress
libidinal impulses or motivations?

These are studies of cognitions of the receiver about the sender, or require direct judgments
about the state and traits or humor style of the sender as done by experts. What about the
humorous products? Do they cover the whole span of (joke, pun) humor, or only selected ones?
If taxonomies (of jokes, puns etc) exist—does the program emulate all categories and even pur-
posefully so? Would computer and human generated humor end up loading on the same factors
(see below)? Or is it the aforementioned comedian who is not able to tailor the jokes to the taste
of the audience? Can they please each audience if they are given the prior information that it is
either cognitively simple, medium, or complex?

Obviously, we are talking about utopistic goals here. While some goals are not reachable at
the moment others might not even be worth pursuing. However, it might be worthwhile to map
computer-generated humor in taxonomies of humor created by human beings and see how it stacks
oﬀ. Also, it might be of interest to study the “personality” of the programs and compare its sense
of humor to the ones of humans. And it might also be important to study what cognition a
human receiver develops about the sender, when it is exposed to the humor generated. In all cases
the criteria for success will be if one deliberately can create the variation that naturally exists in
human life.

In the next section I will present one approach to structure the experiential world of the
human perceiver of humor. How he or she responds to jokes and cartoons. This will involve the
perception of the stimulus properties (i.e., what makes jokes appear similar and others diﬀerent)
as well as the diﬀerent ways in which people respond to humor. Before doing so I want to brieﬂy
address the issue of the diﬀerent breadth of the scope of the same research ﬁeld when approached
from diﬀerent disciplines. Although we are all interested in “humor”, we have to acknowledge

59

that for some approaches at least the researcher needs to be explicitly considered and the whole
enterprise is best seen as a “humor”-“researcher” dyad. The training and disciplinary background
will be diﬀerent and so some element subjectivity is added. This has to be considered in the
evaluation of the outcome of such research. In other approaches the complexity is added by the
presence of humans, the sender or receiver of humor, and hence a triad of “humor”-“researcher”-
“sender/receiver” needs to be considered. While in the second case the dialog among researchers
is important and inter-researcher agreement might rule out subjectivity, in the latter case the
subjectivity or individuality is not to be considered “noise” or “error variance” but meaningful
variation that is in itself is of interest to study. While one can view computational humor as a
dyad of researcher and program/product of program in the early stage it might be reasonable to
see it as a three chain enterprise once it is matured. The taste and preference of the researcher,
but the layperson needs to be systematically integrated into this process too. While I can see
that samples of non-expert research participants are used to evaluate the quality of the humor
generated, I would consider this to be a ﬁrst step only.

3 Humor appreciation
Ruch (1981) proposed that a comprehensive assessment of humor should not only cover a taxonomy
of humor stimuli but also an investigation of the dimensionality of the responses to humor, as well
as a typology of the receiver. The taxonomy of humor stimuli was achieved by a set of factor
analytic studies of diﬀering but overlapping sets of jokes and cartoons. In order to get a robust
taxonomy samples diﬀering with regard to sex, age, occupation, health status and other variables
were used (for an overview see, Ruch, 1992). Most importantly, the ﬁrst construction samples
covered Austrian as well as German subjects. After establishing the taxonomy the items were
translated into diﬀerent languages (e.g., English, French, Hebrew, Russian, Turkish) in order to
be able to test its cross-cultural stability (see, Ruch & Hehl, 1998). The validity of the factors
was investigated by studying correlations to personality.

Similarly, the dimensions of appreciation were obtained by correlational and factor analytic
studies of several rating scales covering diﬀerent aspects of the responses to humor. Those factors
were later validated against responses at other levels, such as facial expression, psycho-physiological
responses, or mapping their location in general taxonomies of emotions. The present chapter only
highlights some selected outcomes. For the details of studies, and other prior literature and
competing ﬁndings and models of other researchers the reader is referred to the original studies
or earlier reviews by the present of other authors (e.g., Martin, 1998).

3.1 The Experiental World of the Receiver
The responses to humor have been conceptualized in quite diﬀerent ways depending on the research
background of the researcher. Jokes are funny, and so the assessment of degree of “funniness” of a
joke on a ﬁve- or seven-point rating seem to be the most natural criterion to use in experiments.
But how does “humorous” or “witty” compare to “funny”? Would not be inclined to reserve those
qualiﬁcations for diﬀerent stimuli? Some humor strikes us as droll, clever, or silly? Is “childish”
or “silly” just the low end of funniness or is it something diﬀerent? Obviously many words we use
can reﬂect aspects of amusing or high or poor in quality. But negative responses go beyond “not
funny” or “boring”. Jokes can be oﬀensive, embarrassing, or disgusting, to name a few. Thus,
one aim would be to map out the dimensions of how we perceive humor.

However, emotion researchers would look less on the perceived stimulus qualities but on the
nature and intensity of the emotion induced (to keep matter simple, humor-induced mood changes
are neglected, see Ruch & K¨ohler, 1998). Amusement (hilarity, exhilaration, mirth) would be a
natural candidate, but again, humor is capable of inducing more emotions. Amusement is often
treated as a facet of happiness, and together with sadness, anger, fear, surprise, contempt and
disgust forms the basic emotions distinguished by Ekman (1992). In some of our studies we used
Ekman’s basic emotions to cover a broader emotional spectrum and it turned out that subjects
made use of the negative emotions quite often. In open ended responses to jokes Ruch and Rath
(1993) found that people use other negative emotion words more often. Again, what would be

60

the dimensions describing the subjective feeling state of individuals exposed to humor? As those
diﬀerent from the dimensions of how we perceive humor? Do more “cognitive” evaluations (clever,
stimulated) diﬀer from more aﬀective (funny, amused) ones?

Ruch and Rath (1993) attempted to determine at the experiential level the number and nature
of dimensions of response to humor. A sample of 50 male and 50 female adults judged 24 jokes
and cartoons on 17 seven-point rating scales. The set of ratings was empirically selected from
spontaneous responses of subjects to a set of humor stimuli and represents a variety of aspects of
reactions to humor. Positive and negative responses were recorded, as were judgments about per-
ceived stimulus properties and subjects’ own feeling state. Factor analyses of the intercorrelations
among the response scales was performed for the joke types separately and combined, and always
yielded three factors (see Table 1).

The results displayed in Table 1 suggest that the most distinguishing feature is the hedonic
tone of the evaluation; positively and negatively toned ratings were found to load on diﬀerent
factors. Positive responses yielded only one factor (of own positive aﬀect/perceived joke quality),
but the negative responses were split up into two correlated dimensions. One of which related
more to aﬀective (“oﬀensive”/”indignation”) and the other to cognitive (“simple/”boredom”)
aspects of experience and perception of stimulus properties. All three factors contain evaluations
of both stimulus properties and evaluation of the one’s feeling state: thus, this distinction between
evaluations of the stimulus and one’s emotional reactions to the stimulus turns out not to be of
importance.

While the major dimension blends perceived funniness with the degree of positive emotion
induced one should not forget that this is a global dimension only. Variations in attributes (funny,
witty, humorous) still exist and might be found of importance for other studies. However, this
response dimension also goes along with overt behavior such as smiling and laughter (Ruch, 1995)
albeit those converge better intrapsychically that across subjects due to diﬀerences in expressivity,
and physiological changes (Ruch, 1993). Also the other two-dimensions go along with facial
expressions and might reﬂect diﬀerent processes (for more details see the study by Ruch & Rath,
1993).

Rating scales1
Witty
Funny
Exhilarated
Amused
Original
Subtle
Activated
Puzzled
Aggressive
Tasteless
Embarrassing
Indignant
Angered
Childish
Simple
Bored
Unstimulated

funniness/exhilaration

oﬀensive/indignation

simple/boredom

All
.98
.94
1.00
.98
.70
.39
.35
.31
.21
-.10
-.23
-.21
-.17
-.15
-.07
-.05
.21

INC NON SEX All
.80
-.20
-.05
.85
-.17
.92
-.11
.91
.75
.25
.41
.78
.53
.79
.70
.50
.65
.32
-.08
.83
.94
-.22
.97
-.14
.87
-.13
-.05
-.20
-.10
-.10
-.04
-.14
.04
-.08

.92
.87
1.03
.85
.77
.02
.03
.30
.03
.05
.10
-.14
-.25
.08
.11
-.40
-.05

.66
.66
.72
.80
.83
.69
.91
.96
.26
-.23
-.08
.06
.05
.02
-.05
-.10
.03

INC NON SEX All
-.32
.01
-.01
-.08
.04
-.23
.12
-.22
.16
-.08
-.15
.11
-.05
.28
.07
.63
.08
.52
.81
.01
-.09
.92
-.06
.89
.08
.80
.10
.46
.71
.12
.88
-.08
-.12
.95

.01
.04
-.06
-.11
-.01
.13
-.03
.03
.74
.89
.85
.74
.49
-.11
.08
-.02
-.04

-.03
-.01
-.04
.06
.07
.41
.53
.81
.74
.70
.81
.89
.84
.22
.24
.33
.35

INC NON SEX
-.09
.02
-.07
-.09
.16
.05
-.08
.13
-.22
-.05
-.76
-.08
-.71
.05
-.05
.04
-.14
.16
-.03
.24
.09
-.20
-.08
-.08
-.07
.13
.54
.55
.71
.57
.28
.85
.97
.54

-.39
-.45
-.31
-.20
-.11
-.08
.19
.32
-.05
-.22
-.08
.19
.42
.81
.69
.82
.90

Table 1: Experiential dimensions of responses to humor as seen in the Promax factor pattern for
the 17 rating scales for all humor categories combined and separated in the study by Ruch and
Rath (1993)

Note. INC = incongruity-resolution humor. NON = nonsense humor. SEX = sexual humor.

1The original German terms used were witzig, kindisch, aggressiv, originell, geschmacklos, geistreich, peinlich,

61

3.2 A Taxonomy of Jokes and Cartoons
What aspects are reﬂected in individual diﬀerences in the perception of humor? Both content and
structure have to be distinguished as two diﬀerent sources of pleasure in humor, and hence one
would assume that both are also pivotal in producing individual diﬀerences, which, in turn, are
relevant in generating a taxonomy of jokes and cartoons. While intuitive and rational taxonomies
typically distinguish only between content classes, factor analytic studies show that structural
properties of jokes and cartoons are at least as important as their content, with two factors
consistently appearing: namely, incongruity-resolution (INC-RES) humor and nonsense (NON)
humor. Jokes and cartoons of these factors have diﬀerent content (e.g., themes, targets) but are
similar with respect to the structural properties and the way they are processed. I will brieﬂy
describe those factors; for more details on the studies see the original studies or the reviews (Ruch,
1992; Ruch & Hehl, 1998)

Jokes and cartoons of the INC-RES humor category are characterized by punch lines in which
the surprising incongruity can be completely resolved. The common element in this type of humor
is that the recipient ﬁrst discovers an incongruity which is then fully resolvable upon consideration
of information available elsewhere in the joke or cartoon. There is a certain projective element in
these jokes as essential things are not spelled out and have to be supplemented by the recipient;
often resolving the incongruity requires attributing motives and traits (e.g., stingy, mean, stupid,
absent-minded) to the characters depicted in the jokes. Although individuals might diﬀer with
respect to how they perceive and/or resolve the incongruity, they have the sense of having ”gotten
the point” or understood the joke once resolution information has been identiﬁed. At the time
this factor was ﬁrst extracted, it seemed that the two-stage structure in the process of perceiving
and understanding humor described by Suls (1972) is a model that ﬁts well to these jokes and
cartoons, and hence incongruity-resolution humor was considered to be an appropriate label for
that factor.

Nonsense humor also has a surprising or incongruous punch line, however, ”... the punch line
may 1) provide no resolution at all, 2) provide a partial resolution (leaving an essential part of the
incongruity unresolved), or 3) actually create new absurdities or incongruities” (McGhee, Ruch
& Hehl 1990; p. 124).
In nonsense humor the resolution information gives the appearance of
making sense out of incongruities without actually doing so. The recipient’s ability to make sense
or to solve problems is exploited; after detecting the incongruity he is misled to resolve it, only
to later discover that what made sense for a moment is not really making sense. Rothbart and
Pien’s (1977) impossible incongruities that allow only for partial resolutions are characteristic of
the nonsense factor, while their possible incongruities allowing for complete resolutions are more
prevalent in INC-RES humor.

While both the incongruity-resolution and the nonsense structure can be the basis for harmless
as well as tendentious content, only few contents seem to be salient enough to form independent
factors. The pool of jokes and cartoons we analyzed contained diﬀerent content areas (including
aggression), but only sexual humor formed a robust factor overpowering the structure variance.
These factors were ﬁrst extracted in studies of Austrian samples and later replicated in Belgium,
England, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, and Turkey (Ruch & Hehl, 1998).

Recently Ruch and Hehl (1998) outlined where the model might need to go both in terms of
reﬁning the structural model (e.g., testing for further, perhaps more speciﬁc content categories)
and the interpretation of the factors. Especially the latter seems necessary, considering that most
likely the cognitive processes continue after resolving the incongruity. Unlike after real problem
solving, the recipient is aware that the ﬁt of the solution is an ”as if”-ﬁt. What makes sense for
a moment is subsequently abandoned as not really making sense. At a meta-level we experience
that we have been fooled; our ability to make sense, to solve problems, has been misused. Thus,
in particular for the impossible incongruities and their partial resolution, it was proposed to move
from a the two-step (i.e., step I: detection of incongruity or violation of a build-up expectation;
step II: resolution of incongruity) model to a three stage model, where the a third stage refers to
detecting that what makes sense is actually nonsense.

lustig, niveaulos, erheitert, gelangweilt, angeregt, entr¨ustet, verbl¨uﬀt, ver¨argert, am¨usiert, and ange¨odet.

62

3.3 The 3 WD Humor Test
The 3 WD (”3 Witz-Dimensionen”) humor test (Ruch, 1983) was designed to assess funniness and
aversiveness of jokes and cartoons of the three humor categories of incongruity-resolution humor,
nonsense humor, and sexual humor. Initially three versions of the test (3 WD-K, 3 WD-A, and 3
WD-B) were constructed. They contain 50 (Form K) or 35 (Forms A and B) jokes and cartoons,
which are rated on ”funniness” and ”aversiveness” using two 7-point scales. The funniness rating
ranges from not at all funny = 0 to very funny = 6 and the aversiveness scale ranges between
not at all aversive = 0 to very aversive = -6. Forms A and B are parallel tests. They are used
together as a long form (with 60 items scored) when reliable measurement is needed or as parallel
versions before and after an intervention whose eﬀects have to be evaluated. Form A and B do
not overlap, but their purest items form the 3 WD-K, which is a short form. The ﬁrst ﬁve items
of each form are used for ”warming up” and are not scored. The jokes and cartoons are presented
in a test booklet with two or three items on a page. The instructions are typed on the separate
answer sheet which also contains the two sets of rating scales.

Six scores can be derived from each Form of the test: three for funniness of incongruity-
resolution, nonsense and sexual humor (i.e., INC-RESf, NONf, and SEXf) and three for their
aversiveness (i.e., INC-RESa, NONa, and SEXa). These six scores describe an individual’s sense of
humor at a general level. As mentioned above, sometimes the three subcategories of ”pure” sexual
humor (PURE SEX), incongruity-resolution based sexual humor (INC-RES SEX) and nonsense
based sexual humor (NON SEX) are used in addition to the general sexual humor category. Other
indices have been derived as well and were validated in several studies (Forabosco & Ruch, 1994;
Ruch & Hehl, 1988; Ruch et al., 1990). For example, a structure preference index was obtained
by subtracting INC-RESf from NONf. Similarly, the funniness and aversiveness scores of a humor
type could be combined to form a more general appreciation score.

A review of studies of the psychometric properties of the diﬀerent forms of the 3WD shows
that the reliability estimates may be regarded as satisfactory for the scales of all Forms of the
3 WD (Ruch, 1992). The internal consistency varies between .68 and .95, mostly exceeding .80.
There is also a suﬃciently high degree of equivalence between Form A and B, with parallel test
reliability of the six scales ranging from .67 to .93 (with a median of .86) when both forms are
ﬁlled in on the same day. The samples with a time lag between 2 and 4 weeks yield coeﬃcients
between .54 and .85 with a median of .73.

4 Humor Appreciation and Personality
Humor is in the eye of the beholder and thus the identiﬁcation of those variables that aﬀect the
perception of humor is necessary. Why is it that somebody ﬁnds a joke absolutely hilarious,
the next considers it boring and still another one embarrassing? Many studies have set out to
investigate the questions of ”what is funny to whom and why” and enriched our understanding
of both humor and personality. Conceptually, we need to distinguish among the predilection to
certain types of responses and the preference to certain types of stimuli. In other words, is there
a generalized tendency to respond positively or negatively to stimuli of all kind (i.e., not only to
humor) and what personality traits are predictive of that readiness or typical intensity? Is there
an inclination to ﬁnd certain types of humor funnier than others and what personality traits may
account for this tendency?

4.1 Individual Differences in Degree of Appreciation
There is increasing evidence that separate factors of positive eﬀect and negative eﬀect can be
extracted from diﬀerent materials (e.g., Watson & Tellegen, 1985). Like funniness and aversiveness
these factors are orthogonal. Moreover, extraversion predicts individual diﬀerences in positive
eﬀect and neuroticism accounts for individual diﬀerences in negative aﬀect. Can these relationships
can be found in the realm of humor appreciation as well?

There is, indeed, a consistent positive intercorrelation among appreciation of the three humor
categories which is low for funniness but relatively high for aversiveness. Thus, there is some room
left for the assumption of stable individual diﬀerences in the tendencies to ﬁnd humor generally

63

more aversive or generally more funny. Since funniness represents the positive responses to hu-
mor and aversiveness covers the possible negative ones it could be hypothesized that extraversion
correlates positively with funniness of the three humor categories and neuroticism predicts their
aversiveness. However, in a review of studies, Ruch (1992) found only spurious eﬀects of ex-
traversion on generalized positive responses to humor. While the zero-order coeﬃcients obtained
were overwhelmingly in the expected direction, they generally lack both statistical and practical
signiﬁcance.

However, there seem to be more generalized individual diﬀerences in aversiveness and they
seem to be correlated with two clusters of predictors (see Table 1). The data collected allow us to
conﬁrm the hypothesis that neuroticism is a predictor of negative responses to humor. Typically,
scales of neuroticism yield positive correlations, but variables associated with neuroticism were
predictive too, like trait-anxiety, depressivity, nervousness, guilt proneness, low ego strength, and
even sexual dissatisfaction. The second cluster of variables involved in the general rejection of
humor relates to tendermindedness. Humor of all categories is found more aversive by tender
than by tough subjects. This could be demonstrated for factors of tendermindedness extracted
from personality and attitude inventories, but also related variables were predictive (see Figure 2).
Ruch and Hehl (1988) argued that the two groups of predictors might relate to diﬀerent aspects
of aversiveness. The tendermindedness complex might refer to the easiness with which feelings
are hurt or subjects feel oﬀended by humor, whereas the neuroticism complex determines the
threshold for an negatively toned response and its intensity.

4.2 Humor Appreciation and Personality
The search for predictors of appreciation of humor structure and content was more successful.
The rationale for the prediction of personality correlates of appreciation of INC-RES and NON
humor was based on the fact that the two humor structures diﬀer with respect to the degree of
resolution obtained: in incongruity-resolution humor a complete resolution of the incongruity is
possible while there are residual traces of incongruity in nonsense humor. Thus, in INC-RES the
resolution of incongruity contributes to appreciation whereas in NON appreciation is based on
the existence of residual incongruity. This consideration and evidence from other sources led to
the hypotheses that appreciation of the incongruity-resolution structure is a manifestation of a
broader need of individuals for contact with structured, stable, unambiguous forms of stimulation,
whereas appreciation of the nonsense structure in humor reﬂects a generalized need for uncertain,
unpredictable, and ambiguous stimuli (Ruch, 1992).

Appreciation of incongruity-resolution humor yielded a broad set of predictors (see Figure 1).
The single most potent predictor is conservatism, the major dimension underlying social attitudes.
According to Wilson’s (1973) dynamic theory of conservatism this trait reﬂects a generalized fear
of both stimulus and response uncertainty. This should lead more conservative individuals to show
greater avoidance and dislike of novel, complex, unfamiliar, incongruous events and to prefer and
seek out stimuli which are simpler, more familiar and congruent. This hypothesis was validated
for visual art, poetry, and music. Not surprisingly, then, the hypotheses that conservative persons
ﬁnd incongruity-resolution humor more funny than liberals were substantiated in several countries
(Ruch, 1992).

The second set of predictors tested the individual’s stance towards stimulus uncertainty vs.
redundancy more directly using behavioral tests and judgment or creation of art (Ruch & Hehl,
1998). Quite clearly, incongruity-resolution humor is preferred by individuals who generally dislike
stimulus uncertainty. For example, appreciation of INC-RES correlated with liking of simple
and representational paintings, and with liking simple (such as a triangle, square, or cross) line
drawings. Another set of predictors may be circumscribes by inhibitedness, and like stimulus
uncertainty it is correlated with conservatism. However, people liking INC-RE humor yield lower
scores in depressivity, and they are generally older and tend to ﬁll in questionnaires in a social
desirable way.

Nonsense humor is well understood and the correlations are lower in magnitude. Nevertheless, a
set of predictors turned up over and over again (Figure 2). While conservatism does not incorporate

64

the seeking of stimulus uncertainty, the trait of sensation seeking, and in particular the component
of experience seeking, does. Experience seeking involves the seeking of stimulation through the
mind and the senses, through art, travel, even psychedelic drugs, music, and the wish to live in an
unconventional style, and there is evidence that it is closely related to the novelty and complexity
dimensions of stimuli (Zuckerman 1994). Therefore it was hypothesized and substantiated in
several countries that experience seeking is positively related to appreciation of nonsense humor
(for details see Ruch 1992). More recently, openness to experience as a basic factor of personality
was found to be predictive of nonsense humor (Ruch & Hehl, 1998).

Clearly, liking of nonsense humor is predicted by liking of complexity in a variety of stimuli.
The hypothesis that and nonsense humor is appealing to those generally enjoying or searching
for uncertainty was also substantiated in the ﬁeld of aesthetics. For example, appreciation of
nonsense correlated positively with liking complex and fantastic paintings (e.g., by Dali), liking of
complexity and asymmetry in freehand drawings and polygons, and also with producing complexity
in black/white patterns and enjoying and enhancing visual incongruity when wearing prism glasses
which distort the visual ﬁeld (Ruch & Hehl,1998). A ﬁnding yet awaiting replication was that
NON goes along with higher sexual libido. They are repeatedly found to be more non-conforming
and higher in intelligence. Liking of nonsense peaks between 20 and 35 years of age and declines
thereafter.

The prediction of personality correlates of sexual humor can be based on either Freudian
theory or salience theory. Freud (1905) hypothesized that repressed needs ﬁnd relief in jokes and
in dreams. Hence, there will be a negative relationship; people repressing their sexual desires will
be the ones appreciating sexual content in humor. Salience theory (Goldstein, Suls & Anthony,
1972) predicts a positive relationship; funniness of a particular content in humor will increase with
increase in salience of this topic in real life. So, the most promising predictor of appreciation of
sexual humor is the individual’s sexual experience and attitudes to sex.

65

 

t
u
o
 
s
k
e
e
s

 
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

 
s
r
e
f
e
r
p

y
t
i
x
e
l
p
m
o
c

 

h
g
i
h

g
n
o
r
t
s

 

y
b
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

 

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a
 
h
g
i
H

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a
 
w
o
L

y
b
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

 

y
b
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

 

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a
 
h
g
i
H

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a
 
w
o
L

y
b
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

 

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E
o
t
 
s
s
e
n
n
e
p
O

s
e
d
u
t
i
t
t

A
 
e
v
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
n
o
C

)

N
O
N

(
 
r
u
o
m
u
H
 
e
s
n
e
s
n
o
N

)
S
E
R
C
N

-

 

I
(
 
r
o
m
u
H
n
o
i
t
u
l
o
s
e
R
-
y
t
i
u
r
g
n
o
c
n
I

 
,

y
s
a
t
n
a
f
 
,
s
c
i
t
e
h
t
s
e
a
 
,
s
a
e
d
i
 
,
s
e
u
l
a
v
o
t
 
s
s
e
n
n
e
p
o

 

 

w
e
n

 
s
k
e
e
s
 
,

g
n
i
k
e
e
s
 
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
 
l
a
t
n
e
m

 
,

n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
e
r
 
s
d
i
o
v
a
 
,
s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

e 
v
i
t
a
n
i
g
a
m

i
 
,
e
r
u
t
p
l
u
c
s
 
,
s
t
r
a
 
c
i
t
s
a
l
p

 

n
i
 
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
 

 

 

 

w
e
n
 
s
d
i
o
v
a

 
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

e
v
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
n
o
c

 

 
s
u
o
i
g
i
l
e
r
 
,

m

s
i
r
a
t
i
l
i

m

 
,
s
e
i
t
i
r
o
n
i
m

 
f
o

 
e
c
n
a
r
e
l
o
t
n
i

y
l
i

m
a
f
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
i
d
a
r
t
 
 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
 
,

m

s
i
l
a
t
n
e
m
a
d
n
u
f

 
,
s
e
d
u
t
i
t
t
a
 
c
i
t
s
i
l
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
,

y
g
o
l
o
e
d
i

 
,
e
d
u
t
i
t
t
a
 
r
e
d
r
o

 

d
n
a
 
w
a
l
 
,

y
e
n
o
m
/
y
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

s
e
u
l
a
v

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
n
o
c
 
,
s
s
e
n
e
v
i
t
i
n
u
p

y
t
i
x
e
l
p
m
o
C

s
s
e
n
d
e
t
i
b
i
h
n
I
 
l
a
r
e
n
e
G

 
s
e
k
i
l
 
,
s
g
n
i
t
n
i
a
p

 
t
r
a
 
c
i
t
s
a
t
n
a
f
 

x
e
l
p
m
o
c
 
s
e
k
i
l

 
s
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

 
,
s
g
n
i
w
a
r
d

 
e
n
i
l
 

n
i
 
y
t
i
x
e
l
p
m
o
c

 
s
e
c
n
a
h
n
e
 
,

n
r
e
t
t
a
p

 
e
t
i
h
w
/
k
c
a
l
b

 

n
i
 
y
t
i
x
e
l
p
m
o
c

)
"
s
e
s
s
a
l
g
m

 

s
i
r
p
"
(
 
y
t
i
u
r
g
n
o
c
n
i
 
l
a
u
s
i
v

e
c
n
e
g
i
l
l
e
t
n
I

e
r
u
s
o
l
c
 
f
o

 

d
e
e
p
s
 
,
"
e
c
n
e
g
i
l
l
e
t
n
i
 
"
d
i
u
l
f
"

o
d
i
b
i
L

 
l
a
u
x
e
S

 
,

o
d
i
b
i
l
 
,
e
r
u
s
a
e
l
p

 
,
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
 
l
a
u
x
e
s
 

h
g
i
h

e
r
i
s
e
d

 
,

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a

y
t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i
s

 
s
r
e
f
e
r
p

w
o
l

k
a
e
w

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
n
i

h
g
i
h

 
,

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
g
a
 
f
o

 

n
o
i
t
i
b
i
h
n
i
 
,

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s
 
o
g
e
r
e
p
u
s

 

,
r
e
d
r
o

 
r
o
f
 

d
e
e
n

 
,

y
t
i
d
i
g
i
r
 
,
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
-
f
l
e
s

e
v
i
s
s
i

m
r
e
p

 

 
t
o
n
y
l
l
a
u
x
e
s
 
,
c
i
t
s
i
n
o
d
e
h
i
t
n
a

 

e
c
n
a
d
i
o
v
A
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

 

 

 

d
n
a
 
w
e
n
g
n
i
d
i
o
v
a
 
,

y
t
i
u
g
i
b
m
a
 
f
o

 
e
c
n
a
r
e
l
o
t
n
i
 

d
n
a
 
y
t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i
s
 
s
r
e
f
e
r
p

 
,
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
 

x
e
l
p
m
o
c

 
 
,
s
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
v

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
n
o
c
 
,

y
r
t
e
m
m
y
s

 
t
r
a
 
c
i
t
s
a
t
n
a
f
 

n
o
n

 
,
e
l
p
m

 

i
s
 
f
o
g
n
i
k
i
l

d
e
s
s
e
r
p
e
d
 
t
o
n

y
t
i
v
i
s
s
e
r
p
e
D

s
s
e
n
e
v
i
s
s
e
r
p
e
d

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
r
i
s
e
D

 
l
a
i
c
o
S

 

r
e
g
n
u
o
y

m
r
o
f
n
o
c
-
n
o
n

 
,

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
r
i
s
e
d

 
l
a
i
c
o
s
 
w
o
l
 
,
t
n
e
i
d
e
b
o

k
n
a
r
f
 
,
"
g
n
i
y
l
"

m
s
i
m
r
o
f
n
o
c
n
o
N

e
g
A

 
t
o
n

l
a
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
n
o
c

 
e
l
b
a
r
i
s
e
d

 
 

y
l
l
a
i
c
o
s
 
s
t
c
a

e
g
A

s
s
e
n
k
n
a
r
f
 

w
o
l
 
,
"
g
n
i
y
l
"
 
,

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
r
i
s
e
d

 
l
a
i
c
o
s

 
 

k
n
a
r
f

r
e
d
l
o

r
e
d
l
o

r
e
g
n
u
o
y

 
/
l
a
r
e
b
i
l

l
a
c
i
d
a
r

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
n
i
s
i
d

d
e
s
s
e
r
p
e
d

w
o
l

Figure 1: Personality correlates of funniness of incongruity-resolution humor (left) and of nonsense
humor (right) in the 3 WD. Figure presents the summary of results across several studies (for
details, see Ruch, 1992, Ruch & Hehl, 1998).

66

h
g
i
h

 

 
 

,
y
t
i
v
i
s
s
e
r
p
e
d
 
,
y
t
e
i
x
n
a
 
,

m
s
i
c
i
t
o
r
u
e
n

,
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s
 
o
g
e
 
w
o
l
 
,
s
s
e
n
e
n
o
r
p
 
t
l
i
u
g
 
,
s
s
e
n
s
u
o
v
r
e
n

s
s
e
n
h
s
i
d
u
r
p
 
l
a
u
x
e
s
 
,
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s
s
i
d
 
l
a
u
x
e
s

w
o
l

g
n
o
r
t
s

 

 

,

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 

d
n
a
 
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
 
,
e
r
i
s
e
d

 
l
a
u
x
e
s

d
n
a
 
c
i
t
s
i
n
o
d
e
h

 
,

x
e
s
 
o
t
 
e
d
u
t
i
t
t
a
 
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p

d
e
t
i
c
x
e
 
y
l
i
s
a
e
 
,

h
s
i
d
u
r
p

 
t
o
n

 
,

g
n
i
k
e
e
s
-
e
r
u
s
a
e
l
p

s
s
e
n
d
e
d
n
i
m

-
r
e
d
n
e
T

s
s
e
n
d
e
d
n
i
m
-
h
g
u
o
T

s
s
e
n
e
v
i
s
r
e
v
A

 
l
a
r
e
n
e
G

)

X
E
S
(
 
r
u
o
m
u
H

 
l
a
u
x
e
S

y
b
 
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

 
s
s
e
n
e
v
i
s
r
e
v
a
 
h
g
i
H

 
s
s
e
n
e
v
i
s
r
e
v
a
 
w
o
L

y
b
 
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

 

 

y
b
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a
 
h
g
i
H

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a
 
w
o
L

y
b
d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
L

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
o
m
E

o
d
i
b
i
L

 
l
a
u
x
e
S

k
a
e
w

 
-
r
e
d
n
e
t

d
e
d
n
i
m

t
r
e
v
o
r
t
n
i

 

 
 
 

 
-
r
e
d
n
e
t

d
e
d
n
i
m

 

 

l
a
r
o
m

 

,
l
a
i
c
o
s
(
 
e
v
i
t
p
e
c
a
r
t
n
i
 
,
s
s
e
n
d
e
d
n
i
m

-
r
e
d
n
e
t

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o
 
e
u
l
a
v
 
)
c
i
t
e
h
t
s
e
a
 
d
n
a
 
,
s
u
o
i
g
i
l
e
r

w
o
l

 
 

w
o
l
 
,
h
g
i
h
 
s
e
u
l
a
v
 
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
t
n
i
 
d
n
a

 
,
n
o
i
t
i
b
i
h
n
i
s
i
d
 
,
s
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
 
l
a
c
i
n
h
c
e
t
 

s
e
u
l
a
v
 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
u
t
c
a
-
f
l
e
s
 
r
o
 
e
c
n
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

 
-
h
g
u
o
t

d
e
d
n
i
m

 
-
h
g
u
o
t

d
e
d
n
i
m

 

 

 
r
o
f
 

 

f
o
g
n
i
k
n
a
r
 

w
o
l
 
,
s
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
 
l
a
c
i
n
h
c
e
t
 
,
r
e
w
o
p

d
e
e
n

 
,
"
d
e
z
i
l
a
i
c
o
s
r
e
d
n
u
"
 
,

n
o
i
t
i
b
i
h
n
i
s
i
d

,
e
c
n
a
n
i
m
o
d

 
,

y
t
i
n
i
l
u
c
s
a
m

 
,
s
s
e
n
d
e
d
n
i
m
-
h
g
u
o
t

 
e
c
a
e
p

 
t
a

 

d
l
r
o
w

 
,
y
t
i
l
a
u
q
e
 
,

m
o
d
e
e
r
f
 
s
e
u
l
a
v

t
r
e
v
a
r
t
x
e

n
o
i
t
o
m
e
 
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p

 
,

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
i
c
o
s
 
,

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a

n
o
i
s
r
e
v
a
r
t
x
E

r
e
d
n
e
G

e
l
a
m

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
h
c
y
s
p

 
,
l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
i
b

e
l
a
m
e
f

Figure 2: Personality correlates of funniness of sexual humor (left) and of general aversiveness;
i.e., the sum of the three aversiveness scores in the 3 WD (right). Figure presents the summary
of results across several studies (for details, see Ruch, 1992, Ruch & Hehl, 1998).

The are four predictors of sexual humor, with sexual libido being the most potent (Table 1).
The studies clearly show that appreciation of sexual content reﬂects the degree and valence of
salience of this theme; i.e., strength of positive salience contributes to funniness and strength of
negative salience contributes to aversiveness of sexual content in humor. The degree of appreciation
of the sexual content in humor varies directly with one’s attitudes to sex and sexual behavior

67

rather than inversely, as deducible from Freudian theory. The other cluster of variables predicting
sexual humor can be circumscribed by tough-mindedness. Tough- vs. tender-mindedness is the
second dimension in the attitude space and orthogonal to conservatism-radicalism. Studies of
appreciation of sexual content in humor using the 3 WD converge on the ﬁnding that tough-
mindedness correlates positively with funniness and negatively with aversiveness of sexual humor
(Ruch & Hehl, 1986). The temperamental trait of extraversion is predictive of sexual humor, too.
However, this result is not very consistent. Finally, there are gender diﬀerences too, which would
go along with the other variables (males score higher in tough-mindedness and libido). However,
it is not clear whether this is due to the selection of jokes and cartoons used in the 3WD (For a
discussion of gender diﬀerences see Martin & Ervin-Tripp, 1998).

5 Conclusion
The present review was aimed at describing the experiential word of the receiver of humor in
terms of a manageable smaller set of descriptive dimensions. Despite the richness of the subjective
experience and the tremendous diversity in the humor stimuli, appreciation of humor can be
reduced to a two by three matrix. This might not be suﬃcient for some research approaches but it
help as a ﬁrst orientation in this area. This approach is obviously fuzzy on the side of the encoder
or sender, as nothing much is said about the actual process of generating the jokes. It is also
not very precise regarding the analysis (or synthesis) of the encoded message, as only one global
description for a set of jokes is given and this is even done at a more global level.

Nevertheless, the strength of the approach is the focus on the receiver, as also computational
humor will want to serve the same client. Is artiﬁcially generated humor perceived as artiﬁcial by
the recipient of a joke? Can computer be programmed in a way that the outcomes is indistin-
guishable from human humor? For me it seems like that the criterion can be whether or not a
random sample of research participants reacts to generated humor in the same way as they do to
the 3WD humor test which claims to represent humor appreciation comprehensively (albeit at a
very global level). Clearly, the strength of computational approaches is the precision at the stage
of the encoder and the control over the variables added or withhold. So far, however, I am missing
the consideration of the richness on the side of the receiver as well as the experimental variations
on the side of the sender and the massage that accounts for the variations in experience on the
side of the receiver. It appears to me that a fruitful research endeavor seems to require fusing the
strength and expertise of diﬀerent approaches.

A dialogue across disciplines can not be substituted by writing a book chapter, however, I
want to raise a few points that I ﬁnd worth considering for investigation. What are the necessary
variations in the encoding algorithms that generates humor that falls within the INC-RES factor?
How to generate humor that jointly loads with the 3WD items on the nonsense factor? Would
it makes sense to give the algorithms a personality—a distinct “sense of humor”? There is not
only preference for structural types of humor that needs to be considered. Humans make the
deliberate choice of being restrained or vulgar in their humor. Humans joke diﬀerently when they
are in diﬀerent mood or altered states of motivation. Humans tailor their humor to the audience
using information about the audience to optimize (or—in rare cases—minimize) amusement. The
audience is sensitive to such variations in their degree of positive and negative responses and
makes inferences about the intentions and personality of the sender. Is this a venue computational
approaches to humor should consider? Is it feasible at this point in time to implement modules
that will make the programs be more “human-like” in their generation of humor? It is the pursuit
of questions like this which makes the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of humor so attractive.

References
Chapman, A.J. and Foot, H.C. (editors) (1977) It’s a funny thing, humour. Pergamon Press,

Oxford.

Davis, J.M. and Farina A. (1970). Humor appreciation as social communication. Journal of

Personality and Social Psychology, 15:175-178.

68

Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Psychological Inquiry.

Forabosco, G. and Ruch, W. (1994). Sensation seeking, social attitudes, and humor appreciation

in Italy. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 16 :515-528.

Freud, S. (1905). Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewußten. Deuticke, Wien.

Goldstein, J.H. and McGhee, P.E. (editors) (1977), The psychology of humor: Theoretical per-

spectives and empirical issues. Academic Press, New York.

Goldstein, J.H., Suls, J.M. and Anthony, S. (1972). Enjoyment of speciﬁc types of humor content:
Motivation or salience? In Goldstein, J.H. and McGhee, P.E., editors., The psychology of
humor, pp. 159-171, Academic Press, New York.

Lampert, M. and Ervin-Tripp, S.M. (1998). Exploring paradigms: The study of gender and
sense of humor at the end of the 20th century. In Ruch, W., editor, The sense of humor:
Explorations of a personality characteristic, pp. 231-270, Mouton de Gruyter, New York.

Martin, R. A. (1998). Approaches to the sense of humor: A historical review. In Ruch, W.,
editor, The sense of humor: Explorations of a personality characteristic, pp. 15-62, Mouton
de Gruyter, New York.

McGhee, P. E. (1979). Humor: Its origin and development. Freeman, San Francisco.

McGhee, P.E. and Goldstein, J.H. (1983). Handbook of Humor Research. New York: Springer.

McGhee, P.E., Ruch, W. and Hehl, F.-J. (1990). A personality-based model of humor develop-

ment during adulthood. Humor. International Journal of Humor Research, 3 :119-146.

Rothbart, M.K. and Pien, D. (1977). Elephants and marshmallows: A theoretical synthesis of
incongruity-resolution and arousal theories of humour. In Chapman, A.J. and Foot, H.C.,
editors, It’s a Funny Thing, Humour, pp. 37-40, Pergamon Press, Oxford.

Ruch, W. (1981). Witzbeurteilung und Pers¨onlichkeit: Eine trimodale Analyse. Zeitschrift f¨ur

Diﬀerentielle und Diagnostische Psychologie, 2 :253-273.

Ruch, W. (1983). Humor-Test 3 WD (Form A, B and K). Unpublished manuscript. University

of D¨usseldorf, Department of Psychology, D¨usseldorf, Germany.

Ruch, W. (1992). Assessment of appreciation of humor: Studies with the 3WD humor test. In
Spielberger, C. and Butcher, J. N., editors, Advances in personality assessment (Vol. 9), pp.
27-75, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

Ruch, W. (1993). Exhilaration and humor (Chapter 42).

In Lewis, M. and Haviland, J.M.,

editors, The handbook of emotions, pp. 605-616, Guilford Publications, New York, NY.

Ruch, W. (1995). Will the real relationship between facial expression and aﬀective experience

please stand up: The case of exhilaration. Cognition and Emotion, 9:33-58.

Ruch, W. and Hehl, F.-J. (1988). Attitudes to sex, sexual behaviour and enjoyment of humour.

Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 9 :983-994.

Ruch, W. and Hehl, F. J. (1998). A two-mode model of humor appreciation: Its relation to aes-
thetic appreciation and simplicity-complexity of personality. In Ruch, W., editor, The sense
of humor: Explorations of a personality characteristic, pp. 109-142, Mouton de Gruyter,
New York.

Ruch, W., and K¨ohler, G. (1998). A temperament approach to humor. In Ruch, W., editor,
The sense of humor: Explorations of a personality characteristic, pp. 203-230, Mouton de
Gruyter, New York.

69

Ruch, W., McGhee, P.E. and Hehl, F.-J. (1990). Age diﬀerences in the enjoyment of incongruity-

resolution and nonsense humor during adulthood. Psychology and Aging, 5 :348-355.

Ruch, W. and Rath, S. (1993). The nature of humor appreciation: Toward an integration of
perception of stimulus properties and aﬀective experience. Humor: International Journal of
Humor Research, 6 :363-384.

Suls, J.M. (1972). A two-stage model for the appreciation of jokes and cartoons: An information-
processing analysis. In Goldstein, J.H. and McGhee, P.E., editors, The psychology of humor,
pp. 81-100, Academic Press, New York.

Watson, D. and Tellegen, A. (1985). Toward a consensual structure of mood. Psychological

Bulletin, 98:219-235.

Wilson, G.D. (1973). A dynamic theory of conservatism. In Wilson, G.D., editor, The psychology

of conservatism, pp. 257-266, Academic Press, London.

Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral expressions and biosocial bases of sensation seeking. Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge.

70

Humor in Online Romantic Relationships

Aaron Ben-Ze’ev

Department of Philosophy
University of Haifa, Israel

benzeev@research.haifa.ac.il

Abstract

Birds do it, bees do it, and now people with PC’s do it. Gloria G. Brame

This paper examines the role of humor in online romantic relationships. I claim that in such
relationships, which are based on conversation rather than on external appearance, humor
plays a considerably greater role than in oﬄine relationships. This is a positive feature of
such relationships as the ability to entertain several diﬀerent perspectives, which is typical of
humor, is a good indicator that such a relationship can endure in the long run. Survival in
the long run requires having more than one partial perspective, which is typical of extreme
emotional states. In light of the increasing popularity of online relationships, we can expect
to see an increase in the role of humor in personal relationships in general.

Keywords: humor, online aﬀairs, emotions, ﬂirting, addiction

1 The Presence of Humor in Online Relationships

Your mind is what interests me the most. Bumper Sticker.

The appearance of computer-mediated communication introduces a new type of communication
and consequently a new type of personal relationships. There are various kinds of computer-
mediated relationships that diﬀer in some signiﬁcant aspects. My main concern is with one-to-one
romantic communication between real people who are not completely anonymous—but whose true
identity may still not be fully disclosed.

The complex experience of romantic love involves two basic evaluative patterns referring to
(a) attractiveness (or appealingness)—that is, an attraction to external appearance, and (b)
praiseworthiness—that is, positively appraising other characteristics. Romantic love requires the
presence of both patterns.

Online romantic relationships diﬀer from oﬄine relationships in that they attach less weight
to external appearance and more weight to the positive appraisal of the other’s characteristics.
External appearance is typically not fully known in the early stages of online relationships, and
therefore these relationships must rely on other characteristics for creating positive emotional
attitudes toward each other. Online relationships prevent people from relying on good looks when
evaluating other people and hence they avoid the unjustiﬁed advantages that are usually granted
to attractive people; these relationships enable people to get to know each other without having
to cope with the heavy burden of the attractiveness stereotype (Wallace (1999): p. 138.)

It should be noted that personal traits, including a sense of humor, are also important in oﬄine
relationships. In a study of human attraction, six out of ten characteristics considered by both
women and men to be most eﬀective in attracting opposite-sex partners had nothing to do with
physical attributes and could easily be conveyed in an online communication. Those include a
sense of humor, sympathetic toward other people’s troubles, good manners, prepared to put eﬀort
into spending time together, and willingness to help (Buss (1988) cited in Levine (2000)).

In online relationships, however, the weight of the other person’s attraction is considerable
smaller, particularly at the beginning of the relationship. Getting to know each other is more

crucial in online relationships. As the information in the ﬁrst message is quite limited, cases
of love at ﬁrst byte are more rare. Nevertheless, we should not exclude the possibility of such
cases—after all, schematic evaluations can also be made on the basis of limited information, which
can be revealed in the ﬁrst conversation. For example, one may detect in the ﬁrst message a
sense of humor and wittiness and instantly fall in love with the sender. As Sandra described her
online mate (who has now become her husband): “He was romantic, brilliant, poetic, witty, funny
. . . everything I’d dreamed about in a man.”1

A common phenomenon in oﬄine relationships is the “attractiveness halo,” in which a person
who is perceived as beautiful is assumed to be good as well; in online relationships, this is re-
placed by the “personality halo,” in which a person who is perceived as having a speciﬁc, positive
personality trait is assumed to have other good characteristics—sometimes even those connected
to physical appearance. A sense of humor constitutes a fundamental attribute in the personality
halo.

Conversation is of great value in online relationships, and it actually determines the quality of

the relationship. The following email message, posted on a message board, exempliﬁes this:

Subject: The art of the spoken word

Looking for ladies who enjoy being pampered with good conversation and the sensuality of the
spoken word. Well-thought conversation is an art, and its appreciation is an extraordinary
gift! I love to talk about anything and everything, so if you’re interested in avoiding the
immature, crass babble online and having a great talk, please e-mail me or look for me
on-line (Cited in Levine (1998)).

It is diﬃcult to imagine the value of conversation being elevated to such heights in an oﬄine
relationship.
It is refreshing to discover that neither physical contact nor visual content, but
rather conversation, is at the heart of true romance and exciting sexual aﬀairs. Conversations are
indeed important in forming a good base for a strong relationship. In modern society, we scarcely
have the time for genuine and prolonged conversations with those dear to us. In cyberspace, such
conversations are common as this is the only means to connect intimately with other people.

Online relationships, which are based on conversations, demand more intense time together—
that is, time together without watching television or reading a newspaper. Conversations have a
slower pace—they require more time. Although the “slam-bang-thank-you” type of experience also
exists in cyberspace, it is less common since a conversation is a kind of ongoing communication.
Online conversations force you to interact with your partner in at least some nonsexual aspects.
These aspects, as well as the ongoing nature of conversations, encourage the pleasant atmosphere
to spill over to the morning after. Most of the time, the impression of what took place the night
before is that of a pleasant conversation, like that typical of ﬂirting.

In light of the crucial role of conversation in online romantic relationships, a sense of humor
becomes much more important as well. Since online relationships have become more and more
prevalent, we can expect an increase in the importance of a sense of humor in human personal
relationships.

Online romantic relationships are often a form of ﬂirting. Flirting creates a relaxing, calm,

and enjoyable atmosphere. It involves curiosity, humor, imagination, and empathy.

In her discussion on ﬂirting, Miss Etiquette indicates that the meanings of ﬂirting is to be
playfully romantic; something of little value or importance. Indeed, her colleague, Miss Manners,
considers ﬂirtation “a gentle amusement,” an activity that should be harmless and not lead to
anything2. Flirting is subtle: it is not an explicit sexual activity, but rather an enjoyable, gentle
prelude or substitute for it. Flirting has elements of intellectual teasing ﬂavored by emotional tone.
Flirting has seemingly contrary aspects: honesty and a somewhat deceptive attitude (expressed
in ﬂattery); caring for others—by listening to and showing interest in them—while not taking the

1Cyberlove Seminars, http://www.bluejuice.com/cyberlove/story.html, “How we met online.”
2Miss Etiquette, Flirting etiquette, http://www.miss-etiquette.com/etiquette\_advice.html.

72

encounter too seriously; being conﬁdent and feeling good about yourself while not attaching too
much importance to yourself; intelligence mixed with a good sense of humor (Ben-Ze´ev (2002)).
The above contrary aspects are also characteristic of humor. Humor involves honesty, such as
when it touches upon the most profound issues in our life; it also involves exaggeration, which
may lead to embellishment of the truth and thus to deception. The sensitivity associated with
humor indicates that it involves caring for others, but this sensitivity is also associated with not
taking others too seriously—sometimes to the extent that other people may be insulted. A sense
of humor indicates that we feel good about ourselves, but also that we do not attach too much
importance to ourselves. Like ﬂirting, a sense of humor includes a measure of intelligence.

The aﬃnity of online aﬀairs to ﬂirting indicates the aﬃnity of online aﬀairs to games. As in
games, in online aﬀairs the process is often more important than the outcome, and as in many
games, online aﬀairs are characterized by spontaneity, manifest joy, and a sense of humor (Danet
(2001): pp. 7-10).

Online aﬀairs, ﬂirting, games, and humor are essentially intrinsically valuable activities whose
value lies in the activity itself, not its results. Although such an activity has results, it is not
performed in order to achieve these results. We perform such activities because we enjoy doing
so and not because of a certain external goal. The intrinsically valuable nature of online aﬀairs,
ﬂirting, and games is another reason for the signiﬁcant role that humor plays in them.

2 Humor and the Emotional Intensity of Online Romantic Rela-

tionships

Online sex is a wonderful invention. Now, if only everyone could type faster. Unknown.

The greater role of humor in online romantic relationships raises the issue of whether this role

serves to increase or decrease the emotional intensity of these relationships.

Humor is similar to emotions in having a strong element of incongruity or change. Both
emotions and humor combine two perspectives—the expected and the unexpected. However,
whereas in emotions the simultaneous presence of incongruent perspectives is problematic, and
hence requires immediate practical actions, in humor the incongruity is enjoyable and requires no
action. The ability to entertain several diﬀerent perspectives is typical of humor and moderate
positions, and is contrary to the partial nature of emotions. A sense of humor is thus often
incompatible with an extreme emotional state (Ben-Ze´ev (2000): p. 39). The ability to entertain
several alternatives is also a sign of mental health. For example, a person who suﬀers from
paranoia denies that alternatives to his position are possible. Indeed, people often describe their
emotionality as a state in which they are unable to think clearly and in particular to appreciate
others’ points of view (Parrott (1995): pp. 76-77).

Laughing at ourselves serves to distance us from the shaming situation as we join others in
taking a fresh perspective at the situation. The new humorous perspective also helps to reduce
the signiﬁcance of the shaming situation. Like humor, confession also involves distancing oneself
from the event. By telling others about an event that has shamed us, we join others in a distanced
observation of the event and in a way share with them some of the responsibility. Moreover,
confession also involves an explicit negative evaluation of the deed—something that also distances
ourselves from the event. By negatively evaluating our deed, we consider it as a speciﬁc isolated
failure, thus keeping our global evaluation of ourselves intact (Ben-Ze´ev (2000): p. 515).

Humor is contrary to extreme emotional states and hence its use in online aﬀairs may decrease
the intensity of such aﬀairs. This may be true, but there are other relevant considerations in this
regard. First, there are other factors that considerably increase the intensity of online relationships.
It is beyond the scope of this paper to describe these factors, and hence I will merely mention
some of them: the more pronounced presence of change and available alternatives, the large role
of the imagination, and the incomplete nature of online relationships. Second, the use of various
perspectives in the initial stages of a relationship is a good indicator that such a relationship can
endure in the long run. Survival in the long run requires having more than one partial perspective,

73

which is typical of extreme emotional states. Moreover, the fact that the relationship has began
as an intrinsically valuable activity further contributes to the strength of the relationship.

The reduced importance in online relationships of attractiveness and the increased importance
of other personal characteristics is a positive feature in long-term considerations, as the latter are
more important for enduring relationships. Getting to know each other’s qualities is important in
building a strong relationship (McKenna et al. (-)). Humor is an essential factor in this regard.

3 Humor and Online Addiction

The Internet is so big, so powerful and pointless that for some people it is a complete substitute

for life. Andrew Brown

A major danger inherent in using the Internet is that of becoming addicted to it. This is
particularly true concerning those engaged in online romantic and sexual aﬀairs. People, who
are careful to avoid oﬄine extramarital aﬀairs, are more easily drawn into online extramarital
aﬀairs. One reason for this is that the latter are considered to be less real than the former. When
something is considered to be less real, its risks are considered to be less signiﬁcant. Another reason
for the addictive nature of online aﬀairs is the lack of an established and familiar mechanism to
warn us against being involved in aﬀairs we do not want to pursue. The permissive nature of
cyberspace gives rise to fast online sexual aﬀairs without leaving much time for the participants
to hesitate about their willingness to be involved in such relationships.

Online romantic relationships are kind of a new toy with which the human race has not yet
learned how to play. People often confuse the toy with reality and ruin their personal as well
as professional life. Cybering is similar, in a few signiﬁcant senses, to taking drugs. Both cases
provide easy access to pleasure, which is often based upon virtual realities. In both cases, the
tempting results can make people dangerously addicted to the method; people want more and
more, but satisfaction is limited and becomes more costly to achieve. An unfulﬁlled craving for
drugs and cybering can cause great distress. Once the ﬁrst steps are taken in online aﬀairs or
drugs, the situation can often run its own course, almost involuntarily. Whereas drugs artiﬁcially
stimulate pleasure centers in the brain, online conversations artiﬁcially stimulate pleasure centers
in the mind. Artiﬁcial stimulation may appear to be easy and cheap; however, the price can be
dear in terms of our overall performance and in particular, in terms of the price that those close
to us in our oﬄine circumstances might have to pay. Addiction is indeed common in cyberspace
(Cooper et al. (2000)).

One way of reducing the likelihood of becoming addicted to cybering is to use humor in online
relationships. Addiction is an extreme behavior that does not encompass other perspectives beside
that involved in the addictive behavior. Using humor may be useful in this regard. As indicated,
the ability to entertain several diﬀerent perspectives is typical of humor and of all moderate
positions. We should encourage people to entertain several perspectives in their daily life. A
useful and enjoyable way to do so is through humor.

Engaging in humor is essentially a social activity. It was found that children who watched
humorous ﬁlms alone laughed less than those watching in pairs, who in turn laughed less than
children in groups of four or more. Moreover, children watching humorous material with a friend
showed more amusement than those watching with a child they did not know well (Chapman and
Wright (1976); Parkinson (1995)). The social aspect of humor may also be a factor in reducing
the risk of online aﬀairs. Social relationships give you additional perspectives. Such relationships
may also inﬂuence us negatively, but in many cases humor can help to prevent the negative social
inﬂuences from swaying us unduly.

The use of humor in online romantic relationships can be risky as well. The reliance of online
relationships on one type of communication may sometimes lead to negative emotions due to
misunderstanding. Thus, something that is intended ironically may cause the other person to feel
insulted and angry. In oﬄine relationships, other clues clarify and contextualize the irony or humor,
so that the intention behind the words becomes obvious; in online communication, such balancing
factors are absent. The lean communication of online relationships may also generate intense

74

positive emotions because the negative aspects of the correspondent tend to remain concealed.

4 Conclusion
Let me make this much clear: I don’t ﬁsh in the desert, I don’t sunbathe in the shower, and I do
not have cybersex with my husband. Unknown

In this preliminary study, I have suggested that the role of humor in online romantic relation-
ships is greater than that in oﬄine relationships. This is, no doubt, a positive feature of such
relationships. Online romantic relationships are not without their own diﬃculties. It seems that
the use of humor can be beneﬁcial for coping with such diﬃculties as well. Substantiating the
above claims and analyzing their implications will require further research.

References
Ben-Ze’ev, A. (2000). The subtlety of emotions. Cambridge, Ma.: MIT Press.

Ben-Ze’ev, A. (2002). Flirting on and oﬄine. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1.

Buss, D. M. (1988). The evolution of human intrasexual competition. Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology, 54, 616-628.

Chapman, A. J. & Wright, D. S. (1976). Social enhancement of laughter: An experimental analysis

of some companion variables. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 21, 201-218.

Cooper, A., Delmonico, D. & Burg, R. (2000). Cybersex users, abusers, and compulsives: New

ﬁndings and implications. Sexual Addiction & Compulsivity, 7, 5-29.

Danet, B. (2001). Cyberpl@y: Communicating online. Oxford: Berg.

Levine, D. (1998). The joy of cybersex: A guide for creative lovers. New York: Ballantine Books.

Levine, D. (2000). Virtual attraction: What rocks your boat. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 3,

565-573.

McKenna, K. Y. A., Green, A. S. & Gleason, M. E. J. (in press). Relationship formation on the

Internet: What’s the big attraction? Journal of Social Issues.

Parkinson, B. (1995). Ideas and realities of emotion. London: Routledge.

Parrott, W. G. (1995). The heart and the head. In J. A. Russell, J.M. Fernandez-Dols, A. S. R.

Manstead & J. C. Wellenkamp (Eds.), Everyday conceptions of emotion. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Wallace, P. (1999). The psychology of the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

75

Generation of Idiom-based Witticisms to Aid Second 

Language Learning 

Justin McKay 
Binsted-McKay 
Tokyo, Japan 

justinm@binsted-mckay.com 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

In  this  paper,  we  discuss  a  model  of  simple  idiom-based  witticisms,  which  we  have  implemented  on  a 
computer. The resulting program, WISCRAIC (Witty Idiomatic Sentence Creation Revealing Ambiguity In 
Context) generates jokes by deriving meaning partially from the normal context in which key words appear 
and partially from humour-independent lexical entries. WISCRAIC also produces explanations of the jokes 
it  creates,  with  a  view  to  helping  second  language  learners  master  the  idioms  that  form  the  basis  of  the 
jokes. 
After reviewing some of the humour research that is most relevant to WISCRAIC, we look briefly at the 
motivation for using humour as a  tool  for  language  learning,  before  examining  the  design  of  the  system 
itself. 
Finally we present the results of an evaluation of the system’s output by a group of joke judges. 
 

Keywords: Computational Humour, Second Language Learning 

 
1.  INTRODUCTION 

WISCRAIC (Witty Idiomatic Sentence Creation Revealing Ambiguity In Context) is the implementation of a 
model of a sub-class of puns, namely simple idiom-based witticisms. The program generates jokes by deriving 
meaning  (semantic  associations)  partially  from  the  normal  context  of  words  and  partially  from  humour-
independent  lexical  entries.  The  system  produces  a  range  of  jokes,  but  focuses  primarily  on  witticisms 
(question-answer and one-liners) that use phonological ambiguity to create jokes based around pseudo-idioms 
(idioms altered during the course of joke production). 
 
WISCRAIC also produces explanations of the jokes it creates, with a view to helping second language learners 
master the idioms that form the basis of the jokes. Although the results of our informal evaluation suggest that 
users were helped by the system, they are not conclusive, and a full-scale formal evaluation is beyond the scope 
of this research. WISCRAIC is different from previous methods of producing computational humour not only 
in its capacity to produce explanations of jokes produced, but also in that it tries to derive meaning implicitly 
from context, rather than using explicit syntactic and semantic categories.  For this reason it does not require a 
structured lexicon which systems such as JAPE [1] depend upon. WISCRAIC's linguistic information is also 
completely general in nature. It is not tailored in any way for the purposes of joke building. The output of the 
system was tested on human joke judges with positive results. 

 

2.  HUMOUR RESEARCH 

2.1 AMBIGUITY AND WIT 

Pepicello  and  Green  [12]  hold  the  common  view  that  humour  is  closely  related  to  ambiguity.  Linguistic 
ambiguity, the type that we are concerned with in WISCRAIC, can take place at a number of different levels: 

 

 

 
 
Phonological - ambiguity concerning the sounds of words 

e.g. What bird is lowest in spirits? 
       A bluebird [12] 

   

 

  This is phonologically ambiguous because ‘blue’ is a colour, but it also means down or depressed. 

 

Morphological - ambiguity concerning word formation (as inflection, derivation, and compounding) 
  

e.g. The book thief was caught read handed 

 

 This  is  morphologically  ambiguous  because  ‘read’  is  only  phonetically  identical  with  ‘red’  in  its  past 
participle form. 

 

Syntactic - ambiguity relating to the rules of syntax or syntactics 
   

e.g. Would you rather have an elephant kill you or a gorilla? 
      I'd rather have the elephant kill the gorilla [12] 

 

  The ambiguity here arises because the question can be parsed in two distinct ways. Under one interpretation, 
the choice of death is by gorilla or by elephant, whilst under a second, the listener is asked if he would like to 
be the elephant’s victim, or would he prefer that the gorilla were the victim. 

 

The important element which these three jokes share, and which is of particular importance in WISCRAIC, is 
that the ambiguity, be it phonological, morphological or syntactic creates a point of semantic comparison. 
 
Pepicello and Green claim that this ambiguity most be unsolvable by the listener until the punch line resolves it 
in some unexpected way. Although this is true of the question-answer format produced by WISCRAIC, 
 

Q. Who broke the woman’s hart? 
A. The cruel deer-keeper. 

 
 there is no such resolution in the one-line witticisms, as there is no punch line. 
 

The cruel deer-keeper broke the woman’s hart! 
 

  It is probably sufficient therefore, that to the listener of a WISCRAIC witticism, the sentence make sense to a 
first approximation, and upon further examination (of the text, or simple reflection on the sentence heard), the 
ambiguity is revealed and a second interpretation is made possible. 
 Indeed it could be argued that the ambiguity is never resolved, as both interpretations are equally valid. 
 

2.2 HUMOUR COMPUTATION 

Attardo and Raskin put together a simple joke generating system, LIBJOG (Light Bulb JOke Generator) [8], 
mainly to show how poorly simple cut-and-paste methods work. However, the most significant work in the area 
of computational humour was carried out by Binsted. 
Binsted [2] examined the based the linguistic structure of a class of jokes, namely punning riddles, and devised 
a  set  of  rules  that  allow  for  the  production  of  question-answer  riddles.  These  rules  were  implemented  in  a 
system called JAPE. 
The final version of JAPE developed by Binsted can generate riddles which: 
 

• 
• 

use typical subtypes of juxtaposition, substitution or comparison as their punning mechanism 
use the constructed word or phrase in the punch line, rather than the question part of the riddle 

 

A comparison of JAPE and WISCRAIC is given in section 6. 

 

 

78

 

 

3.  HUMOUR AND LEARNING 

Minsky's Frame Theory can be applied to linguistic humour, specifically  puns,  which  work  by  changing  the 
meaning or sense of a word. Minsky believes that a common element to all kinds of humour is “unexpected 
frame-substitution, in which a scene is first described from one viewpoint and then suddenly -- typically by a 
single word -- one is made to view all the scene-elements in another, quite different way”[3]. 

We believe that this frame shifting is of benefit to language learners in that it gives the learner/speaker a 
way  of  linking  semantic  frames,  and  each  connection  in  the  frame  network  provides  another  way  of 
remembering  a  given  word,  or  associated  idiom.  The  good  feeling  associated  with  such  humorous  frame 
shifting may reinforce and strengthen the connection between words. Even bizarre or tenuous shifts in frame 
(and possibly logic) may allow a learner to recall a word that cannot be remembered directly. 
 
Research has also been carried out into the use of humour in teaching. This work has shown that humour has 
benefits  in  teaching  whether  it  is  related  to  the  subject  matter  or  not  [5].  There  have  been  no  conclusive 
findings as to whether or not the use of humour aids the learning process. However, research does show that 
relevant humour actually aids retention [4]. 

 

An example of a WISCRAIC witticism and associated explanation is given below: 
 
The friendly gardener had thyme for the woman ! 
 
The word time, which is part of the idiom [have,time,for,someone] is a 
homonym of the word thyme. 
A HOMONYM is a word that sounds like another word. 
------ 
| LINK | between thyme and gardener : 
------------------------------------- 
| thyme is a type of plant 
| a gardener works with plants 
 
"friendly", which is associated with the idiom [have,time,for,someone] was 
selected from other adjectives as it has the highest imagability score : 439 
 
By outlining the semantic and phonetic associations underlying the joke, we believe that the system promotes 
deeper  thought  about  the  words  being  used,  introducing  new  or  potentially  troublesome  (on  account  of  its 
homonymy) vocabulary in a novel and hopefully memorable way. 

 

4.  WHAT MAKES A JOKE? 

We will now look briefly at some of the techniques that are used to produce jokes, and how such jokes may be 
classified. Then we will look in a little more detail at the jokes that WISCRAIC is designed to produce. 

 

4.1 QUESTION-ANSWER RIDDLES 

A riddle is a puzzling (and often misleading) question posed as a problem to be solved. 
A sub-genre of riddles, which was addressed by Binsted [2] in the development of JAPE, is punning riddles. 
 
A pun consists of using a word in a manner that suggests two or more of its meanings, or the meaning of at 
least one of its homonyms. 
Punning riddles therefore exploit ambiguity in either the question or answer part of a riddle. 
 
An example of the question-answer riddles produced by WISCRAIC is shown below: 
 
Q. Who showed the woman his mussels ? 
A. The vain fisherman 

 

79

 

 

4.2 WITTICISMS 

 

A witticism is a clever and often ironic remark. 
A one-liner can be a very succinct joke or witticism. 
 
Some amusing witticisms (and the people they are attributed to) are 
given below: 
            
“If other people are going to talk, conversation becomes  impossible.” – James McNeill Whistler [13] 
“I have had a perfectly wonderful evening. But this wasn’t  it.”  - Groucho Marx [13]                 
“Avoid all needle drugs.  The only dope worth shooting is  Richard Nixon.” – Abbie Hoffman [13] 

 

We can see that this last witticism uses ambiguity of the word ‘dope’ to humorous effect. 
 
An example of a WISCRAIC witticism is : 
 
The obliging dairy farmer met the woman half whey ! 
 
WISCRAIC  also  produces  character-based  witticisms.  If  the  user  enters  a  name,  occupation  and  adjective 
describing the character, WISCRAIC will attempt to return a witticism about the named person, searching its  
existing knowledge bases for the necessary semantic connections. 
For instance, if we enter ‘Johnny, deer-keeper, poor’, WISCRAIC will return the following witticism: 
 
Your mate Johnny is a hard up deer-keeper. He really needs doe ! 

 

5.  SYSTEM DESIGN 

A common mechanism in jokes that use phonological ambiguity is substitution. 
WISCRAIC uses this mechanism to construct a sentence using an altered idiom that is phonologically identical 
to the original idiom. The choice of substitution is guided by the availability of a noun phrase profession (e.g. 
the doctor, the chef) that in some way creates a semantic link, through shared context, to the substitute word. 
Strictly, an idiom refers to an expression in a given language whose meaning cannot de derived solely from the 
meaning of the words comprising the expression. It is important to note that although attention is focused on 
idioms throughout this thesis, WISCRAIC is designed in such a way that it will handle any verb phrase. 
 
All the witticisms: 

use word-word substitution as their main mechanism 
substitute phonetically identical words 
substitute into an idiom 
either  use  the  pseudo-idiom  thus  constructed  in  the  question  part  of  the  joke  if  it  is  presented  in 
question-answer format 

 e.g. Who met the woman half whey ?  
       The obliging dairy-farmer 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

or construct a sentence using this pseudo-idiom 
 

e.g. The friendly gardener had a lot of thyme for the woman ! 

   
 
The jokes also use adjectives to ensure that the meaning of the original idiom is suggested, if not obvious. In 
the examples above, “obliging” suggests “meeting someone half way” while “friendly” hints at “having time 
for someone”. 
The set of preconditions that must be satisfied in order for a joke to be produced are as follows: 

 

 

•  There is an idiom A in the idiom database 
•  There is a word B in the text of A which the word dictionary shows to be a verb or noun 
•  There is a word E which is a homophone or alternate meaning of B and is defined in the lexicon 

80

 

 

•  There is a word C, specified as being suitable for use with idiom A, which the dictionary shows to 

be an adjective 

•  There is a profession or character D (in database) which is semantically linked to the substitute E 

 
WISCRAIC  attempts  to  construct  a  witticism  based  on  a  common  idiom.    It  has  several  distinct  knowledge 
bases and processing modules with which to accomplish this task. 

5.1 KNOWLEDGE BASES 

a dictionary of idioms, containing a list of adjectives associated with each idiom. 
a dictionary of professions, containing a list of thematic vocabulary for each that defines a context for 
the profession. 
a general dictionary of nouns, verbs and adjectives, containing a phonetic transcription and values for 
four psycholinguistic indicators for each entry. 
a lexicon, containing a list of defining words with each entry. 
a grammar containing information on such things as verb conjugation, valid noun phrases and plural 
forms of nouns. 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

 

A distinction is drawn between ``dictionary'' and ``lexicon'' as they are used in WISCRAIC. 

 

WISCRAIC's lexicon defines a relation between each word entered as part of a definition for a lexeme and the 
lexeme itself.  For instance, the definition for the lexeme ``bough'' asserts that the relation is_part_of_a holds 
between ``bough'' and ``tree''.  The lexemes in this lexicon  are  the  words  that  are  found  as  homophones  for 
words comprising the idioms. These relations are not used in the construction of witticisms but are used rather 
to produce the explanations, as shown above. 

 

WISCRAIC's  other  knowledge  sources  however  contain  no  such  relations.  In  the  profession  database,  the 
profession ``chef'' for example has ``kitchen'' as one of the words in its list of associated vocabulary but there is 
no indication of how the two are related. The reason for this design choice was to stay true to the original idea 
of manipulating context. The context in which any word appears is not defined through the  use  of  semantic 
categories,  but  rather  by  the  frequency  with  which  the  given  word  occurs  in  writing  or  speech  with  other 
words. Words which are immediately associated with a given word provide a suitable context with  which  to 
make jokes based around puns on that word. 
 
Note that all information contained in the lexicon, dictionaries and DCG is completely general in nature. In 
other words it is humour-independent. 
 

5.2 PROCESSING MODULES 

• 

Joke  Constructor  This  module  contains  information  on  what  elements  and  relations  between 
elements must be present for a joke to be constructed. 
Uses: dictionary of idioms, dictionary of professions, general dictionary, lexicon 

•  Surface-form  Generator  This  module  is  responsible  for  taking  the  elements  provided  by  the 
Constructor  above  and  converting  them  into  a  complete  joke  form  (the  form  which  is  printed  to 
screen). 
Uses: the grammar 

•  Explanation  Generator  Takes  the  elements  provided  by  the  Constructor  and  generates  an 

explanation of the relations between them. 
Uses: the grammar 
 

 

81

 

5.3 ADJECTIVES 

5.3.1 The Role of the adjective 

 

 

The sentence "The lumberjack took a bough" is a valid grammatical sentence, but it also semantically valid. It 
makes perfect sense for a lumberjack, someone who works with trees, to take a branch of a tree for some reason. 
What we have lost therefore is the meaning of the original idiom "take a bow". This idiom creates the mental 
image of a performer on stage acknowledging his audience's appreciation. 
The delivery of a joke often suggests a joke - the ambiguity or innuendo is stressed through mechanisms such 
facial  expression  or  vocal  stress.  A  joke  is  rarely  delivered  in  the  same  fashion  as  a  factual  statement. 
Computer generated witticisms do not have access to these mechanisms. 
In WISCRAIC, the adjective is used as an indicator of what is to come - the reader expects the regular idiom, 
and does not spot the ambiguity immediately. 
To this end, WISCRAIC selects an adjective from a list of adjectives associated with each idiom to qualify the 
protagonist  in  the  sentence.  For  instance,  the  list  for  the  idiom  "take  a  bow"  is:  performing,  entertaining, 
flamboyant. 
Any  of  these  adjectives  may  be  chosen  to  qualify  lumberjack  and  will  result  in  a  reversion  to  the  original 
meaning of the idiom "take a bow", and hopefully the realisation on the part of the user that the word bough is 
replacing bow from that idiom. 
The  use  of  the  adjective  to  suggest  the  original  idiom,  and  the  simultaneous  existence  of  the  semantic  link 
between the substituted word and the protagonist of the sentence result in the reader having the simultaneous 
view that a) the text constitutes a normal usage of the idiom, and b) something is not  quite  right  about  that 
interpretation. In general terms, the reader of a WISCRAIC witticism has in mind the simultaneous view that 
the situation is normal and also that there is some sort of violation of the way things should be. 
 

5.3.2 Choosing an adjective 

 

WISCRAIC uses the MRC Psycholinguistic Database to gather information about a number of psycholinguistic 
indicators for each of the adjectives appearing in the list. The adjective with the highest imageability score is 
selected first. Upon backtracking, the next highest adjective is selected and so on until the list is depleted. Any 
adjective appearing in the list that does not have an entry in the MRC Database will never be selected. This 
ensures that obscure adjectives will not be used in the joke. 
 

5.4 WORKED EXAMPLE 

 
Step 1: 
 
 
 

 
 
 
The  

 
 
 

 
 
 
{PERSON} 

 
 
 
took 

 
 
 
a 

BOUGH 
 
 
  BOW 

Homonym search 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Step 2: 
 
 
 
 

The  

 

Search for semantic link 

PERSON

BOUGH 

{PERSON} 

took 

a 

  BOW 

 

82

 

 
 

 

PERSON

The     LUMBERJACK 

took 

a 

  BOUGH 

 

Step 3: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 4: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 5: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The  

The  

 

Search associated adjectives 

Adjective List 

take a bow 

{ADJECTIVE} 

lumberjack 

took 

a 

bough 

Adjective List 

PERFORMING  lumberjack 

took 

a 

bough 

6.  DIFFERENCES IN THE DESIGN OF JAPE AND WISCRAIC 

There are broad architectural similarities between JAPE and WISCRAIC; both manipulate data from a lexicon, 
both use DCG grammars to help build surface forms and ensure grammatical correctness and both specify a set 
of preconditions that must be met in order for a joke to be constructed. 

 

However, there are also important differences in the type of  information  stored  in  the  respective  Knowledge 
Bases, in the approach to data representation and in the scope and type of jokes produced. 
 
Perhaps the most obvious difference between the two systems is the type of joke each produces. JAPE produces 
a wide range of question-answer punning riddles built around compound nouns and phrases. WISCRAIC on 
the  other  hand  focuses  principally  on  witticisms  based  around  idioms  and  some  other  verb  phrases. 
WISCRAIC also produces a limited range of more traditional question-answer riddles, like JAPE, though the 
mechanism used is somewhat different. 
 
One important difference between the two systems is that to a large degree JAPE uses explicit syntactic and 
semantic information to derive jokes whereas WISCRAIC's knowledge is often implicit. WISCRAIC aims to 
derive  meaning  from  context  rather  than  word  definitions.  For  instance,  JAPE  uses  categories  such  as 
‘inact_verb’,  ‘act_verb’,  ‘used_to’,  ‘used_to_object’  and  ‘specifier’.  The  information  therefore  is  very 
structured, and as was the case  with  JAPE-1,  volunteers  are  quite  restricted  in  how  they  can  define  a  given 
word. WISCRAIC uses a more open-ended approach. Only broad syntactic categories such as noun, adjective, 
and verb are explicitly coded into WISCRAIC.  The  important  element  in  WISCRAIC  is  that  two  words  are 
semantically related in some respect - the nature of the link is not considered in the production of a joke. Of 
course, WISCRAIC data is not completely free of structure or constraint. When gathering data for the idiom 
dictionary, volunteers were told to think of adjectives associated with a particular idiom. In the case of the data 

 

83

 

 

on the professions, volunteers were told only that the words they provided should be nouns - the association 
and  reasons  behind  choosing  a  particular  word  were  never  declared  or  considered  in  the  design.  All  that 
mattered is that there was some type of association in the mind of the volunteer. One of the aims in designing 
WISCRAIC was to see if a word could be sufficiently defined by context alone to form the basis of jokes that 
others would find funny and clever, without the basis for this funniness and cleverness being explicitly stated at 
any stage of production. For this reason it can be said that WISCRAIC's semantic knowledge is largely implicit 
- it is tacit in the minds of the people who provided the words, yet is sufficiently explicit to allow jokes to be 
built. 
 
JAPE on the other hand has been designed from a standpoint of having analysed jokes and identified certain 
semantic and syntactic patterns: this allow rules to be derived which when applied and satisfied will reproduce 
a particular range of jokes. 
 
7.  EVALUATION 

Once  the  development  of  WISCRAIC's  model  had  been  completed  and  its  implementation  finished,  it  was 
necessary to evaluate its performance. 
The purpose of the evaluation was to test whether or not a number of hypotheses hold. The most fundamental 
question we must answer of course is ``Does WISCRAIC produce jokes ?''   
We also wished to determine the factors that contributed to the quality of a joke. In order to evaluate the quality 
of the jokes (and determine the factors which contributed to or detracted from the quality), questionnaires were 
developed and distributed to native English-speakers, who judged a selection of WISCRAIC's output. 

 

A further aspect we wished to evaluate is the quality and effect of the explanation generated by WISCRAIC. To 
this end, another questionnaire was developed and distributed to non-native English speakers. The evaluation 
of  the  explanations  was  not  carried  out  to  test  any  specific  hypotheses,  but  rather  to  provide  a  basis  for 
discussion and to give some preliminary indication of the value of the system as a teaching tool. 
 
Through this evaluation we hoped to show that : 

•  WISCRAIC's output is in fact jokes. 
•  Puns without the supporting adjective would have lower funniness ratings than the same pun with the 

adjective. 

•  Cleverness is correlated with funniness: jokes with higher cleverness ratings than other jokes would 

also have higher funniness ratings. 

•  Texts  without  homonym  substitution  into  the  idiom  but  with  semantic  links  derived  from  the 

homonym would sometimes be thought of as weak jokes. 

•  Texts demonstrating normal use of an idiom would be judged as regular sentences. 
   

7.1 EXPERIMENT DESIGN 

The judges’ ability to distinguish jokes from non-jokes needed to be checked, so non-jokes were also included 
in the questionnaires distributed to judges. 

 

Five sets of materials were prepared: 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

the WISCRAIC generated jokes. 
the sentences illustrating normal use of the idioms. 
e.g. The mysterious man disappeared into thin air ! 
the WISCRAIC jokes with the adjective removed. 
e.g. The lumberjack took a bough ! 
texts with homonym substitution but no semantic links. 
e.g. The strong policeman met the woman half whey ! 
texts  with  the  original  idiom  intact  but  semantic  links  with  a  potential,  phonetically  identical 
substitute. 
e.g. The strong fisherman showed the woman his muscles ! 

 

84

 

 

 

Each questionnaire comprised 10 texts to be judged - 6 jokes (set 1 above) and one text each from sets 2,3,4 
and 5. It was important that a range of jokes be evaluated and also that the ordering of the jokes, controls and 
hypotheses-testing texts be varied across the questionnaires. Steps were taken to ensure this were so. 

 

7.2 PARTICIPANTS & PROCEDURE 

An  initial  e-mail  asking  for  volunteer  joke-judges  was  sent  to  the  Masters-level  AI  and  Cognitive  Science 
students of Edinburgh University, as well as a number of outside parties. The mail explained that those willing 
would be asked to judge a set of jokes as part of project exploring written humour. 
The majority of volunteers were British, aged between 25 and 30 and educated to first-degree level or higher. 
 
Each text in the questionnaire has three potential rating slots: Joke Rating, Funniness Rating and Cleverness 
Rating.  The  volunteers  were  asked  to  indicate  whether  or  not  they  considered  each  text  to  be  a  joke,  by 
marking  a  'J'  in  the  Joke  Rating  box.  For  each  text  marked  'J',  two  additional  values  must  be  provided:  a 
funniness rating and a cleverness rating. The scales for these two ratings are provided in the questionnaire so 
everyone judges by the same scale. 
 
If  a  text  is  not  given  a  ‘J’  rating,  it  must  be  given  one  of  the  following  ratings  (taken  from  the  actual 
instructions accompanying the questionnaires): 

•  O - Obscure - I'm not familiar with certain words used. 
•  S - Not a joke - simply a regular sentence. 
•  N - Nonsense - doesn't make any sense. 
•  V - Recognisably an attempt at a joke but doesn't work as a joke for some reason. 

 

7.3 RESULTS & DISCUSSION 

We now present a summary of the results and how they relate to our original hypotheses (presented in section 
7). 
 

•  WISCRAIC produces jokes 
        Confirmed - 84% considered jokes. 
•  Lower funniness scores for jokes without adjectives 
        Unconfirmed - 80% considered jokes - slightly higher funniness score than average. 
•  Cleverness correlated with funniness 

Confirmed - of the jokes rated 5 times or more, 80\% had the same funniness and rating scores, either 
2 or 3 for both measures. 

•  Suggested Jokes thought of as weak jokes 
        Confirmed - 40% judged 'J' - lower than average funniness rating 
•  Texts showing normal use of idiom judged as regular sentences 
        Unconfirmed - just over half judged as regular sentences  

 
A  factor  that  affected  the  results  of  the  evaluation  was  the  number  of  subjects  who  actually  completed  and 
returned the questionnaires. Of over 50 people who received the request to take part in the evaluation, a small 
number agreed to do so and only 15 completed questionnaires were eventually returned. Another problem is 
that because only a small number of questionnaires were returned, the  planned  distribution  of  the  jokes  was 
essentially lost. Some jokes were evaluated ten times whereas others were only rated once. 
Although most of the idioms used by the system should be well known to the volunteers, some, such as ``wear 
a cat suit'' might not be instantly recognisable. Also, jokes are not often based around idioms, so people may 
not be in ``joke-mode'' when they are presented with texts of this genre. 

 

 

85

 

8. CONCLUSION 

 

We succeeded in developing a model of a sub-class of puns, namely witticisms that use idioms as the basis of 
the joke. This model was then successfully implemented in a computer program, WISCRAIC. 
Three of our original hypotheses have been retained. While the other 2 were not rejected, the evidence was not 
strong enough to confirm them. The limited evaluation carried out seems to suggest that the explanations did 
aid understanding and promote learning. 
A lack of constraints on some of WISCRAIC's mechanisms means that jokes are prone to tenuous links. This 
would become more apparent if the system were scaled up to use online rather than hand-built methods. 
 
9. CURRENT RESEARCH  

Since the development of WISCRAIC, our focus has been on developing and implementing interactive models 
of humour. These systems are able to learn new semantic relations through user interaction. 
An important part of the interactive process is being able to converse with the system. Consequently, we have 
concentrated on developing dialogue engines that can introduce jokes (both system and human generated) into 
dialogue at a contextually appropriate juncture. 
Such systems are still in the early stages of development, but progress so far has been encouraging. 
 
 
REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Binsted,  K.  (1996).  Machine  Humour:  An  implemented  model  of  puns.  PhD  Thesis,  Dept  Artificial 
Intelligence, University of Edinburgh, 1996. 

[2]  Binsted,  K.  (1993).  Computer  Generation  of  Linguistically  Definable  Riddles.  Technical  Paper  No.25, 
Dept Artificial Intelligence, University of Edinburgh, 1993. 

[3]  Minsky,  M.  (1981).  Jokes  and  their  Relation  to  the  Cognitive  Unconscious.  Web  Version  of  Paper, 
http://www.ai.mit.edu/people/minsky/papers/jokes.cognitive.txt, 1981. 

[4]  Kaplan,  R.M  &  Pascoe,  G.C.  (1977).  Humorous  Lectures  and  Humorous  Examples,  Journal  of 
Educational Psychology, Volume 9, pages 61-65, 1977. 

[5]  Townsend, A.R, Mahoney, P & Allen, L.G. (1983). Student perceptions of Verbal and Cartoon Humor in 
the Test Situation, Educational Research Quarterly, Volume 7, pages 17-23, 1983. 

[6]  Freud, S. (1957). Humour, Hogarth Press, Volume 21, pages 161-166, 1957. 

[7]  Attardo, S & Raskin V.  (1991).  Script  theory  revis(it)ed:  joke  similarity  and  joke  representation  model, 
Humor, Volume 4, No. 3, pages 293-347, 1991. 

[8]  Attardo, S & Raskin V. (1993). Non-Literalness and Non-Bona-Fide in Language: Approaches to Formal 
and Computational Treatments of Humour and Irony, Unpublished paper, 1993. 

[9]  Redfern,  W.  (1996).  Puns:  Second  Thoughts,  HUMOR:  International  Journal  of  Humor  Research, 
Volume 9-2, pages 187-198, 1996. 

[10] Veatch,  T.  C.  (1998).  A  Theory  of  Humor,  HUMOR:  International  Journal  of  Humor  Research,  May, 
http://www.sprex.com/else/humor/paper/humor.html, 1998. 

[11] Ritchie, G. (1999). The JAPE riddle system, pages 89-108, 1999. 

[12] Pepicello & Green. (1984). The Language of Riddles, Ohio State University, 1984. 
[13] The Urban Legend (2000), WebZine, 29th August 2000, 
http://homepages.ihug.co.nz/~dbaxo/urban_legend1024.htm 

 
 

 

86

 

APPENDIX 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Information & Processing Flow in WIS CRAIC 

 

 

 

87

 

 

Real and Fictional Ridicule

A Cognitive Approach for Models of Humour

Francesco Mele

Istituto di Cibernetica “Edoardo Caianiello”

National Research Council (C.N.R.)

Via Campi Flegrei 34 Bld 70
I-80078 Pozzuoli (Naples) Italy

f.mele@cib.na.cnr.it

Abstract

In day-to-day life it can happen that someone makes people laugh because he/she becomes
ridiculous, but without any intention of doing so. We refer to this ridicule situation as “real
ridicule”. Otherwise people laugh because someone has a ridiculous behaviour intentionally,
for example in a theatrical performance, a ﬁlm, or some ﬁctional events. We refer to this
ridicule situation as “ﬁctional ridicule”.
In the paper some formal models about the real ridicule are discussed. The reported models
are based on derision theory proposed in Cousuns and Shoham (1994).
In these models
derision happens when someone’s behaviour results in inadequacy in pretending or in doing
in relation to a particular action to be performed. It will be shown that the inadequacy is
a necessary condition for a ridicule event, but not a suﬃcient one.
It will be shown that
the concepts of wait and surprise can reﬁne the ridicule model in order to capture suﬃcient
conditions.
Some ﬁctional ridicule models, reported in the paper, can be considered as a well characterised
subclass of the entire ﬁeld of the humour phenomena.
It will be shown that Mr. Bean and Groucho Marx in Dylan Dog (Dylan Dog a well known
Italian comics edited by Bonelli) humour and several kind of humour in some telecasts are
examples of ﬁctional ridicule. Ridicule models will be deﬁned using a formalism of intensional
logic Mele (1999); Mele and Minei (2000); Mele et al. (1997) based on four basic mental
attitudes Cousuns and Shoham (1994); Shoham (1993): belief (bel), goal (goal), capability
(can) and intention (int).

1 Real Ridicule
The models that we present for real ridicule are derived from the derision theory proposed in
Cousuns and Shoham (1994). In this formulation it is stated that:

“the person is doubly inadequate:
inadequate in being or in doing, and inadequate
in presuming and expecting. There is contrast between that which was expected and
foreseen (surprise, unexpected) and that which actually happens.”

For the real ridicule, various basic components will be provided upon which to build the
double inadequacy identiﬁed in the previous deﬁnition. From now on Pr will refer to the principal
character of the ridiculous event and A will refer to the onlooker, who is the person that witnesses
the ridiculous event, and to whom the beliefs on the observed events are attributed. For the
purpose of having a reference example to which variations will be carried out, let’s consider the
following ridiculous situation:

A person Pr is walking through a long alley. An onlooker A observes Pr attentively.
At the end of this alley there is a deep puddle of water which impedes Pr to proceed.

(e1) Pr stops, (e2) he observes the puddle of water, (e3) he takes a long pole (similar
to that used for pole vaulting in athletics). (e4) Pr takes a run-up with the pole. (e5)
Instead of sticking the lower end of the pole into the ground, Pr mistakingly sticks it
into the puddle. (er) Pr falls, wetting himself completely. (ey) the onlooker A laughs.

(In the following formalism, we will denote with ← , ∧ and ¬ respectively implication, conjunc-
tion and negation. In addition we will denote the variables with capital letters and the constants
with small letters).

1.1 Model Components

1. bel(A, int(Pr, Ex))

the onlooker A believes that Pr has the intention of reaching a certain objective Ex
In the above example the intention of Pr is relative to the event Ex = |P r jumps over the
puddle of water |. In this formulation we will not consider how the onlooker A reaches this
belief. We will assume that A observes a series of events e1, e2, e3 which make him believe
that Pr has the intention of achieving Ex.

2. bel(A, goal(Pr, Ex))

the onlooker A believes that Pr wants to reach a certain objective Ex. This belief can be
acquired by A either by inference, according to the base axiom proposed in Rao and Georgeﬀ
(1991):
bel(A, goal(Pr, Ex)) ← bel(A, int(Pr, Ex))
or because Pr explicitly manifests it (i.e., he tells A, or he does something similar to an
explicit communication). In the latter case the onlooker A is supposed to perceive an event
Ez =def send message(Pr, A, inform, int(Pr, ex)); in other words, a person Pr sends A a
declarative type message (inform), containing his intention to achieve Ex.

3. bel(A, bel(Pr, can(Pr, Ex)))

A believes that Pr believes that he is capable of reaching Ex.
This component can either be inferred by the onlooker by:
bel(A, bel(Pr, can(Pr, Ex))) ← bel(A, int(Pr, Ex))
A believes that Pr believes that he is capable of reaching Ex if
A believes that Pr has the intention of reaching Ex

or, as in the previous case, because Pr explicitly manifests it through an event Ez =def
send message(Pr, A, inform, can(Pr, Ex)) where he informs that he has the ability to
achieve Ex. To communicate that one has particular abilities is an important element for
ridicule in that we believe that it strengthens the eﬀect of ridicule in A once Pr demonstrates
the lack of his declared abilities.

4. bel(A, Ex))

A believes that the objective Ex will be reached.

5. bel (A, Ex ← (E1 ∧ E2 ∧...En))

A believes that the objective Ex will be reached through the plan E1∧ E2∧,...,∧En
(We will write ‘bel(A, Ex ← ∧iEi))’) instead of ‘bel (A, Ex ← (E1 ∧ E2 ∧...En))’)

6. bel (A, bel(Pr, Ex ← ∧iEi))

A believes that Pr believes that the objective of Ex will be reached by ∧iEI

7. bel(A, ¬can( Pr, Ex))

the onlooker A believes that Pr is not capable of reaching Ex

90

This component is essential for inadequacy. It:
• can be acquired by A before Pr fails to reach Ex. (for example if Pr uses a very short pole
(the length of an umbrella for example) so that in no way A can believe that Pr will be able
to jump over the puddle: this circumstance is already suﬃcient to create hilarity in A.

• can be acquired by A after Pr fails to reach the objective Ex.
• may not be acquired by A neither before, nor after (for example if Pr sticks the pole correctly

into the ground, but the pole breaks, and Pr still falls into the puddle of water).

1.2 Formulation of the Inadequacy
The presumptuous act of being or of wanting to reach an objective is an essential component in
a model of the real ridicule process.
We will express the inadequacy of doing by the inability of Pr to reach a particular objective Ex.
bel(A, inadequacy of doing(Pr,Ex)) ← bel(A, ¬can(Pr, Ex))

A believes that Pr is inadequate of doing if
A believes that Pr is not capable of reaching Ex.

The inadequacy of Pr, in pretending to want Ex, can be deﬁned by starting with the particular
belief of the onlooker A who believes that Pr wants to reach Ex . This inadequacy can be deﬁned
as follows:
bel(A, inadequacy in pretending(Pr,Ex))←

bel(A, goal(Pr, Ex)) ∧
bel(A, ¬can(Pr, Ex)).

A believes that Pr is inadequate in presuming to want Ex if:
A believes that Pr wants Ex and
A believes that Pr is not capable of reaching Ex.

The inadequacy in presuming of the ridiculous person Pr can be deﬁned by the beliefs of the
onlooker A, who observes Pr ﬂaunting his conﬁdence in reaching Ex. From these observations
A believes that Pr believes that he is able to reach Ex, but at the same time A (for some other
reason) does not believe in the abilities of Pr. Formally we propose the following:
bel(A, inadequacy in presuming(Pr,Ex))←

bel(A, bel(Pr, can(Pr, Ex))) ∧
bel(A, ¬can(Pr, Ex))

A believes that Pr is inadequate in presuming Ex if:
A believes that Pr believes that he can achieve Ex and
A believes that Pr is not capable of reaching Ex

A simple derision model can be developed by using the logical disjunction (non exclusive) of the
three inadequacies that have been presented.

91

1.3 Waiting and Surprise
We believe that the formalisation of waiting is a problem of extreme complexity. In the completed
study we have taken into account various types of waiting. Here we will only describe two cases:

wait (A, Pr , ∧iEi ) ←
bel (A, bel(Pr, Ex ← ∧iEi))∧
bel(A, goal (Pr, Ex)).

A waits for the conjunction of events ∧iEi if
A believes that Pr believes that from ∧iEi will follow Ex and
A believes that Pr wants Ex

wait (A, Pr , ∧iEi )←
bel (A, Ex ← ∧iEi) ∧
bel(A, goal (Pr, Ex)).

A waits for the conjunction of events ∧iEi if
A believes that from ∧iEi will follow Ex and
A believes that Pr wants Ex

The waiting in the ﬁrst deﬁnition is stronger in that it is based on a belief of what Pr believes
‘bel (A, bel(Pr, Ex ← ∧iEi)’. The waiting in the second deﬁnition is instead based on what an
agent believes to be the plan to reach Ex. This belief has a weak foundation ‘bel (A, bel(Pr, Ex
← ∧iEi)’ but it is often formed in agents and it is also the cause of major surprises.

Various types of surprises can be taken into consideration, but here only two types of surprises
are described: a surprise created in the agent A due to the fact that an element of the plan does
not take place, and a surprise due to the objective Ex of the plan not taking place. The following
deﬁnition includes both cases:

surprise(A, ¬ (Ex ← ∧iEi))←
wait(A, Ex ← ∧iEi) ∧
bel(A, ¬(Ex ← ∧iEi))

A is surprised that the plan Ex ← ∧iEi did not take place if
A waits for the plan Ex ← ∧iEi and
A believes that the plan Ex ← ∧iEi did not take place

Therefore the above deﬁnition contemplates situations in which:
• the objective Ex is reached by Pr even without having activated the plan ∧iEi,, that is with
an alternative non conventional plan. Examples: to comb ones eyebrows with a toothbrush,
to switch oﬀ the light of the room (without getting up) by shooting the light-bulb, to mount
a horse using a hoist etc.;

• A expected a failure (considering the inadequacies of Pr in doing and in being capable) at the
objective Ex (implementing a particular plan) and instead Pr creates a surprise by reaching
the objective via an alternative plan;

• one of the events of the plan ∧iEi does not take place or even when all the elements of
the plan take place but Ex is not achieved, that is, something unexpected happens (as an
example, when the pole breaks in the case referred to above).

92

2 Ridicule Models
With the basic components provided, it is possible to construct various components of ridicule. A
number of models are presented which lead to ridicule and which are constructed by starting with
the components described.

2.1 No Ridiculous Event
Before showing some ridicule models, we present a simple case where no ridiculous event happens.

e1 = Pr stops
e2 = Pr observes the puddle of water
en = Pr makes sure on puddle depth close to
em = Pr decides to come back

A waits

Neither surprise nor inadequacy
A does not laugh

(a) e1

(b) e2

(c) em

In a ﬁrst analysis we can say that in such event sequence there is both lack of surprise, and

lack of inadequacy, therefore there is the lack of ridicule.

2.2 Ridicule Due to Inadequacy
Real ridicule model due to inadequacy is a ridicule frequent case, and it happens in day-to-day
life.

(d) e4

(e) e5

(f) e6

93

e1 = Pr stops
e2 = Pr observes the puddle of water

e3 = Pr takes a long pole
e4 = Pr takes a run-up with the pole
e6 = Pr sticks the pole into the puddle
er = Pr falls, wetting himself completely

There is a waiting period:
wait(A, Pr, |Will Pr jump over the puddle| )

Surprise in one of the conditions of the plan
Inadeguacy (A laughs)

2.3 Ridicule with a Double Wait and a Single Surprise

e1 = Pr stops
e2 = Pr observes the puddle of water
e8 = Pr takes a short pole

e4 = Pr takes a run-up with the pole
e5 = Pr puts the pool on the dry ground
ey = Pr falls, as the range is short

and he wets himself completely

First wait (A waits that Pr jumps)

Surprise in one of the conditions of the plan
Inadequacy
A laughs
second wait (A waits that Pr does not jump)

no surprise
A laughs

It is supposed that A has two reasons for laughing: the ﬁrst reason is due to an inertia eﬀect

caused by e8 event, the second reason is due to the intrinsic ridicule ey event.

2.4 Ridicule with Double Surprise and Double Waiting
Now we present a case of ridiculous event that is rare in the day-to-day life although it is a very
frequent schema in ﬁctional ridicule.

e1
e2
e9

= Pr stops
= Pr observes the puddle of water
= Pr takes an umbrella to use as a pole

e10 = Pr takes a run-up with the umbrella

e7

en

= Pr hooks onto a bar ﬁxed to the wall, with

the handle of the umbrella
= Pr jumps over the puddle

First wait (A waits for Pr to jump)

Surprise in one of the conditions of the plan
Inadequacy , A laughs

Second wait, A waits for Pr not to jump
A waits for the inadequacy of Pr

New surprise, no inadequacy, but A laughs

In the case of inadequacy another aspect which can be an important component can be added
to the model, that is the attempt of Pr to eliminate (reduce) the inadequacy. For example when
Pr acts as if he is having fun and he tries to show that he wanted to fall into the water on purpose.
This component is present when Pr knows that he has been ridiculous and with this action he

tries (unsuccessfully) to make the onlooker believe that he is in a normal situation.

Finally, we want to point out a last model of ridicule that is present when Pr is not aware of
his state of ridicule or ridiculous behaviour. In this model, even if it takes place as frequently as
the ﬁrst, Pr is not aware that he is the object of ridicule. For this reason, it is necessary to add
another component of the model that takes place, for example, after an inadequacy, that is:

bel( A , bel(Pr , Ex))
A believes that Pr believes that he has reached Ex.

94

2.5 Ridicule with Consciouness and Hidden Inadequacy
When inadequacy is present, another aspect, that is an important component of the model, can
be considered and it consists in Pr attempting to hide the inadequacy. This happens when Pr
believes to be ridiculous and he makes the onlooker A believe that he desired and enjoyed falling
in the water.

This component is present when Pr is counscious of his ridicolousness and with his action tries

(failing) to make someone believe that he is in a normal situation, pleasant too.

2.6 Ridicule without Consciousness
On the contrary of the previous ridicule model, where Pr is counscious of his ridicolous behaviour,
in the following model an unconsciousness component is present in the Pr cognitive state. In this
model, that is very frequent in day-to-day life, Pr is not aware to be an object of ridicule, and this
is the reason for the presence of another ridicule model component. This component is present
after that an inadequacy happens, and it is represented by the following conditions:

bel(A,bel(Pr,Ex)) A believes that Pr believes of having reached Ex.
bel(A,¬Ex)
A believes that Ex has not been reached

2.7 Ridicule Without or With Weak Inadequcy
Ridicule with weak or without inadequacy needs a wider discussion compared to the previous
models.

The considered model includes situations as the following ones:

e1 = Pr stops
e2 = Pr observes the puddle of water
e3 = Pr takes a pole
e4 = Pr takes a run-up with the pole
e5 = Pr puts the pool on the dry ground
e7 = The pool breakes
ey = Pr falls in the water and he wets himself completely No Surprise in the goal, A laughs

Surprise in the plan

Wait

It seems that there was not inadequacy on behalf of Pr because the pool does not break due
to a Pr uncapability. Anyway the onlooker A laughs. In this case A perceives the Pr presumtion
(in this case we assume presumption). Furthermore, even though Pr falls not volountary, there
is a discrepancy between the goal pursued by Pr and the goal really obtained. If we consider to
include in the concept of inadequacy also cases in which Pr is not able to reach Ex, depending or
not on his capability, this does not imply a substantial modiﬁcation of the inadequacy concept.
In this last case we simply adopt a concept of eﬀective capability instead of a potential one.

3 Fictional Ridicule: a Subset of Humour
In this section we consider the ridiculous situations that happen in the reality – but represented
in a ﬁctional context.

These models, in comparison with more general humour models, such as the two phases ones
(inconsistency plus consistency reconstruction) Suls (1976), have the lack of reconstruction al-
though they have the wait and the surprise components. Here we give a characterisation of a
subset of phenomena regarding humour that we called ﬁctional ridicule.

3.1 The Function of the Onlooker in the Representation
Although it is not a necessary condition, the onlooker presence in the representation increases the
humour potentialities of the represented ridiculous situations.

The function of a witness, inside a humoristic representation, is to stress the inadequacy of
the ridiculous person. The inadequacy is represented by means of a wittness embarassment,or

95

by means of showing indignation or simply by being silence. In such a way the witness has the
function of a human detector of inadequacy (visible to the spectator) and the inadequacy itself
has the eﬀect to decrease the fruition resistence barrier of the spectator.

So, the witness is a key element for a ﬁctional ridicule model. Till now, the onlooker of the
ridicule in real situations takes part into the representation. In the following examples we show
that a good ridicule representation can be built when including an onlooker in the representation.
The protagonist of the ridicule event pretends with the onlooker to reach a certain goal, also
showing some capabilities to be able to do so.

It is worth noting that very rarely the witness laughs.

3.2 Mr. Bean Fictional Ridicule
Mr. Bean humour is the best example or ﬁctional humour. Mr Bean comic eﬀect has a very large
repertory of inadequacies. He often reaches his goals, but he achieves a goal adopting a plane
surprising the spectator: he washes his ears with a teeth-brush, he turns oﬀ lights with a gun shot
to the bulb, and so on. In his humour model Mr. Bean uses very largerly a represented witness,
that is passive, does not interact with Mr. Bean, is serious and never laughs. (In the ﬁgure below,
the witness is blind, and the blindness is discovered at the end)

(g) I shot

(h) II shot

(i) III shot

(j) IV shot

In the spectator cognitive state, after the ﬁlm sequence that ends with the shot I, the following

mental attitude arises (according to the component (1)):

(a) bel(spectator,int(“MisterBean”,take oﬀ(trousers)).

The (2.1), for values (A::=reader, Pr::= “MisterBean”, Ex:== take oﬀ(trousers)), becomes:

96

(b) bel(spectator,goal(“MisterBean”,take oﬀ(trousers))) ←

bel(spectator,int(“MisterBean”,take oﬀ(trousers)))

From (a) and (b) we obtain:

(c) bel(spectator,goal(“MisterBean”,take oﬀ(trousers)).
For the considered case we suppose that the plane of (16) Ex← ∧iEi (Ex← E1 ∧ E2) believed by
the spectator, is:
Ex::== take oﬀ(trousers) ← unlace(belt) ∧ drop(trousers).
As the following belief holds:
(d) bel(spectator, take oﬀ(trousers) ← unlace(belt) ∧ drop(trousers)).
the expression (16) becomes:
(e)wait(spectator, take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt)∧ drop(trousers))←
bel(spectator, take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt)∧ drop(trousers)) ∧
bel(spectator,goal(“MisterBean”, take oﬀ(trousers))).

From (c) , (d) and (e) results:
(f) wait(spectator, take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt)∧ drop(trousers)).
For the sight of shots II and III, the spectator believes that Mr. Bean is not able to pursue the
plan (in particular he is not able to drop his trousers) and he makes a revision of his believes that
generates a new belief:
(g) bel(spectator, ¬ take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt) ∧ drop(trousers))
There is a surprise. In fact, from (17) we obtain:
(h) surprise(spectator, take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt)∧ drop(trousers))←

wait(spectator, take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt)∧ drop(trousers)) ∧
bel(spectator,¬ take oﬀ(trousers)← unlace(belt)∧ drop(trousers))

The surprise is obtained from (h), (g) and (f).

3.3 Double Humour Models
The components of a ridicule model (inadequacy, wait, surprise) are the basis of a more general
schema to generate humour.

The model oﬀers two possibilities to make people laugh and for this reason it becomes very
robust, i.e. it is able to make always people laugh independently from the quality of the ﬁnal joke.

In the humour present in Dylan Dog the main character Groucho assumes to be able to make

people laugh.

97

If his plan is successful, the spectator laughs because the joke makes him laugh. If his plan is
unsuccessful, Groucho appears inadequate for some onlooker represented in the scene, therefore
the spectator laughs because of the inadequacy of Groucho; in other words the spectator laughs
because of the ﬁctional ridicule.

Let’s consider the joke (Dylan Dog 27, Pag 64) reported in ﬁgure.
The goal of Groucho is to make Dylan Dog laugh: Ex ::= laugh(‘Dylan Dog’)

e11 = Groucho says: line 224

bel(reader,bel(‘Groucho’,int(‘Groucho’,Ex))
bel(reader,bel(‘Dylan Dog’,bel(‘Groucho’, ¬can(Groucho’,Ex))))

e12 = | Groucho tells the following joke:

when I was a child my parents
moved 12 times but I was able to
ﬁnd them each time |
e13 = says: Enough please ...
You’re driving me nuts !! |

If the joke (e12) makes one laugh we have normal humour. If the joke does not produce laughter we
have inadequacy and therefore humour due to the ﬁctional ridicule. The model adopts a witness
in the scene (Dylan Dog in e13) to emphasise the inadequacy.

At the end of the fruition process, the cognitive state of the reader is the following:

bel(reader,bel(‘Dylan Dog’,¬can(‘Groucho’,Ex))
bel(reader,bel(‘Dylan Dog’, inadequacy in presuming (‘Groucho’,Ex))
bel(reader,bel(‘Dylan Dog’, inadequacy in pretending (‘Groucho’,Ex))

References
Cousins S. B. and Shoham Y., (1994). Logic of mental Attitudes in AI, In Lakemeyer G. e Nebel
B. (Eds) Foundations of Knowledge Represention and Reasoning. Springer-Verlag LNAI n.810.

Castelfranchi C, (1988). Che ﬁgura, Emozioni e immagine sociale, Il Mulino, Bologna

Mele F., (1999), Ridicule and Humour. An intensional logical models for real and represented

ridicule. European Conference of Cognitive Science Pontignano (Siena)

Mele, F., Minei G. (2000), Un linguaggio logico temporale per modelli cognitivi, Atti del convegno

nazionale della Mathesis, Teramo 1999

Mele F., Minei G. Palladino M. (1997), Magopl: a language for multiagent oriented programming,
Proceedings of the Workshop in Advances in User Modelling, Sixth International Conference on
User Modelling (Chia Laguna Sardinia 2-5 June 1997) pp 10-28

98

Rao A., Georgeﬀ M., (1991). Modelling Rational Agents within a BDI-Architecture, KR91, Ed

Morgan Kaufman, San, Mateo, CA

Shoham Y. (1993). Agent Oriented Programming, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 60:51-92,

Suls J.M.(1976), L’apprezzamento di barzellette e cartoon in un modello a due fasi: un’analisi
del processo informazionale. In La psicologia dell’huomor ,Goldstein J.H., McGhee P.E., Franco
Angeli Milano

99

Embodied Agents: A New Impetus to Humor Research

Anton Nijholt

University of Twente

Department of Computer Science
PO Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede

The Netherlands

anijholt@cs.utwente.nl

Abstract

In this paper we survey the role of humor in human-to-human interaction with the aim to see
whether it is useful for embodied conversational agents to integrate humor capabilities in their
internal model of intelligence, emotions and interaction (verbal and nonverbal) capabilities.
For that reason we shortly survey the current state of the art of research in embodied con-
versational agents, aﬀective computing and verbal and nonverbal interaction. We adhere to
the ‘Computers Are Social Actors’ paradigm to assume that human conversational partners
of embodied conversational agents assign human properties to these agents, including humor
appreciation.

Keywords: Humor, Embodied Conversational Agents, Aﬀective Computing, Nonverbal Com-

munication

1 Introduction
It is certainly not the case that when we consider research on the role of human characteristics
in the user interface of computers no attention has been paid to the role of humor. However,
when we compare eﬀorts in this area with eﬀorts and experiments that attempt to demonstrate
the positive role of general emotion modeling in the user interface, then we must conclude that
the amount of attention is still minimal. As we all know, the computer is sometimes a source
of frustration rather than a source of enjoyment. And indeed we see research projects that aim
at recognizing a user’s frustration (Klein et al. (1999)), rather than his enjoyment. However,
rather than detecting frustration, and maybe reacting to it in a humorous way, we would like to
prevent frustration by making interaction with a computer more natural and more enjoyable. For
that reason we are working on multimodal interaction and embodied conversational agents. In the
interaction with embodied conversational agents, verbal and nonverbal communication are equally
important. Multimodal emotion display and detection are among our advanced research issues,
and investigations in the role of humor in human-computer interaction is one of them.

Our research is on multimodal interaction with and between embodied conversational agents
that inhabit virtual worlds. We envision situations where humans talk to embodied conversational
agents in the interface, where maybe it is not at all clear what they represent. Are they completely
artiﬁcial, autonomous, with built-in intelligence, and put in the environment by their owner or
designer? Do they represent a human interactor, including aspects of his personality, beliefs and
desires? And is this done ‘oﬀ-line’ or even ‘on-line’, where also the interactor’s physical behavior
is reﬂected (not necessarily one-to-one) in the animations of the embodied conversational agent?
The user or visitor of an inhabited world may interact with these embodied conversational agents,
e.g.
to engage in an information service dialogue, a transaction dialogue, to solve a problem
cooperatively or to perform a task, or to engage in a virtual meeting. Other obvious applications
can be found in the areas of education (including training and simulation), electronic commerce
and teleconferencing.

In previous years researchers have discussed the potential role of humor in the interface. How-
ever, during these years the potential role of embodied conversational agents was not at all clear,
and no attention was paid to their possible role in the interface. Useful observations, also valid
when we look at the possible role of embodied conversational agents, were made by Binsted (1995)
and Stock (1996). Binsted discusses how humor can make user interfaces friendlier. That is,
humans use humor to ease communication problems. In a similar way humor can be used to solve
communication problems that arise with human-computer interaction using natural language in-
terfaces. Binsted explains that the kinds of humor to be used do not have to be very sophisticated.
Suitable humor that can be used is self-deprecating humor. In some cases deprecating the user
or a third party can be appropriate, but this type of humor is very risky. Humor can make a
computer more human when it fails and can ease the interaction. Inappropriate humor, however,
is irritating and humor should be tailored to the user. When a certain user regularly works with a
system, the system can adapt the use of humor to the user’s taste. She concludes that humor that
is sparingly and carefully used can make natural language interfaces much friendlier. However,
there are not that many applications. There are exceptions, for example, Loehr (1999) discusses
the use of humor in a natural language robot in the interface, some researchers have been working
on adding humor, or rather humorous remarks, to (primitive) embodied agents in the interface or
explanation facilities, but these attempts are rather pre-canned and hardly take into account an
appraisal of the events that occur or have recently occurred in their world.

About this Paper: In the next section (section 2) we want to look at the role of humor in
human-human interaction. We discuss some general issues concerning trust and interpersonal
attraction and then, using the CASA paradigm (section 3), start discussing the role of embodied
conversational agents in human computer interaction (section 4), including multimodal emotion
display, and how we can display appreciation of humor. Section 5 has some observations about
feigned and felt emotions when an embodied conversational agent displays them. Section 6 is
about the appraisal of events in order to decide that the event is humorous. Section 7 contains
the conclusions of this paper.

2 The Role of Humor In Interpersonal Interaction
In interpersonal interactions, either at work or at home, humans use humor, humans smile and hu-
mans laugh. Humor can be spontaneous, but it can also serve a social role and be used deliberately.
A smile can be the eﬀect of appreciating a humorous event, but it can also be used to regulate the
conversation. A laugh can be spontaneous but can also mask disagreement or be cynical. Research
has shown that laughs are related to topic shifts in a conversation and phases in negotiations or
problem solving tasks. In an educational situation humor can be used by the teacher to catch
students’ attention but also to foster critical thinking. Humor allows criticism to be smoothed,
stress can be relieved and students can become more involved in joint classroom activities by the
use of humor. Humor can also be the right answer to frustration. In an (E-)commerce situation
we have negotiators that use humor to induce trust.

In this section we want to look at the role of humor in human-human interaction. We survey
some results from experimental research. Section 2.1 is devoted to three more general issues, not
necessarily connected to a particular domain, but playing a role in human-human interaction:
trust, interpersonal attraction and humor support in a conversation. More topics could have been
chosen, but some of these arise naturally when in section 2.2 we discuss some domains for which
we may expect that in the near future embodied conversational agents can play the roles of one
or more of the conversational partners in the current real-life situations. The domains we choose
are education, information services and commerce, meetings, and negotiations. The role of humor
in these domains is discussed by taking examples from the literature.

2.1 General Issues: Support, Trust, and Attraction
In this paper we are not particularly interested in a possible preconceived aim of a conversational
partner to create humor during a conversation or discussion. Rather we look at situations where
humor occurs spontaneously during an interaction or where it occurs in a supporting role, for

102

example to hide embarrassment, to dominate the discussion or to change the topic. Some of these
roles will get more attention in section 2.2. Here we have some remarks on humor to induce trust,
interpersonal attraction and how to show appreciation of humor during a conversation.

Humor support, or the reaction to humor is an important aspect of personal interaction. We
employ a wide range of humor in our conversations and the given support shows the understanding
and appreciation of humor. In Hay (2001) it is pointed out that there are many diﬀerent support
strategies. The strategy that can be used in a certain situation is mainly determined by the context
of the humorous event. The strategy can include smiles and laughter, the contribution of more
humor, echoing the humor, oﬀering sympathy or contradicting self-deprecating humor. There are
also situations in which no support is necessary. In order to give full humor support, humor has
to be recognized, understood and appreciated. These factors determine our level of agreement on
a humorous event and the grade of how we want to support the humor. This paper is in fact a
discussion on the possible role of humor support in the context of the design and implementation
of embodied conversational agents

Support may show our involvement in the discussion, our motivation to continue and how much
we enjoy the conversation or interaction. Similarity in appreciation also supports interpersonal
attraction (Cann et al (1997)). This observation is of interest when later we discuss the use
of embodied conversational agents in user interfaces. Sense of humor is generally considered a
highly valued characteristic of self and others. Nearly everybody claims to have average to above
average senses of humor. Perceived similarity in humor appreciation can therefore be an important
dimension when designing for interpersonal attraction. In experiments reported by Cann et al
(1997) participants had to interact with an unseen stranger. Before the interaction ratings were
made of the attitudes of the participants and they were led to believe that the stranger had similar
or dissimilar attitudes. The stranger responded either positively or neutrally to a participant’s
attempt to humor. As a main result it was shown that similarity in humor appreciation was able
to negate the negative eﬀects of dissimilarity for other attitudes when looking at interpersonal
attraction. In our group we have studied how similarity in attitudes is related to the development of
a friendship relationship. The development of a friendship relationship requires time, but especially
in the initiation phase the kinds of similarities mentioned above can be exploited. A discussion
on friendship in the context of the design and implementation of embodied conversational agents
has been presented in Stronks (2002).

Friendship and intimacy are closely related. Hampes (1994) discussed the relation between
intimacy and humor and in Hampes (1999) the relation between trust and humor. Trust is an
essential aspect of intimacy and the hypothesis that there also exists a correlation between humor
and trust was conﬁrmed. There are three key-factors that help us to understand this relationship.
The most important factor is the demonstrated relation between humor and extroversion (Ruch
(1994)). When we break up extroversion into basic components like warmth, gregariousness,
assertiveness and positive emotions it becomes obvious that extroversion involves trust. Another
factor, mentioned above, is the fact that humor is closely related to a high self-esteem. People
who are proud of who they are, are more likely to trust other persons and to reveal themselves to
them. A third factor is that humorous persons are eﬀective in dealing with stress (Fry (1995)).
They are well qualiﬁed to deal with the stress or anxieties involved in interpersonal relationships
and therefore are more willing to enter relationships. A discussion on trust in the context of the
design and implementation of embodied conversational agents has been presented in Bickmore et
al (2001).

2.2 Conversations and Goal-Directed Dialogues
Humor plays a role in daily conversations. People smile and laugh, certainly not necessarily
because someone pursues the goal of being funny or tells a joke, but because the conversational
partners recognize the possibility to make a funny remark fully deliberately, fully spontaneously,
or something in between, taking into account social (display) rules. We will not go deeply into
the role of humor in daily conversations, small talk or in entertainment situations.
In daily
conversations humor very often plays a social role. The role of humor is hardly discussed in

103

Deborah Tannen’s well known “That’s Not What I Meant!” (about “How Conversational Style
Makes or Breaks Relationships”), probably simply because the book is not about conversations
going well, but about conversations going wrong. Some issues related to the role of humor have
been mentioned in the previous section. It is diﬃcult to design experiments intended to ﬁnd the
role played by humor in human-to-human interactions, when no speciﬁc goals are deﬁned. Even
experiments related to rather straightforward business-to-consumer relationships are diﬃcult to
ﬁnd. Rather we have to deal in these situations with regulations protecting a customer from humor
by a salesman (never use sarcasm, don’t make jokes on account of the customer, etc.).

We continue this section by discussing the role that humor plays in some domains of interaction.
The discussion is certainly not exhaustive and neither is the choice of domains. It is meant to
show the importance of the role of humor and therefore the need to consider the role of humor in
situations where we try to replace one or more of the interactors in (multi-party) conversations
or dialogues with embodied conversational agents. The examples we mention are task-related.
For example, the teacher wants to teach a student, someone wants to get information about
theatre performances, I want to buy a pair of shoes. As another example, in a meeting we want to
exchange information, solve a problem or negotiate with the other participants. In section 4 of this
paper we will mention some examples of conversational situations, (not necessarily commercial)
information service situations and business-to-consumer situations that have been modeled using
embodied conversational agents (among others, a virtual receptionist, a virtual tourist guide, a
car saleswoman, a female bartender). However, the (possible) role of humor in these situations is
rather restricted and hardly any comparisons have been made with the real-life situations.

When we look at more goal-directed situations, teaching seems to be one ﬁeld where the
use of humor in the teaching process has received reasonable attention. What is the role of
humor as a teaching tool? Many beneﬁts have been mentioned and sometimes made explicit in
experiments. Among them are motivating eﬀects on attention, promotion of comprehension and
retention of information, more pleasurable learning experience, development of aﬀective feelings
toward content, fostering of creative thinking, reducing anxiety, etc. The role of humor during
instruction, its social and aﬀective functions for teaching and implications for classroom practice
has been discussed in several papers (see Price (-) for an example). Despite the many experiments,
it seems to be hard to generalize from the experiments that are conducted Ziv (1988).

There are more interesting examples of studies about the role of humor in interaction processes.
For example, the role of humor and laughter during negation processes is another issue that
has received attention. In Adelswaard (1998) several tape recordings made during international
negotiations have been analyzed. One of their research questions concerned the interactional
position of laughter: When do we laugh during interaction? Diﬀerent phases during negotiation
can be distinguished. Laughing events turned out to be related to the phase boundaries and also
to discourse boundaries (topic shifts). Hence, laughter serves interactional goals. The distinction
between unilateral and joint laughter is also important. Mutual laughter often reﬂects consensus,
unilateral laughter often serves the same function as intonation. Moreover, this distinction is
related to social issues. Who is dominant in the negotiation, who has the advantage, and for what
reasons? Attitudes towards topics discussed are also reﬂected in the laughing events: which topics
are important, sensitive or face threatening?

Describing and explaining the occurrence of humor in small task-oriented meetings is the topic
of a research study conducted by Consalvo (1989). The study gives good insight in humor’s impor-
tant role within management meetings. A humorous event was deﬁned as the situation in which
at least one of the participants laughed. An interesting and unforeseen ﬁnding was the patterned
occurrence of laughter associated with the diﬀerent phases of the meeting. The opening phase is
characterized by its stiﬀness and serious tone and the atmosphere of distrust. Humor in this phase
is infrequent. This is in contrast with the second, transitional phase that lasts only a couple of
minutes and the humorous interactions are frequent and for the ﬁrst time during the meeting all
participants laugh. Their laughter conveys the agreement that the problem can be solved and the
commitment of the individual participants. The last phase, the problem-solving phase contains
a lot more humorous events than the opening phase, but still less than the transitional phase.
Humor echoes the progression of a meeting and can be both constructive or destructive. It can

104

be an important tool for management and leadership, because appropriate humor can smoothen
the task-oriented processes through cultivating an environment where freedom and ﬂexibility will
ﬂourish.

Any reader will know about other examples of interactions that involve the role of humor.
What about a tourist guide, explaining the history of a cathedral, a bartender that soothes a tense
situation, or a car saleswoman who knows how to handle sexual harassment by using humor?

3 Computers As Social Actors
In the research on the ‘computers are social actors’ (CASA) paradigm (see e.g. Reeves and Nass
(1996)) it has been convincingly demonstrated that people interact with computers as if they were
social actors. Due to the way we can let a computer interact, people may ﬁnd the computer
polite, dominant, extrovert, introvert, or whatever attitudes or personality (traits) we can display
in a computer. Moreover, they react to these attitudes and traits as if a human being displayed
them. As an example, consider the situation where a person interacts with the computer in order
to perform a certain task. When, after completing the task, the person is asked by the same
computer about its (i.e., the computer’s) behavior, the user is much more positive than when
asked this question while sitting behind an other computer. From these CASA experiments we
conclude that it is possible, at least in principle, to design systems that are perceived as social
actors and that can display characteristics that elicit positive feelings about an interaction, even
though the interaction is not considered as perfect from the user’s point of view.

As mentioned above, humor plays an important role in interpersonal interactions. And so do
smiles. We will return to the role of smiles later. Will humor in the interface have similar eﬀects
as in interpersonal interactions? In Morkes et al. (1998), experiments are reported that have been
performed to examine the eﬀects of humor in task-oriented computer-mediated communication
and in human-computer interaction. It was shown that humor could have many positive eﬀects.
For example, participants who had received jokes during the interaction rated a system as more
likable and competent. They smiled and laughed more, they responded in a more sociable manner
and reported greater cooperation. The study provides strong evidence that humor should be
incorporated in computer mediated communication and human-computer interaction systems.

Figure 1: Examples of 2D and 3D embodied agents

4 Embodied Conversational Agents
4.1 Developments In Embodied Conversational Agents
In our research on natural interactivity between humans and computers we adhere to the CASA
paradigm. Embodied conversational agents (ECAs) have become a well-established research area.
Embodied agents are agents that are visible in the interface as animated cartoon characters or ani-
mated objects resembling human beings. Sometimes they just consist of an animated talking face,
displaying facial expressions and, when using speech synthesis, having lip synchronization. These
agents are used to inform and explain or even to demonstrate products or sequences of activities
in educational, e-commerce or entertainment settings. Experiments have shown that ECAs can
increase the motivation of a student or a user interacting with the system. In Lester et al. (1997)
showed that a display of involvement by an embodied conversational agent motivates a student
in doing (and continuing) his or her learning task. Some examples of embodied conversational

105

agents are shown in Figure 1. From left to right we see: Jennifer James, a car saleswoman who
attempts to build relationships of aﬀection, trust and loyalty with her customers, Karin, informing
about theatre performances and selling tickets, Layla, a virtual receptionist, Carmen, a mother
undergoing therapy, and Steve, educating a student.

Current research deals with improving intelligent behavior of these ECAs, but also with adding
emotional behavior and personality. Improving intelligent behavior requires using techniques from
artiﬁcial intelligence, in particular natural language processing. Domain knowledge and reasoning
capabilities have to be modeled. Agent models have been developed that allow separation between
the beliefs, desires and intentions of an agent. For systems consisting of multiple agents formal
communication languages have been developed that allow the transfer of information from one
agent to another. Together with dialogue modeling techniques rudimentary natural language
interaction with such agents is becoming possible. Speech input remains diﬃcult to realize, speech
output can be of acceptable quality.

Despite improvements we cannot expect that in the near future these agents can match human
capabilities.
In Bates (-) the notion of ‘believability’ was introduced in this ﬁeld of research.
Believability is present in an ECA when despite a lack of realism communication using a multiple
of modalities leads to a suspension of disbelief by the human conversational partner.
‘Trust’ in
an embodied conversational agent is a related issue. Do we trust an agent that plays the role of a
doctor or a salesperson? The role of small talk for, among others, inducing trust in an embodied
real estate agent is discussed in Bickmore et al (2001).
It is an example of sometimes subtle
capabilities that help to improve the believability of an embodied agent. Clearly, humor is very
much related to many of the natural interaction issues mentioned above: emotions, personality,
attraction, and trust. Until now we have not seen much research going on into embodied agents
that interpret or generate humor in the interface. Nevertheless we see attempts to maintain
an emotional state and generate facial expressions and other display of emotions from such an
emotional state. This may cause an agent to smile at an appropriate moment.

4.2 Nonverbal and Affective Interaction In Embodied Agents
An embodied agent has a face.
It may have a body, arms, hands and legs. We can give it
rudimentary intelligence and capabilities to have verbal and nonverbal interaction. Nonverbal
signals come from facial expressions, gaze behavior, eyebrow movements, gestures, body posture,
and head and body movements. Nonverbal signals can also be made available in the voice of an
ECA. Communicative behavior is dependent on the personality that has been modeled in an ECA.
In previous years we have seen the emergence of aﬀective computing. Although many research
results on modeling of aﬀect are available, it is certainly not the case that a comprehensive theory
of aﬀect modeling is available. Reasons to include emotion modeling in intelligent systems are,
among others, to enable decision-making in situations where it is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to
make rational decisions, to aﬀord recognition of a user’s emotions in order to give better and more
natural feedback, and to provide display of emotions. Especially when the interface includes an
embodied conversational agent, it seems rather obvious that the user expects a display of emotions
and some recognition of emotions by the embodied agent. On the other hand, in order to improve
the interaction performance of embodied agents they should integrate and use multimodal infor-
mation obtained from their human conversational partner. Although measurement techniques and
technology are becoming available to detect multimodal displayed emotions in human interactants
(cameras, microphones, eye and head trackers, expression glasses, face sensors, movement sensors,
pressure sensitive devices, haptic devices and physiological sensors) here we will not discuss the
display of humor emotions, e.g. enjoyment, by the human interactant (and preferably be perceived
by an ECA). Obviously, although useful, we would rather have an ECA understand why the events
that take place generate enjoyment by its conversational partner and why the ECA itself should
display enjoyment because of its appreciation of the humorous situation. Display of enjoyment
should follow from some emotional state that has been computed from sensory inputs of a human
interactant, but in the ﬁrst place from an appraisal of the events that happen or have happened
simultaneously or very recently. A usual standpoint is that of appraisal theory, the evaluation of

106

situations and categorizing arising aﬀective states.

4.3 Displaying Humor Appreciation In The Face and In The Voice
In Cowie (2000), when discussing the display of emotions in speech, Roddy Cowie mentioned, “A
major topic is raised here for want of a better place. It is humour. Humour appears to have strong
links to both control and emotional mixture. It may express anger or bleakness or happiness, and
our explorations suggest that it is very often used as the preferred way of signalling these emotions
without violating display rules. A useful way of making the point is in terms of artiﬁcial agents.
If they are going to show emotion, we surely hope that they would show a little humour too.”
Facial expressions and speech are the primary sources for obtaining information of the aﬀective
state of an interactant. So, we conclude that an embodied conversational agent ﬁrst of all needs
to display emotions and humor appreciation through facial expressions and the voice.

In speech, emotion (or emotion changes) can be detected by looking at deviations from personal,
habitual vocal settings of a speaker because of emotional arousal. Cues come from loudness, pitch,
vibrato, precision of articulation, etc. See e.g. Kappes et al. (1991) for observations, including
a discussion of cues that are related to detecting enjoyment in the voice. The vocalization of
laughter is another interesting issue for embodied conversational agents.

Figure 2: Blending of happiness and surprise

To describe emotions and their visible facial actions, facial (movement) coding systems have
been introduced. In these systems facial units have been selected to make up conﬁgurations of
muscle groups associated with particular emotions. The timing of facial actions has also been
described. Using these systems, the relation between emotions and facial movements can be
studied. For example, it can be described how emotion representations can be mapped on the
contraction levels of facial muscle conﬁgurations. Modalities in the face that show aﬀect also
include movements of lips, eyebrows, color changes in the face, eye movement and blinking rate.
Cues combine into expressions of anger, into smiles, grimaces or frowns, into yawns, jaw-droop,
etc. Happiness, for example, may show in increasing blinking rate. Obviously, when using a talking
face, a designer can deliberately put emphasis on particular facial actions during interaction. In
Figure 2 we display a face from our own research that uses a fuzzy-rule based system to map an
emotional state on muscle contraction values (Duy et al. (2001)).

Smiles and laughs are the usual responses to humor. As mentioned in previous sections,
laughs and smiles also serve social and (discourse) interactional goals. In Eckman (1985) eighteen
diﬀerent smiles are distinguished. A smile can be a greeting; it can mean incredulity, aﬀection,
embarrassment or discomfort, to mention a few. Smiling does not always accompany positive
feelings. That makes it important to be able to display the right kinds of smiles at the right time
on the face of an embodied conversational agent. Frank and Ekman (1993) discuss the ‘enjoyment’
smile, the particular type of smile that accompanies happiness, pleasure, or enjoyment. The facial

107

movements that are involved in this smile are involuntary, they originate from other parts in
the brain than the voluntary movements and have a diﬀerent manifestation. Morphological and
dynamic markers have been found to distinguish enjoyment smiles from others. The main, best
validated marker is known as the Duchenne marker or Duchenne’s smile, the presence of orbicular
oculi action (the muscle surrounding the eyes) in conjunction with zygomatic major action (muscles
on both sides of the face that pull up the mouth corners). The Duchenne smile can reliably be
identiﬁed visually. Although some people can produce it consciously, it probably is the best facial
cue for deciding enjoyment and therefore an embodied conversational agent should show it in
the case of sharing humorous events with its human partner. For a survey of hypotheses and
empirical ﬁndings regarding the involvement of muscles in the laughter facial expression see Ruch
and Ekman (2001). Laughter also involves changes in posture and body movements. Again, we
need to distinguish between diﬀerent types of laughter (spontaneous, social, suppressed).

5 Feigned or Felt?
In applications using embodied conversational agents we have to decide which smiles and laughs to
use while interacting with a human conversational partner. When a virtual teacher smiles, should
it be a Duchenne smile? Is the embodied agent ‘really’ amused or does it only display a polite smile
because it does not really like the joke made by its human conversational partner. Or should it
not laugh or smile at all because of this politically incorrect joke? As mentioned by Cowie (2000):
“People respond negatively to displays of emotion that are perceived as simulated, and that is a real
issue for agents that are intended to convey emotion.” Will our attempts to introduce believability
not be hampered by the impossibility to convey emotions in a believable way? Maybe we accept
poor quality speech synthesis, maybe we accept poor quality facial expression (compared with
human speech and human facial expressions), but will we accept the same for emotion display,
in particular display related to an appreciation of a humorous event conveyed through these
channels? Note, that when we talk about a humorous event, we include events that appear in a
story being told by a virtual agent in interaction with a human conversational partner, events that
are interpreted from a sequence of utterances in a dialogue, events that are visualized in a virtual
environment, or events that need interpretation of integrated virtual and real-life interactions.
These are interesting issues, but in our view not diﬀerent from other observations on believability
of embodied agents. In some situations, assuming that quality allows it, a synthesized voice or face
may express acted pleasure (or anger), in other situations genuine pleasure (or anger). Whether
it sounds or looks sincere depends on being able to suspend disbelief in the human partner of the
agent. Interesting in this respect is the work of Marquis and Elliott (1994) who discuss research
on embodied poker-playing agents (with a human partner) that can display, based on the OCC
model deliberately display false emotions in the face and in the voice.

6 Appraisal of Humorous Events
It is clear from the observations we made in the previous sections that there is a need for models
that allow generation, prediction, detection and interpretation of humorous events. There is
also a need to be able to generate, display and interpret smiles and laughs in a context that
is not necessarily found humorous by an embodied conversational agent, but that nevertheless
may lead to smiles and laughs, for example to keep a conversation going. We think that it
seems to be quite natural to make a step from event appraisal theories for emotion to appraisal
theories for humorous events, in order to obtain embodied conversational agents that smile or
laugh at the right moment, making them more believable. Some of these theories have been
designed with computation in mind. How can we elicit and display emotions using a computational
model? One rather mature theory for calculating cognitive aspects of emotions is the OCC model
Ortony et al. (1988), a framework of 22 distinct emotion types. In later years Ortony (2001) it
was suggested to collapse this scheme to ﬁve distinct positive and ﬁve distinct negative aﬀective
reactions, under the assumption that this should be suﬃcient for building believable aﬀective
agents (“with the potential for a rich and varied emotional life”). In several (mostly, stripped-

108

down) versions, the model has been used. E.g., in the OZ-project Reilly and Bates (1992), which is
concerned with the development of a theatre world inhabited by emotional agents. In the Carmen
project (Marsella et al. (2000)) event appraisal is used to recognize and process feelings of guilt
and anger in a setting where an embodied conversational agent talks with a mother of children
with leukemia.

We think it is useful to review existing theories and observations concerning the appraisal of
(humorous) situations (available as events, in conversation, in verbal descriptions or stories) in
terms of possible agent models that include explicit modules for beliefs, desires, intentions and
emotions. For example, it would be worthwhile to investigate how such a model can include
reasoning mechanisms about situations where there is the feeling that the situation is normal,
while at the same time there is a violation of a certain commitment of the agent about how things
ought to be. With this view in mind it seems useful to look at the violation theory discussed in
Veatch (1998), attempts to deﬁne degrees of incongruity Deckers (2001), attempts to deﬁne humor
in terms of violations of Grice’s conversational maxims (Attardo (1993)), proposals to deﬁne and
explain humor or laughter in terms of perceptual, aﬀective, and response patterns (Russel (2000)),
but also ‘measures’ made possible by a Situational Humor Response Questionnaire (measures the
propensity to laugh in a variety of verbally described situations). Annotated verbally described
situations could be the basis for (supervised) learning of humorous situations similar as our model
of agent emotions learning discussed in Poel et al. (2002).

7 Conclusions
In this paper we were able to touch upon the state of the art of embodied conversational agents,
humorous interfaces and aﬀective computing. We think that from our observations it may become
clear that current research on aﬀective computing, research on generating and interpreting facial
expressions and research on embodied (and intelligent) agents can and should be combined with
humor research. This is for the beneﬁt of humor research and results can help to design new and
interesting applications in human-computer interaction using embodied agents.

Acknowledgements
This paper was written while we took part in the HAHAcronym project (Humorous Agent for
Humorous Acronyms). This is a European IST programme (IST-2000-30039) on Future and
Emerging Technologies, done jointly with Istituto Trentino di Cultura (ITC-IRST) in Trento,
Italy. Part of the material in this paper was taken from a deliverable we wrote for that project
(Mulder and Nijholt (2001)). I am grateful to Matthijs Mulder for his help in ﬁnding relevant
literature and to Lynn Packwood for proofreading the paper.

References
V. Adelswrd B.-M. ¨Oberg. The function of laughter and joking in negotiation activities. Humor.

J. of Humor Research (11) 4, 1998, 411-429.

S. Attardo. Violations of conversational maxims and cooperation: The case of jokes. Jourmal of

Pragmatics 19 (1), 1993, 537-558.

J. Bates. Virtual reality, art, entertainment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1

(1), 133-138.

T. Bickmore J. Cassell. Relational agents: A model and implementation of building user trust.

Proc. ACM CHI 2001, Seattle, Washington, 2001.

N. Bischof. The varieties of smiling and the problem of motivational acclimatization. Abstract.
In: Proceedings 8 European Conference on Facial Expression – Measurement and Meaning,
University of the Saarland, Saarbrcken, Germany, 1999.

109

K. Binsted. Using humour to make natural language interfaces more friendly. In: Proceedings of
the AI, ALife and Entertainment Workshop, Intern. Joint Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1995.

Bui The Duy, D. Heylen, M. Poel A. Nijholt. Generation of facial expressions from emotion using a
fuzzy rule based system. In: Proc. 14th Australian J. Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI 2001),
Adelaide, Australia, LNAI 2256, M. Stumptner, D. Corbett M. Brooks (eds.), Springer, Berlin,
2001, 83- 94.

A. Cann, L.G. Calhoun J.S. Banks. On the role of humor appreciation in interpersonal attraction:

It’s no joking matter. Humor. J. of Humor Research (10) 1, 1997, 77-89.

C.M. Consalvo. Humor in management: no laughing matter. Humor. J. of Humor Research (2) 3,

1989, 285-297.

R. Cowie. Describing the emotional states expressed in speech. Proceedings of the ISCA Workshop

on Speech and Emotion. Belfast, September 2000, 11-18.

R. Cowie et al. (eds.). Speech and Emotion. A conceptual framework for research. Proc. of the

ISCA Workshop, Belfast, September 2000.

L. Deckers. On the validity of a weight-judging paradigm for the study of humor. Humor. J. of

Humor Research (6) 1, 2001, 43-56.

P. Ekman. Facial expressions and emotion. American Psychologist, Vol. 48, No. 4, 384-392.

P. Ekman. Telling Lies. W.W. Norton, New York, 1985.

C. Elliott. Why boys like motorcycles: using emotion theory to ﬁnd structure in humorous stories.

Unpublished paper, School of Computer Science, DePaul University, Chicago, 1999.

M.G. Frank P. Ekman. Not all smiles are created equal: the diﬀerences between enjoyment and

nonenjoyment smiles. Humor. Intern. J. of Humor Research (6) 1, 1993, 9-26.

P.S. Fry. Perfection, humor, and optimism as moderators of health outcomes and determinants of
coping styles of women executives. In: Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs,
Vol.121, 1995, 211-245.

W.P. Hampes. Relation between intimacy and the Multidimensional Sense of Humor In: Psycho-

logical Reports, Vol. 74, 1994, 1360-1362.

W.P. Hampes. The relationship between humor and trust. Humor. J. of Humor Research (12) 3,

1999, 253-259.

J. Hay. The pragmatics of humor support. Humor. J. of Humor Research (14) 1, 2001, 55-82.

J. Hulstijn A. Nijholt (eds.). Computational Humor:

Interpretation and generation of verbal
humor. Proc. Twente Workshop on Language Technology 12, Un. of Twente, Netherlands, 1996.

A. Kappas, U. Hess K.R. Scherer. Voice and emotion. In: Fundamentals of nonverbal behavior.

R.S. Feldman et al. (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 1991, 200-237.

J. Klein, Y. Moon R.W. Picard. This computer responds to user frustration. Theory, design,

results, and implications. MIT Media Lab, 1999.

J.C. Lester, S.A. Converse, S.E. Kahler, S.T. Barlowe, B.A. Stone R. Bhogal. The persona eﬀect:
Aﬀective impact of animated pedagogical agents. Proc. CHI ’97 Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM, 359-356.

D. Loehr. An integration of a pun generator with a natural language robot. In: Proc. Intern. Work-
shop on Computational Humor, J. Hulstijn A. Nijholt (eds.), University of Twente, Netherlands,
1996.

110

S. Marquis C. Elliott. Emotionally responsive poker playing agents. In: Notes for the Twelfth
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-94) Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Artiﬁcial Life, and Entertainment, 11-15. American Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

S.C. Marsella, W. Lewis Johnson C. LaBore. Interactive pedagogical drama. In: Proceedings of

4th International Conference on Autonomous Agents 2000, ACM Press, 301-308.

J. Morkes, H.K. Kernal, and C. Nass. Humor in task-oriented computer-mediated communication

and human-computer interaction. In: Proceedings of CHI 98, 1998.

M.P. Mulder A. Nijholt. Humour research: State of the art. Deliverable D1, IST Programme
on Future and Emerging Technologies. Action Line: IST-2000-6.1.1, HAHAcronym: Humorous
Agent for Humorous Acronyms, October 2001.

A. Nijholt. Agents, Believability and Embodiment in Advanced Learning Environments. In: Proc.
IEEE International Conf. on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2001), T. Okamto, R.
Hartley, Kinshuk J.P. Klus (eds.), Madison, Wisconsin, IEEE Computer Society, 457-459.

A. Ortony. G.L. Clore A. Collins. The Cognitive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge University

Press, 1988.

A. Ortony. On making believable emotional agents believable. In: Emotions in humans and arti-

facts. R. Trappl P. Petta (eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, 2001.

M. Poel, R. op den Akker, A. Nijholt A.J. van Kesteren. Learning emotions in virtual environments.
Proc. EMCSR 2002 Symp. Agent Construction and Emotions, Vienna, Austria, April 2002, to
appear

K. Price. Humour and I.T. You must be jokin. WorldWide Web, Manuscript.

B. Reeves C. Nass. The Media Equation: how people treat computers, televisions and new media

like real people and places. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996.

W. Reilly, J. Bates. Building emotional agents. Report CMU-CS-92-143, Carnegie Mellon Univer-

sity, 1992.

W. Ruch. Extroversion, alcohol, and enjoyment. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences (16), 1994,

89-102.

W. Ruch P. Ekman. The expressive pattern of laughter. In: Emotion, qualia, and consciousness.

A.W. Kaszniak (Ed.), Word Scientiﬁc Publisher, Tokyo, 2001, 426-443.

R.E. Russell. Humor’s close relatives. Humor. J. of Humor Research (13) 2, 2000, 219-233.

O. Stock. Password Swordﬁsh: Verbal Humour in the Interface. In: Proc. Intern. Workshop on
Computational Humor, J. Hulstijn A. Nijholt (eds.), University of Twente, Netherlands, 1996.

J.J.S. Stronks. Friendship relations with embodied conversational agents: Integrating psychology
in ECA research. M.Sc. Thesis, Parlevink research Group, University of Twente, January 2002.

T. Veatch. A theory of humor. Humor. J. of Humor Research (11) 2, 1998, 161-215.

A. Ziv. Teaching and learning with humor: Experiment and replication. J. of Experimental Edu-

cation 57 (1), 1988, 5-15.

111

A Formalism for Misapprehended Identities:

Taking a Leaf Out of Pirandello

School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Greenwich,

Queen Mary Court, Maritime Greenwich Campus, 30 Park Row

Ephraim Nissan

(Old Royal Naval College), Greenwich, London SE10 9LS, England, U.K.
~E.Nissan/CmsNlp

http://www.gre.ac.uk/~E.Nissan

E.Nissan@greenwich.ac.uk

&

Abstract

Epistemic and behavioural inadequacy do not make for humour by themselves, yet it often
involves them. The ‘madman’ theme is prominent in jokes. Non-joke humorous, or even in
the main not-humour texts, negotiate a maze of factors, from which humour may emerge.
I formalize some beliefs from Pirandello’s Henry IV (1922), a tragedy whose protagonist
is thought (by pragmatic rationality) to (delusionally) believe he is the medieval emperor of
Germany at a time when he has recovered. Diﬀerent characters are faced with problems rooted
in having been schooled or not in medieval history. For example, some women hired to be
“Berta of Susa” (Henry IV’s wife), allegedly each myrthfully announced herself to the deluded
protagonist as being Berta and as harking back from Susa (a town in Piedmont). Apart from
the protagonist epistemic inadequacy, they are laughing because of reasons diﬀerent from those
of his social peers, or of the servants who impersonate his vassals. My formalism (part of a
broader project on capturing identity ascriptions) tries to put some order in the quagmire.

1 Elements from a Pirandello Play
For all of the diﬃculty of capturing verbal jokes in AI models (Hulstijn and Nijholt, 1996), taking
on non-joke humorous text (or on humour in some non-humour text) is by far a more daunting
task (Attardo 1996; Nissan, Columbus, in press). Raskin (1996) and Attardo in their works have
shown how, basically, it’s amenability to competing scripts (loosely meant), that undelies humour.
In a goal-driven approach to understanding, Dyer emphasized planning-related inadequacies (Dyer
et al., 1986, 1988). In this paper, epistemic inadequacy (involving beliefs about one’s identity)
motivates behavioral mismatch on a parallel-worlds scale. Yet, epistemic and behavioural inade-
quacies by themselves wouldn’t make for humour; it’s out of anger, not amusement, that somebody
in Italy may snap at you: Lei non sa chi sono io! — “If only you knew who I am!
[And how
well-connected I am!]”.1 Still, in Pirandello’s Henry IV,
it’s violent behaviour that a medieval
emperor may aﬀord, while a modern private citizen is not supposed to, which time and again is
taken by characters to be evidence of an individual (the protagonist) being crazy; the story plot
contains three phases in which the protagonist, A, impersonates B: in turn, A is initially acting
B in a conventional perfomance, then A is delusionally, pathologically B, and ﬁnally A is B by
imposture, the latter in a special sense that will emerge in the discussion. Here is the pr´ecis of

1Many would poke fun at the very phenomenon, however. For example, Prof. Shmuel Moreh of
the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, in a recent commemoration of Prof. Elie Kedourie (1926–1992), a
prominent orientalist from the London School of Economics, reminisced how, in Baghdad apparently in
the late 1940s, Kedourie and Moreh’s own brother, Jacob (Kedourie’s classmate), used to discuss “Elie’s
articles, before and after their publication in Baghdad newspapers. Their discussions were full of humour,
sometimes with ironic, absurd and sharp remarks mingled with high bursts of laughter or sardonic smile
[. . . ]. One notable example that they would repeat was that of a tribal chief [who was a Member of
Parliament, and] who repudiated the censure of the traﬃc police with the boast of thousands of tribal
gunmen at his disposal” (Moreh, 2001, p. 55, col. 3).

Luigi Pirandello’s play of 1922, Enrico IV; the amount of details included here is intended to do
justice to the intricacies of the dynamics of the characters’ own beliefs and beliefs they ascribe to
some other characters, as the plot unfolds.
The play is set in an upper-class milieu, at a villa
in Umbria in Pirandello’s own days. The protagonist, who is never referred to by his real name,
and—at the time in his life when the action as shown takes place—he is about 50. He imperson-
ates Henry IV, the 11th-century emperor of Germany (the one who had to humiliate himself at
Canossa), and is surrounded in the villa by servants who impersonate the emperor’s young vassals
from his secret council. Over twenty years before, acting in the role of Henry IV at a pageant,
the protagonist fell oﬀ his horse, and the blow on his head caused him to enter a psychologically
abnormal state, because of which he believes he actually is Henry IV, who in turn is by some kind
of evil magic stopped at the age of 26, when he was begging to have his excommunication revoked
at Canossa. His entourage connives in posturing as though this is his real identity indeed. (In one
scene, the protagonist recalls a visit, a few months before, by Agnes, the emperor’s mother: this
was the protagonist’s sister in disguise, and she has meanwhile passed away. The protagonist, in
that scene, states he has overheard she is dead, but then he reckons aloud that as ‘he’ is 26, i.e.,
at the point in time in the life of Henry IV when he went to Canossa, it couldn’t be that Agnes
is dead, so the sorrow for this event has to be deferred by some more years.)

Unbeknown to his entourage, the deluded man has eventually recovered his old normal self,
realized his situation, and become aware that his rival of old, Baron Tito Belcredi, has supplanted
him in the good graces of Marquise Matilde Spina, the woman he was courting. Now 45, a widow,
and a fausse blonde, earlier in life—at the pageant (still a young brunette, like now her daughter
Frida)—she had played Marquise Matilde di Toscana (i.e., Matilda of Tuscany), cousin, foe, and
host in Canossa of the historical Henry IV. In the villa’s “hall of the throne” there are two modern-
style realistic portraits, intended to “mirror” the images of how at the pageant ‘Henry IV’ and
‘Matilda of Tuscany’ had looked. The mature blonde no longer looks like her old portrait, but
Frida, now 19, startingly does. Frida is betrothed to the young Marquis Carlo Di Nolli.2 The
protagonist decides to feign that things are as usual, in the sense that he would make his entourage
believe that he still thinks of himself as Henry IV, so they are to deal with him accordingly. The
action in the play revolves on a visit to the villa by Di Nolli, Matilde, Frida, Belcredi, and a
doctor.3 The protagonist had meanwhile revealed to the “vassals” that he has been his real,
modern-man self for a while, and has nevertheless feigned and went on with his medieval emperor
identity; he encourages the “vassals” to behave likewise. The revelation was leaked to Belcredi and
Matilde. The protagonist is talking to the visitors, in particular Matilde and Belcredi, as one who
has called the trick, yet persists on purpose, not being eager in the least to re-enter ordinary social
life. Even though he no longer harbours amorous feelings for Matilde (Belcredi is rather spiteful
as he realizes her still positive attitude to the protagonist), the protagonist reveals things intended
to dismantle Belcredi in her esteem (already meager, even though they are lovers); especially, by
making Matilde and Belcredi understand he knows it was somebody (Belcredi) who deliberately

2Di Nolli is the one employing the staﬀ and giving orders at the villa, as he is the nephew, guardian and
carer of the protagonist since the recent loss of their respective mother and sister. One of the “vassals”
procures theatre costumes; we even learn in passing that on occasion—at such times when the protagonist
gave order to convoke Henry IV’s beleaguered wife, Berta of Susa—diﬀerent women had been paying visit
to ‘Henry IV’ as occasional, mercenary, amused impersonators (who would each claim her name is Berta,
and she is from Susa, the town in Piedmont—the historical reference being beyond their grasp).

3By way of a therapeutic attempt devised by the doctor, these eventually masquerade: the doctor and
Belcredi as Benedictines, Di Nolli as Henry IV at the pageant of twenty years before, Matilde Spina ﬁrst
as Duchess Adelaide (Berta’s mother, the mother-in-law of Henry IV, expected to rebuke the emperor
for neglecting her daughter), then both Matilde and Frida as Matilda of Tuscany: supposedly, seeing real
persons coming out from behind the respective portraits, the protagonist is to be ‘healed’ and realize also
the time elapsed. When Frida comes out of a niche behind the protrait that so resembles her, and calls
out repeatedly “Enrico” (the referent is ambivalent: she is to call out and attract the attention of the
protagonist, but Di Nolli is to come out from behind the man’s portrait), the protagonist, seeing her in
ﬂesh, is quite scared lest he is going mad again. Frida herself is scared and proclaiming this aloud to the
other visitors, so in practice the protagonist’s own sudden distress is ignored.

114

caused his horse fall. The protagonist implements a crescendo of steps to put his “friends” in
embarrass, partly by blurring the boundaries between his modern and his medieval, imperial
identity. The protagonist explicitly mocks the visitors’ masquerade. (He actually regrets his own
lost youth. As a deluded person, he had partly dyed his grey hair blond.) They are old, he points
out, but as for him time has stopped, he declares in paradoxical derision, it’s Frida he now claims
for himself (and here he is posturing as the emperor) as “rightfully” his; he deﬁantly embraces
Frida, laughing scorfully. The visitors rush to separate them, and the protagonist imperiously
orders his vassal-impersonating servants to stop them; confused, the “vassals” obey him. Belcredi
hurls himself at him; “You are not mad”, he shouts. The protagonist, by reﬂex, draws the sword
of one of the “vassal” impersonators and, repeating interrogatively Belcredi’s statement, wounds
him. Matilde shouts that the protagonist is crazy; Belcredi, contradicting her while being taken
away, that he is not. Oﬀstage, the hubbub, then a high-pitched shout by Matilde, then silence,
signal Belcredi’s death. The protagonist, still onstage with the four young vassal-impersonators,
is shocked, and utters the closing line: “Now it’s so indeed, it couldn’t be otherwise” (“Ora s´ı. . .
per forza. . . ”); then, calling to his vassals: “Here together, here together. . . and forever!” Social
common sense dictates the interpretation of the play’s closing line. The protagonist, having killed
a man, could only save himself from the punishment met to sane killers by pretending he is ‘still’
Henry IV.4 Perhaps he hopes for detention in the villa.5

4When, before this summary of Pirandello’s play, I stated that the protagonist’s relation to his pretended
personal identity is at ﬁrst delusional, then as an actor (as indeed, not only he knows he is not the ancient
Henry IV, but he eventually makes his servants and then his visitors aware of his acting, and discusses
this with them), and ﬁnally as an impostor, this imposture of his is not in the sense that A pretends
he is B and that C believes that A is B indeed (where A is the play’s unnamed protagonist, B is the
historical Henry IV, and C is whoever in the universe of the play is aware of and has access to the given
person), but rather in the sense that A has committed a crime, and, starting right afterwards, tries to
make the rest of the world believe that his criminal action was committed while he delusionally was B,
and tries to dissuade them from thinking (the way he did, instead, shortly before the crime) that at the
very time he, A, was driving the sword into the man who quite shortly afterwards died of his wounds, A
was aware that he was the modern man A, liable under the modern law of the country (whereas an ancient
emperor could behave arbitrarily and even kill at will), and that moreover, A is thereafter sane and thus
punishable by law. To the eﬀect of conveying that false belief about his own liability for the murder, A,
the protagonist of the play, is going to behave as though delusionally, pathologically A believes he is B
(the ancient emperor) and behaves accordingly.

5Not an impossibility, even though typically he should expect to be committed to a hospital for the
criminally insane (a motif not unknown to the noir cinematic genre). At any rate, this is to go on forever,
as long as he is alive. Two factors militate for such an outcome (for him, the lesser evil): ﬁrstly, after
the wounding, it was Belcredi who realized that the recluse is sane, but Belcredi is dead and the others,
notwithstanding his proclamations right before, don’t share this realization, so as long as after the crime
the protagonist is taken to be insane, he will not be as liable as a sane oﬀender. Secondly, by behaving
insanely after the crime, the protagonist (who realizes the ﬁrst point) deliberately provides the witnesses
with what they take to be evidence that he was insane while committing the crime. The ﬁnale makes
the play amply satisfy the requirements for qualifying as a tragedy. In fact, the protagonists, as well as
Belcredi, and (up to a point) Matilde, all are tragic characters, because not only catastrophe strikes them,
but realization dawns on the ﬁrst two of their respective responsibility in bringing their misfortune about
(whereas Matilde, before Belcredi dies, acquires an awareness she didn’t have, and that would have been
relevant at turning points in her life history). The protagonist, having become a murderer, no longer has
the choice of abandoning his insanity posture and going back to anything resembling a more normal life.
As to Belcredi, he dies knowing (a) that this is because of the protagonist’s revenge, a revenge taken
impulsively yet while sane; and (b) that the people present, and Matilde in particular, are now aware
of Belcredi’s guilt in causing the horse fall. Even though Matilde settles for the insanity explanation of
the murder, her ﬁnal wail signals the loss to death of Belcredi, the convenient lover for whom she was
making display of disrespect even before the protagonist demolished him in her eyes. (The beneﬁt that
accrued to Belcredi from the horse fall was late to come anyway: Matilde had married somebody else, and
later on, once she was widowed, he had become the man in her life but, to her, just a tolerated, belittled
ersatz. Belcredi during the visit is spited by her being partial to—and, he ironizes, attracted to—the
insane recluse, all the more so during the revelations the latter makes.)

115

In the main, the epistemic states involved are amenable, somewhat laboriously yet with no
fundamental inadequacies, a representation of agents’ beliefs like the one described in Ballim
et al., in press (also see Ballim and Wilks (1991), Maida (1995, 1991), as well as, on logics of
knowledge, Fagin et al. (1995), and, on uncertainty, uncertain reasoning about agents’ beliefs
and reasoning, Barnden (2001)). It can be shown however how some devices in the play require,
as should be expected, more levels of formalization, in order to account for poetic conventions.
Detecting such ﬁne points is inessential for making sense of the plot and for reasoning on the maze
of who believes what; it would take an architectural component about literary poetic conventions
to model the ability to interpret such cues as well. Only part of those capabilities has to do with
analogizing with plot details from a known literary repertoire: this falls outside the scope of this
paper. Yet, the interference of a repertoire (intertextual impact on a plot or on wording) features
prominently in my Columbus model of a satirical pastiche (Nissan, Columbus, in press).6

2 The Formalism for Identity in Henry IV
First of all, let us introduce some useful notation. Our interest is practical representation, instead
of oriented to abiding to the theoretical neatness of logic-based inferential engines. Nevertheless,
by adopting a widespread notation (Lomuscio and Ryan, 1999, §1.3, pp. 120–121) from epistemic
logic research (Fagin et al., (1995), let formulae be generated by this grammar:
ϕ ::=
p | ¬ϕ | ϕ1 ∧ ϕ2 | 2i ϕ | C ϕ
where ϕ is a formula, p ∈ P is a propositional atom, i ∈ A

6The posture, on the part of the protagonist of Pirandello’s Henry IV, of replacing Matilde Spina with
Frida ﬁts in the same pattern as, in the classic horror ﬁlm The Mummy (a 1932 Universal ﬁlm directed
by Karl Freund and featuring Boris Karloﬀ), the revived mummy of an ancient Egyptian rebel priest, who
goes on to pursue the daughter of an archaeologist, in replacement of the ancient woman whose mummy
he destroys and who, the story claims, was reincarnated in his modern prey (whom he would like to
transform into a fresh mummy). Recognizing this similarity obtains once the recognizing agent detected
more elements in the analogy than the mere replacement of a person for another. And indeed, motif
indexes and concepts from structural narratology would come handy, to account for that. More remarks
are called for: how is the protagonist of Henry IV to behave after the murder is suggested allusively at the
start of Act One, in a conversation among the young vassal-impersonators in the protagonist’s absence
from the scene; one of these servants, “Bertoldo” (in real life, Fino Pagliuca) is a newly hired employee, in
replacement of one who in real life was called Tito (like Belcredi), and who used to impersonate the bishop
Adalbert of Bremen. Tito had died, and Di Nolli did not intend to hire somebody else in his stead, yet
had to have that post manned after all, by “Bertoldo”, because the protagonist had blamed Adalbert’s
disappearance on rival courtiers, and had declared he wanted at court Bertoldo. Nobody could tell who,
“historically”, Bertoldo was, yet they complied. That Act One mentions how “Henry IV” coped with a
dead Tito before Tito Belcredi even appears in the play, closes a cycle: it suggests how Henry IV is likely
to cope with the aftermath of Belcredi’s murder. Yet, it’s not like the two Tito characters are identiﬁed
with each other, other than in the aside detail of the symbolism of there being name-sakes in the play (and
which, unlike in real life, can be expected to carry a meaning, because of poetic conventions). One more
cycle obtains as Henry IV draws the sword and attacks, at the end of the play. Matilde Spina, recollecting
in Act One his horse fall, stated that on coming back to his senses he drew his sword when provoked by
revellers in costume, thus with a furor beﬁtting the emperor personality and role, not the actor’s; this had
signalled his folly. As to Marquise Matilde (Spina) herself playing at the pageant Marquise Matilde (di
Toscana), her character in Pirandello’s play explains she had chosen that role for the very reason she was
a name-sake; she had thus determined the protagonist’s gallant response (he would be at her feet like at
Canossa), and thus, his choice of his role as Henry IV as being the one accompanying her at the pageant.
Still, she admits that at ﬁrst she couldn’t recall the historical connection, other than vaguely. At another
level, Pirandello alludes to himself, but only in details, not as a full persona in passing himself oﬀ as one
of the characters; in fact, in the likeness prescribed for the doctor’s, the details of his having a pate and
a silvery pointed small beard point to Pirandello (but the doctor having to have a debauched satyr’s face
presumably cannot be Pirandello’s reference to himself! Rather, it perhaps pokes fun at Freudianism’s
emphasis on the libido). Moreover, a biographical reference to Pirandello obtains as Belcredi’s idea for
the Carnival pageant’s theme admittedly came from an illustrated German magazine which Belcredi could
only browse and not read, and which depicted the Kaiser at a pageant, clad in the pictoresque costume
of his former students union, qua alumnus of Bonn University, i.e., Pirandello’s own alma mater.

116

is an agent, and 2i ϕ denotes “Agent i knows ϕ ”. Moreover, 3i ϕ ≡ ¬2i¬ϕ (that is,
(cid:1)
“Agent i does not know that not ϕ ”). Here is some shorthand notation:
Eϕ ≡
i ∈ A
C ϕ ≡ ∞(cid:1)
E2ϕ ≡ E(Eϕ)

“Everyone knows ϕ ” (each agent came to know ϕ privately).

Power notation: “Everyone knows that everyone knows ϕ ”.

2i ϕ

E

ϕ

x

“ϕ is common knowledge”
(the eﬀect if ϕ was announced publicly).

x = 1
−1

B

stand for: Whatever is known to agent B about A .

t

A

ϕ stands for: At time
agent A holds

t ,
the belief ϕ .

−1 , t

A

B stands for: Whatever,
at time t , is known to
agent B about A .

Let

A

I introduce time:

, t

ω
A

respectively stand for:

α
t
A
M

A

stands for: The biographical context of agent A , at time t , t

The time at which agent A was born;
The time of the death of agent A .
α
A

≤ t ≤ t

now

.

M

A

≡

now
t

t = t

α
A

Mt
A

On the left, see one way (a union of sets) to describe the trajectory of
biographical-context states in a person’s life from birth to the present.
We discard this formula, ridden with repetitousness as it is, also be-
cause we need deﬁne discrete time increments that suit the trajectory’s
evolution. Later on I’ll provide a recursive deﬁnition.

stands for:

Υ
H stands for: Henry IV, Emperor of Germany, as per 2

Standard historiography.

−1H Υ , which is his standard

historiographical image; that is to say, whatever, Φ , is known to standard
historiography about H . Equivalently: Φ such that 2
Υ

Φ

P , P
H
P
0

stand for:

stands for:

The protagonist of Henry IV; and P insofar as 2P (P = H )
The protagonist, other than when he believes himself to be H .
So it’s: P ,



(cid:13)(cid:14)

insofar as 2P¬ (P = H )
 = Mt
(cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:13)



where:

P
0

P
0

Mt
A

t
h

(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:15)

A

−1 , t
(cid:13)

Mt
P
0

≡ (cid:6) Q

≡ (cid:6)(cid:12)e

t
A

t

A

(cid:7)

t
, h

A

, M(cid:12)t

A

(cid:7)

and where:

Mτ
is deﬁned here as a doubleton, a tuple
composed of the subset of people of A’s entourage at time t who (by then) are individually
known to A , and the history of A at time t .

The biographical context of agent A at time t

(cid:8)= Mt

α
t
A

< τ

τ

A

A

Of that much, by default, a person is (supposedly) aware:

t

Mt
A

A

117

, he holds

When P is P
0
accurate knowledge about
his actual biographical
context (including his
current milieu):

(cid:12)t ≡ max

t
A

A

(cid:7)

(cid:12)t

can be,

t
, h
A

≡ (cid:6) Q
t
A
(cid:7)

, M(cid:12)t
(cid:12)e

whose own second member is the latest past biographical context

We’ll come back to expectations, but we may assume that (unless we learn otherwise) an agent
is aware, at time t ,
of that same agent’s milieu, comprising the people in his (or her) cur-
rent entourage, as well as that agent’s history, which in turn, among the other things, comprises
the same agent’s past milieu states. The “history” member of the doubleton given above and
repeated here: Mt
in turn, conceived of as a doubleton
& ≡ &(cid:6) (cid:12)e
A
t
h
A
of the same agent, so that biographical context is deﬁned recursively:
(cid:12)e
≡ e
A
≡ (cid:12)e
the deﬁnition of (cid:12)t vis-`a-vis t . ”
b.d.i.≡ “by discrete increments like in

That is to say, the symbol (cid:12)e (surmounted by the
changed: (cid:12)e is an increment with respect to the

hat) stands for a set (of events in which agent A is
knowingly involved) resulting from a diﬀerence of
two sets, and having occurred in the latest inter-
val of time since the biographical context had last

(cid:17)(cid:12)t
− e
(cid:12)t (b.d.i.)
A

latest earlier point in time when the biographical
context was diﬀerent, whereas without the hat, e
stands for a cumulated set: see on the right.

By our convention:

≡ e
t
A

− e
A

just as:

τ = t

t
e
A

(cid:12)t

A

α
A

(cid:12)e

τ
A

t
A

t
A

(cid:12)t

(cid:12)t

(cid:12)e

t
Here is some semantics: e
A

stands for the set of such current events (here, conventionally,
from birth on) that involve the agent A , provided that A is aware of them. As a subset of

t
, we need include A’s state of relations with Q
A

, possibly are
A
events of the Self alone, e.g., some physiological event that stands out, say, a heart attack, or,
then, some thoughts that occurred to the given individual.
see Berge (1989)) can be reconstituted for Mτ

Likewise, a life-long trajectory of states (as a set of sets, thus as a hypergraph: on hypergraphs,

τ
sets, and h
A
Now, let us also introduce the following notation for standard expectations:

doubletons, Qτ

doubletons.

A

A

A

. Other elements of (cid:12)e

(cid:12)t

exp

exp

−1

ϕ
−1

u

u

Actually, we can rewrite

stands for: The expected knowledge held

by agent u about ϕ .

stands for: Whatever knowledge is expected

to be held by agent u .

t

A

Mt
A

exp

this way:

t

A

Mt
A

.

−1
H soc+

Pir

In particular, we need to explicitly deal with generally expected knowledge, to represent this:
exp

stands for: As much knowledge as could be expected to have been held,
concerning H , by a person from the upper classes of Italian society
in Pirandello’s own days (in which the play is set).
−1
−
H soc

= ∅

exp

Pir

By default, a person from the lower classes of
Italian society of Pirandello’s own days is not
expected to know anything whatsoever about
Henry IV, the Emperor of Germany. (See on
the right.)

118

In particular, such a person would not
be expected to know that there was

any time, at which H existed.

¬(cid:18)

exp

(cid:10) “ [∃ t , at t : ∃H ]”

−1
H soc

−

Pir

(cid:19)

Arguably, this is one factor involved in motivating the amused attitude (see below on
this) allegedly displayed by the female mercenary visitors who (as reported by one of the vassal-
impersonators in the play) used to pay visit to P
and to each announce herself as being Berta
H
and being from Susa. (To them, these are two separate, though concomitant assertions, as they
don’t identify the historical character named by the ﬁxed phrase “Berta of Susa”.) An educated
reception of that detail from the play will promptly recognize that the vassal-impersonators are
servants, thus from the lower classes, and that in turn the social status of the impersonators of
H’s wife was considerably lower than even the servants’, according to their basically belonging
(respectively) inside or outside the realm of a decent way of life. Yet, out of professional reasons
(stable for the servants, but sporadic for the hired women), they have been each made to acquire
−1
H Υ (i.e., the standard histo-
some subset of as per his standard historiographical image: 2
riographical image of Henry IV, Emperor of Germany), so that they could cater to the needs of
In fact, the ﬁrst scene in the play has a new member of staﬀ being taught about H and
P
H
about P
so that in practice, what both he and the
H
hired women learned about H ,

by his fellow vassal-impersonators V ,

−1
H V , or a subset thereof.

is 2

.

Let us turn now to pinpointing and symbolizing points or intervals in time which are relevant

for the pageant at which the protagonist had fallen oﬀ his horse.

y

Canossa
t

pageant

d
t

f
t

s−
g
t

s+
g
t

stands for: The time interval (the grainsize being one year) in which the Canossa

event involving the Henry IV, Emperor of Germany, occurred.

grainsize is one day.

stands for: Time of the pageant; it’s an interval with medium-sized granularity:
stands for: Time of P’s fall oﬀ the horse.
stands for:

f ⊂ d
pageant
t
t
s
Immediate past time vis-`a-vis the time t
value being g . This stands for grainsize also in the following:

the grainsize

of event s ,

stands for:

s
Immediate subsequent time vis-`a-vis the time t

of event s .

2H
During an extended interval in one’s life, from time t
q

, which occurred much later than
one’s birth, but much earlier than one’s death, agents q (i.e., P or the upper-class members of
his milieu) each came to learn the standard historiographical knowledge about H :

where:
H
On the day of the pageant, up to his falling oﬀ the horse, P was playing H , i.e.,
(where ϑ is a theatre mode, versus λ for taking a legal role); and moreover, P (like everybody at
the pageant) was conscious of this fact and of this attitude of P .
, but the other people present still believed that he
was acting, until, later in the day, a violent reaction of his reveals that he delusionally “is” H .

Once P fell oﬀ his horse, he became P

ϑ(cid:14)

P

Pir

H

119

(cid:18)

(cid:19)
−1
(cid:15)(cid:16)
H Υ

,

2H
q

(cid:14)

(cid:13) t ≤ t
(cid:13)

ω
q ,
r ∈ MtP

r

(cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:13)

q
r ∈ soc+

At t ,

α
t
q

(cid:13) t

q ∈ P



 (cid:20)
(cid:15) (cid:20) (cid:18)

At t ,

pageant

 Q

d

t
P

pageant

⊂ J

∃ j , j ∈ J ,
(cid:20) (cid:27)

(cid:20)



At t ,

t
P

f
t



(cid:1)

(cid:13)

t

t ⊆ d
(cid:13)

(cid:13)

< t < t
P =







(cid:20)





(cid:15) (cid:1)

pageant
t

:

−1 , t

P

(cid:28) (cid:20)

j
: P ∈ J

At t , t ⊆ d
ϑ(cid:14)(t)

(cid:19)

P H ⊂
t ≤ t
f
(cid:15)(cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:13)
 ⊂

ω
t
H

:

wakeup

Play’sPresent

< t
H at

y

Canossa
t

t

f
τ = t

Q

τP

MP = MH



Q

τH

α
τ = t
H

The latter formula in its entirety states that P was only party to the knowledge that he was
just acting at the pageant, up to his horse fall, whereas the other people of his entourage on that
day went on temporarily believing so even after his fall; and that from that fall, up to some time
before the play’s present, P believed that he was (mind this) Henry IV within the time span
of a year or so when the event at Canossa occurred (in fact, in the play, P thinks of “himself”
as though he was H at the age of twenty-six, and he refers to his present time as though his
self-humiliation at Canossa was current), yet he also believes that the people in P’s life (from the
fall, to the present) belong to the set of people in Henry IV’s entire life!

ζ

ξ

stands for a marital intercourse event between ξ and ζ. An upward crescent
stands for marriage, a state whose onset was the wedding (and whose end is divorce or
If that state holds, then socially it’s well-regarded and
either spouse’s death): ξ
ζ)} ]. Royalty
dutiful that [ (ξ
(where it applies) is at society’s top. Being a royal consort carries much prestige. Being mad
doesn’t. And being promiscuous for a fee is at the lowest end of expected appreciativeness by
social norms. Hence the laughter of F , i.e., each impersonator of H’s legitimate royal consort,
W. In P’s actual life, F was hired by the “vassal”-in-chief for P’s marital purposes:

ζ) at{k | k is-a EventTime ∧ {k} dots TimeInterval(ξ

ζ .

(cid:13)(cid:13)

(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:13)

(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:13)

(cid:15)(cid:15)(cid:30)

P = H

W

H

F = W

 ϑ(cid:14)

W

F

 (cid:20) (cid:29)

F

P

So when F
P eventually obtains — F is thinking — P would be delusionally associating with
the situation a situation diametrically opposed in terms of social prestige. This satisﬁes “script
opposition” as meant in an approach `a la Attardo & Raskin.7 Madness, sex, and posturing, each

7Victor Raskin’s “Script-based Semantic Theory of Humor” (SSTH) evolved into Attardo and Raskin’s
“General Theory of Verbal Humor” (GTVH). Attardo (1996), discussing non-joke humour, mentioned
(p. 95) the existence of an “expansionist approach” (to which neither he, nor I would commit ourselves),
according to which, non-joke humour could be treated as complex jokes. Yet, “the broad theory to be
developed will [possibly] need to incorporate some technical apparatus which was unnecessary in the SSTH
and GTVH” (p. 87). In SSTH, two claims on verbal jokes were combined: “such a text is compatible
in part or in full with two diﬀerent [loosely scripts” (‘script’ being used loosely), and “these two scripts

120

are a salient theme in the thematology of humour. Another element in F’s amusement pertain
to the onomastic requirement (which she soes not properly understands) for qualifying as the
deluded madman’s legitimate wife. Complying fulﬁls the adage: “La ragione si d`a ai matti” (“To
the mad, say:
‘Right’.”). There is much more that is worthy to be analyzed in and formalized
on Pirandello’s Henry IV. The tyranny of space prevents me from, e.g., developing here the
goal-and-plan kind of analysis of characters’ behaviour, authorial strategy and wording tactics, I
developed in the Columbus project (Nissan, Columbus, in press).8
References
Attardo, S.: Humor Theory Beyond Jokes. In Hulstijn and Nijholt (1996), pp. 87–101.

Ballim, A. and Wilks, Y.: Artiﬁcial Believers: The Ascription of Belief. Erlbaum, 1991.

Ballim, A., By, T., Wilks, Y. and Lieske, C.: Modelling Agent Attitudes in Legal Reasoning. In
E. Nissan and A.A. Martino (Eds.), Software, Formal Models, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence for
Legal Evidence, special issue, Computing and Informatics,

in press.

are opposite in a specially deﬁned sense” (Raskin, 1996, p. 9). Moreover (p. 11), in GTVH “the text of
the joke and the script opposition were redeﬁned as two of six knowledge resources (KR’s) constituting
a joke, Language (LA) and Script Opposition (SO), respectively”; “four more knowledge resources were
introduced, namely, Narrative Strategy (NS), Target (TA), Situation (SI), and Logical Mechanism (LM)”.
8ﬁrst announced in Nissan (1996). In Nissan (“Collegno”, in press), I analyzed beliefs, communication
events, and actions from Italy’s 1927 amnesia case of the Smemorato di Collegno, contended by two
alleged wives: a gripping drama that a 1962 ﬁlm of comedian Tot`o turned into a madhouse farce. Amnesia
suﬀerers recovering shreds of identity are of course a world apart from delusions (Rust 1990) and delusional
identities, the subject of a classic study by Milton Rokeach (1964) about the psychotic reasoning of three
committed patients who each believed he was the same historical character as the other two, without
this intruding into their routine coexistence. This is worth mentioning here, as handling paraconsistency
in reasoning is important for Henry IV. Marvin Minsky (who on jokes wrote Minsky (1980)), at his
presentation (Minsky, 2000) at AISB 2000 in Birmingham, announced a forthcoming book, The Emotion
Machine, on human individual cognition actually several coexisting identities, hence one’s contradictory
beliefs: “Thus, when someone asks what you ‘really’ believe [. . . that] make[s] sense in the Single-Self realm
[which is unrealistic]” (Minsky, 2000). At that same symposium, Keith Oatley (2000) dealt with “three
primary kinds of socio-emotional scripts”, analyzing in the process Shakespeare’s Henry IV, Hamlet, and
As You Like It. I would like to end this paper with a remark on a kind of multimedial humour, namely,
a musical joke in an operatic context. The opportunity for this is provided by a theme shared by the
following example, and Pirandello’s Henry IV: a character’s disillusionment with the possibility to escape
into an alternative world. James Parakilas (1993/94) pointed out: “There are no examples of exoticism
in the Western musical tradition more famous than the ‘Gypsy’ numbers in Carmen:
[. . . ]. A number
of scholars have examined the techniques of Bizet’s exoticism, [. . . ]. But there has been no comparable
consideration of why this musical exoticism [. . . ]
lasts for only half the opera. Once Don Jos´e stops
Carmen in the middle of her castanet dance, there is no Gypsy or Spanish sound to her music for the rest
of the opera, [. . . ]. Musical exoticism in Carmen is a matter of dramatic structure, not simply of local
color. Its function is not to characterize Carmen and her fellow Gypsies as much as to map a change in
the relationship between Carmen and Don Jos´e. The silencing of the exotic music in the middle of the
opera marks the moment when Don Jos´e follows Carmen into her world and discovers that he can neither
force her to be the Carmen he had dreamed of nor escape from his own world, from himself” (p. 33).
“The dramatic function of the Gypsy music is clariﬁed only after Don Jos´e, responding to the bugle call,
makes Carmen stop her dance and put down her castanets. In so doing he drives Gypsy music out of the
opera. Once he has taken up life among the Gypsies, exchanging the lure for the experience of their life,
they take on the style of the culture he thought he was escaping. In fact, the music the Gypsy smugglers
come onstage singing at the beginning of act 3 (“Ecoute, compagnon, ´ecoute!”) is no Gypsy dance; it is
all business, all discipline, practically a march [. . . ]. This music can be heard as a grim musical joke on
Don Jos´e, showing that for him there is no escape from the soldier’s life, no escape from his culture and
the rule of force that it has imposed on other cultures” (p. 46, my underlining). “Ironically, it is Don
Jos´e’s perspective that is represented by the use of Gypsy music in the opera; in eﬀect, the Gypsy music
is Bizet’s operatic substitute for M´erim´ee’s literary device of letting Don Jos´e narrate his own part of the
story” (p. 47). Actually, the irony arises indeed from there being—as required by Sperber and Wilson
(1981), Wilson and Sperber (1992)— both echoic mention, and negation.

121

Barnden, J.A.: Uncertain Reasoning About Agents’ Beliefs and Reasoning. In: A.A. Martino and
E. Nissan (Eds.), Formal Approaches to Legal Evidence, special issue, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Law, 9(2/3), 2001, pp. 115–152.

Berge, C.: Hypergraphs: Combinatorics of Finite Sets. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1989.

Dyer, M.G., Flowers, M. and Reeves, J.F.: A Computer Model of Irony Recognition in Narrative

Understanding. Tech. Rep., Computer Science Dept., UCLA, 1986.

Dyer, M.G., Flowers, M. and Reeves, J.F.: Recognizing Situational Ironies: A Computer Model

of Irony Recognition and Narrative Understanding. Tech. Rep., UCLA, 1988.

Fagin, R., Halpern, J., Moses, Y., Vardi, M.: Reasoning about Knowledge. MIT Press, 1995.

Hulstijn, J. and Nijholt, A. (Eds.): Automatic Interpretation and Generation of Verbal

Humor: Proceedings of the 12th Twente Workshop on Language Technology, 1996.

Lomuscio, A. and Ryan, M.: An Algorithmic Approach to Knowledge Evolution. In B. Knight
and E. Nissan (Eds.), Temporal Logic in Engineering,
special issue, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
for Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing (AIEDAM), 13(2), 1999, pp. 119–132.

Maida, A.S.: Maintaining Mental Models of Agents Who Have Existential Misconceptions.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 50, 1991, pp. 331–383.

Maida, A.S.: Review of Ballim/Wilks (1991). Minds and Machines, 5(2), 1995, pp. 277–280.

Minsky, M.: Jokes and the Logic of the Cognitive Unconscious. MIT AI Memo 603, 1980.

Minsky, M.: Future Models for Mind-Machines (draft). In Sloman (2000), pp. 124–129.

Moreh, Sh.: A Tribute to Elie Kedourie. (Reviewing: Elie Kedourie [. . . ], ed. by S. Kedourie;
Frank Cass, London, 1998; = originally: supplement to Middle Eastern Studies, 33(4),
1998.) The Scribe (The Exilarch Foundation, London), no. 74, 2001, pp. 55–56.

Nissan, E.: From ALIBI to COLUMBUS. In Hulstijn and Nijholt (1996), pp. 69–85.

Nissan, E.: The COLUMBUS Model (2 parts).

Anticipatory Systems,

in press.

International Journal of Computing

Nissan, E.: A Formalism for Competing Claims of Identiﬁcation: The “Smemorato di

Collegno” Amnesia Case. Informatics and Computing,

in press.

Oatley, K.: Shakeaspeare’s Invention of Theatre as Simulation That Runs on Minds. In Sloman

(2000), pp. 102–110.

Parakilas, J.: The Soldier and the Exotic, Part I. The Opera Quarterly, 10(2), 1993/94, 33–56.

Pirandello, L.: Enrico IV. Bemporad, Florence, 1922; also: B.M.M., Mondadori, Milan, 1948;
Oscar Mondadori 233, 1966, 1974. English translation: Henry IV, trans. J. Mitchell, Eyre
Methuen, London, 1979; trans. F. May, The University of Leeds, 1956. Also in Three Plays:
Six Characters in Search of an Author, Henry IV, Right You Are! (If You Think So), trans.
A. Livingston, Dent, London, 1922, 1923, 1931.

Raskin, V.: Computer Implementation of the General Theory of Verbal Humor. In Hulstijn and

Nijholt (1996), pp. 9–19.

Rokeach, M.: The Three Christs of Ypsilanti: A Psychological Study. Knopf, New York, 1964;

Arthur Barker Ltd., London, 1964; Columbia University Press, New York, 1981.

Rust, J.: Delusions, Irrationality and Cognitive Science. Philosophical Psychology, 3(1), 1990,

pp. 123–138.

122

Sloman, A. (Ed.): Proceedings of the AISB’00 Symposium on How to Design a Functioning Mind,

Birmingham, 17–20 April 2000.

Sperber, D. and Wilson, D.: Irony and the Use-Mention Distinction. In: P. Cole (Ed.), Radical

Pragmatics. Academic Press, New York, 1981, pp. 295–318.

Wilson, D. and Sperber, D.: On Verbal Irony. Lingua, 87, 1992, pp. 53–76.

123

HAHAcronym: Humorous Agents for Humorous Acronyms

Oliviero Stock and Carlo Strapparava

ITC-irst, Istituto per la Ricerca Scientiﬁca e Tecnologica

I-38050 Trento, ITALY
{stock|strappa}@itc.it

Abstract

HAHAcronym1 is the ﬁrst project concerned with computational humor sponsored by the
European Commission. The project is meant to convince about the potential of computational
humor, through the demonstration of a working prototype and an assessment of the state of
the art and of scenarios where humor can add something to existing information technologies.
The main goal of HAHAcronym is the realization of an acronym ironic re-analyzer and gen-
erator as a proof of concept in a focalized but non restricted context. In order to implement
this system some general tools have been adapted, or developed for the humorous context. A
fundamental tool is an incongruity detector/generator: in practice There is a need to detect
semantic mismatches between expected sentence meaning and other readings, along some
speciﬁc dimension (i.e. in our case the acronym and its context). For all tools, particular
attention has been put on reusability.

1 Introduction
It is time that Computational Humor is perceived as a ﬁeld that can deliver something useful.
The current dynamics of research support, for good or for bad, is based on the prospect that
the research themes are conducive to practical results in more or less short terms. In the ﬁeld
of information technology, generally there is an especially limited amount of patience for the
ﬁrst visible outcome of research activity. Another element for pushing toward some concrete
results is, on the other side, that by means of those constructive experience we, ourselves, can
become more aware of problems and necessities. Besides anything else we believe there are real
opportunities out there, that not always require a complete modeling of humor processes. We are
convinced that deep modeling of humor in all of its facets is not something for the near future. The
phenomena are too complex; humor is one of the most sophisticated forms of human intelligence.
It is AI-complete: the problem of modeling it is as diﬃcult to solve as the most diﬃcult Artiﬁcial
Intelligence problems. But some steps can be followed to achieve results. And when something
is realized we can note that humor has the methodological advantage (unlike, say, computer art)
of leading to more directly falsiﬁable theories: the resulting humorous artifacts can be tested on
human subjects in a rather straightforward manner.

Basically, in order to be successfully humorous, a computational system should be able to:
recognize situations appropriate for humor; choose a suitable kind of humor for the situation;
generate an appropriately humorous output; and, if there is some form of interaction or control,
evaluate the feedback.

And indeed society needs humor, not just for entertainment. In the current business world,
humor is considered to be so important that companies may hire ‘humor consultants’. Humor can
be used “to criticize without alienating, to defuse tension or anxiety, to introduce new ideas, to
bond teams, ease relationships and elicit cooperation”.

1HAHAcronym is a Future Emerging Technologies (FET) EC project (contract number IST-2000-30039) in
the context of Information Society Technologies (IST) programme. The consortium is composed by ITC-irst
(coordinator partner) and by the Centre for Telematics and Information Technology/Parlevink of University of
Twente.

So, looking at computational humor from an application-oriented point of view, one assumption
is that in future human-machine interaction, humans will demand a naturalness and eﬀectiveness
that requires the incorporation of models of possibly all human cognitive capabilities, including
the handling of humor. There are many practical settings where computational humor will add
value. Among them there are: business world applications (such as advertisement, e-commerce,
etc. . . ), general computer-mediated communication and human-computer interaction, increase in
the friendliness of natural language interfaces, educational and edutainment systems.

Not necessarily applications need to emphasize interactivity. For instance there are important
prospects for humor in automatic information presentation. In the Web age presentations will
become more and more ﬂexible and personalized and will require humor contributions for electronic
commerce developments (e.g. product promotion,getting selective attention, help in memorizing
names etc.) more or less as it happened in the world of advertisement within the old broadcast
communication.

We are concerned with systems that automatically produce humorous output (rather than
systems that appreciate humor). Some of the fundamental competencies are within the range of
the state of the art of natural language processing.

In one form or in another humor is most often based on some form of incongruity. In verbal
humor this means that at some level diﬀerent interpretations of material must be possible (and
some not detected before the culmination of the humorous process) or various pieces of material
must cause perception of speciﬁc forms of opposition. Natural language processing research has
often dealt with ambiguity in language. A common view is that ambiguity is an obstacle for
deep comprehension. Most current text processing systems, for example, attempt to reduce the
number of possible interpretations of the sentences, and a failure to do so is seen as a weakness
of the system. The potential for ambiguity, however, can be seen as a positive feature of natural
language. Metaphors, idioms, poetic language and humor use the multiple senses of texts to
suggest connections between concepts that cannot, or should not, be stated explicitly. Fluent
users of natural language are able to both use and interpret ambiguities inherent in the language
and verbal humor is one of the most regular uses of linguistic ambiguity.

The work presented here is based on various resource for natural language processing, adapted
for humor. It is a small step, but aiming at an appreciable concrete result. It has been developed
within the ﬁrst European Project devoted to computational humor. A visible and evaluable result
were at the basis of the deal. We have proposed a situation that is of practical interest, where
many components are present but simpliﬁed with respect to more complex scenarios. The goal is a
system that makes fun (Victor Raskin says profane) existing acronyms, or, starting from concepts
provided by the user, produces a new acronym, constrained to be a word of the given language.
And, of course, it has to be funny.

HAHAcronym is the ﬁrst project concerned with computational humor sponsored by the Euro-
pean Commission. The project is meant to convince about the potential of computational humor,
through the demonstration of a working prototype and an assessment of the state of the art and
of scenarios where humor can add something to existing information technologies.

The main goal of HAHAcronym is the realization of an acronym ironic re-analyzer and gen-
erator as a proof of concept in a focalized but non restricted context. In order to implement this
system some general tools have been adapted, or developed for the humorous context. A funda-
mental tool is an incongruity detector/generator: in practice There is a need to detect semantic
mismatches between expected sentence meaning and other readings, along some speciﬁc dimension
(i.e. in our case the acronym and its context). For all tools, particular attention has been put on
reusability.

2 State of the Art on Computational Humor
So far only very limited eﬀort has been put on building computational humor prototypes.

Indeed very few working prototypes that process humorous text and/or simulate humor mech-

anisms exist. Mostly they are concerned with rather simple tasks.

There has been a considerable amount of research on linguistics of Humor and on theories

126

of semantics or pragmatics of humor (Attardo, 1994; Attardo and Raskin, 1991; Giora and Fein,
1999); however, most of the work has not been formal enough to be used directly for computational
modelling of humor. In this sense Pepicello and Green’s work on puns (Pepicello and Green, 1984)
is an exception.

Within the artiﬁcial intelligence community, most writing on humor has been speculative (Min-
sky, 1980; Hofstadter et al., 1989). Minsky made some preliminary remarks about how humor could
be viewed from the artiﬁcial intelligence/cognitive science perspective, reﬁning Freud’s notion that
humor is driven by our mental “censor” which control inappropriate thoughts and feelings. Utsumi
(1996) outlines a logical analysis of irony, but this work has not been implemented in any way.
Among other works: De Palma and Weiner (1992), who have worked on knowledge representation
of riddles, Katz (1993), who attempted to develop a neural model of humor. Ephratt (1990) has
constructed a program that parses a small range of ambiguous sentences and detects alternative
humorous readings.

Probably the most important attempt to create a computational humor prototype is the work

of Kim Binsted and Graeme Ritchie (1997).

They have devised a formal model of the semantic and syntactic regularities underlying some
of the simplest types of punning riddles. A punning riddle is a question-answer riddle that uses
phonological ambiguity. The three main strategies used to create phonological ambiguity are
syllable substitution, word substitution and metathesis.

The last mention is for Jester (Goldberg et al., 2001), an on-line joke recommending system
using collaborative ﬁltering in order to recommend jokes adapted to the user’s sense of humor’.
It does not implement any linguistic technique for humor, rather it uses statistical techniques to
recommend jokes based on the user’s ratings of a set of sample jokes.

Almost all the approaches try to deal with the incongruity theory at various level of reﬁnement
(K¨ostler, 1964; Raskin, 1985). The incongruity theory focuses on the element of surprise. It states
that humor is created out of a conﬂict between what is expected and what actually occurs in the
joke. This accounts for the most obvious features of much humor: ambiguity or double meaning.
Moreover, what we have tried to exploit in the HAHAcronym project is incongruity planned as
terms that are ‘inconsistent’, not ﬁtting well together, disjointed, unsuitable. In the prototype
primarily we have exploited an “oﬀ-the-shelf” resource (WordNet Domains) to ﬁnd and employ
incongruous terms in re-analyzing and generating funny acronyms.

3 The HAHAcronym Project
As said HAHAcronym is the ﬁrst European project about computational humor. It is part of the
Future Emerging Technologies Program within the Information Society Technologies section of
The Fifth FP.

The main goal of the project is the realization of an acronym re-analyzer and generator as a
proof of concept in a focalized but non restricted context. We had to propose something that we
would be able to develop in a short period of time (few months) that would be meaningful, well
demonstrable, that could be evaluated along some pre-decided criteria, and that is conducive to
a subsequent development in a direction of potential industrial interest. So for us it was essential
that a) the work could have many components of a larger systems, simpliﬁed for the current setting;
b) we could reuse and adapt existing relevant linguistic resources; c) some simple strategies for
humor eﬀects could be experimented.

One of the purpose of the project was to show that using “standard” resources (with some
extensions and modiﬁcations) and suitable linguistic theories of humor (i.e. developing speciﬁc
algorithms that implement or elaborate theories), it is possible to implement a working prototype.
For that, we have taken advantage of specialized thesauri and repositories and in particular
of WordNet Domains, an extension developed at ITC-irst of the well-known English Word-
Net. In WordNet Domains, synsets are annotated with subject ﬁeld codes (e.g. Medicine,
Architecture, Literature. . . ) providing cross-categorial information. WordNet Domains
is organized for multilinguality and an Italian extension is already available. Other important
computational tools are: a rule database of semantic ﬁeld oppositions with humorous potential;

127

a parser for analyzing input syntactically and a syntactic generator of acronyms; general lexical
resources, e.g. acronym grammars, morphological analyzers, rhyming dictionaries, proper nouns
databases.

The initial results have been submitted to an evaluation by human subjects that eventually
have given indications for re-use of the semantic tools. Even if the scenario of this assessment
project is simpliﬁed, the tools developed will be reusable for other applications and, in principle,
portable to other languages.

Beside the prototype, the project produces an assessment of applied opportunities in the mar-
ket; an assessment of the state of the art in the ﬁeld and of what can be done in a short to
medium term. The working demonstrator is meant to convince about the feasibility and the
potential impact of a larger applied project.

4 Resources and General Architecture
In order to implement the HAHAcronym prototype, we have reﬁned existing resources and we
are developing general tools useful for humorous systems. As we will see, a fundamental tool is
an incongruity detector/generator: concretely we need to be able to detect semantic mismatches
between word meaning and sentence meaning (i.e. in our case the acronym and its context). For
all tools, particular attention is put on reusability.

Analyzing or generating verbal humor, calls for exploitation and adaptation and elaboration of
natural language processing resources such as lexicons, part-of-speech taggers, parsers, annotation
tools, knowledge representation formalisms.

The starting point for us consisted in making use of some “oﬀ-the-shelf” resources, such as
WordNet Domains (an extension of the well-known English WordNet) and standard parsing
techniques. The tools resulting from the adaptation will be reusable for other applications, and
are portable straightforwardly to other languages (e.g. Wordnet Domains is multilingual).

4.1 Wordnet and Wordnet Domains
WordNet is a thesaurus for the English language inspired by psycholinguistics principles and
developed at the Princeton University by George Miller (Miller, 1990; Fellbaum, 1998). It has been
conceived as a computational resource, therefore improving some of the drawbacks of traditional
dictionaries, such as circularity of deﬁnitions and ambiguity of sense references. Lemmata (about
130,000 for version 1.6) are organized in synonym classes (about 100,000 synsets). WordNet
can be described as a “lexical matrix” with two dimensions: a dimension for lexical relations, that
is relations holding among words, and therefore language speciﬁc, and a dimension for conceptual
relations, which hold among senses (the synsets) and that, at least in part, we consider independent
from a particular language. A synset contains all the words by means of which it is possible to
express the synset meaning: for example the Italian synset {calcium, calcio, Ca} describes the
sense of “calcio” as a chemical substance, while the synset {calcio, pedata} describes the sense
of “calcio” as a leg movement. A list of the main relations present in WordNet follows.

4.1.1 Augmenting WordNet with Domain information
Domains have been used both in linguistics (i.e. Semantic Fields) and in lexicography (i.e. Subject
Field Codes) to mark technical usages of words. Although this is useful information for sense
discrimination, in dictionaries it is typically used for a small portion of the lexicon. WordNet
Domains is an attempt to extend the coverage of domain labels within an already existing lexical
database, WordNet (version 1.6). The synsets have been annotated with at least one domain
label, selected from a set of about two hundred labels hierarchically organized. (Figure 1 shows a
portion of the domain hierarchy.)

We have organized about 250 domain labels in a hierarchy (exploiting Dewey Decimal Classi-
ﬁcation), where each level is made up of codes of the same degree of speciﬁcity: for example, the
second level includes domain labels such as Botany, Linguistics, History, Sport and Reli-

128

PHILOSOPHY

ARCHAEOLOGY

PALEOGRAPHY

ASTROLOGY

RELIGION

THEOLOGY

MYTHOLOGY

OCCULTISM

DOCTRINES

PSYCHOLOGY

PSYCHOANALYSIS

LITERATURE

PHILOLOGY

LINGUISTICS

GRAMMAR

HISTORY

HERALDRY

ART

PHOTOGRAPHY

THEATHRE

MUSIC

Figure 1: A sketch of the domain hierarchy

gion, while at the third level we can ﬁnd specialization such as American History, Grammar,
Phonetics and Tennis.

Information brought by domains is complementary to what is already present in WordNet.
First of all a domain may include synsets of diﬀerent syntactic categories: for instance Medicine
groups together senses from Nouns, such as doctor#1 and hospital#1, and from Verbs such as
operate#7. Second, a domain may include senses from diﬀerent WordNet sub-hierarchies (i.e.
deriving from diﬀerent ”unique beginners” or from diﬀerent ”lexicographer ﬁles”). For example,
Sport contains senses such as athlete#1, deriving from life form#1, game equipment#1, from
physical object#1, sport#1 from act#2, and playing field#1, from location#1.

4.1.2 Opposition of semantic fields
On the basis of well recognized properties of humor accounted for in many theories (e.g. incongruity,
semantic ﬁeld opposition, apparent contradiction, absurdity) we have modelled an independent
structure of domain opposition, such as Religion vs. Technology, Sex vs. Religion, etc. . . We
exploit these kind of opposition as a basic resource for the incongruity generator.

4.1.3 Adjectives and Antonymy Relations
Adjectives play an important role in modifying and generating funny acronyms. So we gave them
a thorough analysis. WordNet divides adjectives into two categories. Descriptive adjectives
(e.g. big, beautiful, interesting, possible, married) constitute by far the largest category.
The second category is called simply relational adjectives because they are related by derivation
to nouns (i.e. electrical in electrical engineering is related to noun electricity). To
relational adjectives, strictly dependent on noun meanings, it is often possible to apply similar
strategies as those exploited for nouns. Their semantic organization, though, is entirely diﬀerent
from the one of the other major categories. In fact it is not clear what it would mean to say that one
adjective “is a kind of” (ISA) some other adjective. The basic semantic relation among descriptive
adjectives is antonymy. WordNet proposes also that this kind of adjectives are organized in
clusters of synsets associated by semantic similarity to a focal adjective. Figure 2 shows clusters
of adjectives around the direct antonyms fast/slow.

4.1.4 Exploiting the hierarchy (e.g. geographic names)
It is possible to exploit the network of lexical and semantic relations built in WordNet to make
simple ontological reasoning. For example, if a noun or an adjective has a geographic location
meaning, the pertaining country and continent can be inferred.

4.2 Rhymes
The HAHAcronym prototype takes into account word rhymes and the rhythm of the acronym
expansion. To cope with this aspect we got and reorganized the CMU pronouncing dictionary

129

swift

dilatory

prompt

sluggish

alacritous

similar to 

fast

antonymy

slow

leisurely

quick

tardy

rapid

laggard

Figure 2: An example of adjective clusters linked by antonymy relation

(http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict) with a suitable indexing. The CMU Pro-
nouncing Dictionary is a machine-readable pronunciation dictionary for North American English
that contains over 125,000 words and their transcriptions.

Its format is particularly useful for speech recognition and synthesis, as it has mappings from
words to their pronunciations in the given phoneme set. The current phoneme set contains 39
phonemes; vowels may carry lexical stress. (e.g. 0 No stress, 1 Primary stress, 2 Secondary stress).

The current phoneme set has 39 phonemes, not counting variations for lexical stress.

4.3 Parser and grammar
Word sequences that are at the basis of acronyms are subject to a well-deﬁned grammar, simpler
than a complete noun phrase grammar, but complex enough to require a a nontrivial analyzer. We
have decided to use a well established nondeterministic parsing technique (ATN-based parsing).
Ordinarily, an ATN parser has three components: the ATN itself, that represent the grammar in
the form of a network, an interpreter for traversing it, and a dictionary (possibly integrated with
a morphological analyzer). As obvious at this point for the third component we use WordNet;
integrated with an ad-hoc morphological analyzer. As far as the interpreter is concerned, we
developed an ATN compiler that translate ATN’s directly into Lisp code (i.e. Lisp augmented
with nondeterministic constructs). Figure 3 sketches a portion of the acronym grammar.

adv

acr

jump

adv/adj

jump

adj/n

adj

n

v gerun 

pp

prep

pp/prep

push acr

n

n/n

pp/pp

push pp

Figure 3: A simpliﬁed grammar

Even if for the generation part we do not traverse the grammar, we exploit it as the source for

syntactic constraints also there.

4.4 A-semantic dictionary
The A-semantic dictionary is a collection of hyperbolic/epistemic/deontic adjective/adverbs. This
resource is particularly useful when it is necessary to complete a forming acronym (especially dur-

130

ing the generation of new acronyms). Some examples of this kind of words are: abnormally, ab-
strusely, adorably, exceptionally, exorbitantly, exponentially, extraordinarily, voraciously, weirdly,
wonderfully. This resource is hand-made using various dictionaries as information sources.

Other important lexical resources are: an euphemism dictionary, a proper noun dictionary,

lists of typical foreign words commonly used in the language with some strong connotation.

4.5 Implementation
To get an ironic or “profaning” re-analysis of a given acronym, the system follows various steps
and strategies. The main elements of the algorithm can be schematized as follows:

• acronym parsing and construction of a logical form
• choice of what to keep unchanged (typically the head of the highest ranking NP) and what

to modify (e.g. the adjectives)
• look for possible substitutions

– using semantic ﬁeld oppositions,
– keeping the initial letter, rhyme and rhythm(the modiﬁed acronym should sound similar

to the original as much as possible)

– for adjectives, basing reasoning mainly on WordNet antonymy clustering
– using the a-semantic dictionary

Figure 4 and 5 show respectively a sketch of the architecture and an example of the system

strategies.

Acronym

Morphological

Analysis

Parser

Acronym
Grammar

WordNet Domains

DB Semantic

Fields Oppositions

Annotated

Logical Form

Acronym
Realization

Re-analyzed
Acronyms

Heuristics -

Rules

Incongruity

      Generator

Figure 4: Acronyms Reanalysis: a sketch of the demonstrator architecture

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

A-semantic
dictionary

Keep the head 
of NP fixed

Semantic field opposition
+ Rhyme

Mythical Institute of Theology

Figure 5: An example of acronym reanalysis

Making fun of existing acronyms is basically using irony on them, desecrating them with some

unexpectedly contrasting but otherwise consistently sounding expansion.

In practice, as mostly you do not come across acronyms and their expansion an ironizing
system, that for instance is part of a funny mail replier, will ﬁrst look up for the good expansion
in a large repository (The Acronym Finder http://www.acronymfinder.com/).

Then the process would start leading to a reformulation of the original sequence of words.

131

As far as acronym generation is concerned, the problem is more complex. We constrain resulting
acronyms to be words of the dictionary. The system takes in input some concepts (actually synsets,
so that even input to this system can result from some other processing, for instance sentence
interpretation) and some minimal structural indication, such as the semantic head. The primary
strategy of the system is to consider as potential acronyms words that are in ironic relation with
the input concepts. By deﬁnition the acronyms will have to satisfy constraints, such as to include
the initial letters of some lexical realization of the inputs words synsets, with some elaboration
that will grant the sequence of initials on the basis of the constraints of the overall acronym syntax.
In this primary strategy, the ironic reasoning comes mainly at the level of acronym choice in the
lexicon and in the deﬁnition of the ﬁllers of the open slots in the acronym.
(Note
that the complete synset for “CPU” is {processor#3, CPU#1, central processing unit#1,
mainframe#2}. So we can use in the acronym expansion a synonym of “CPU”. The same happens
for “fast”.) Once we have an acronym proposal, a syntactic skeleton has to be ﬁlled to get a
correct noun phrase.

For example, giving as input “fast” and “CPU”, we get static, torpid, dormant.

For example given in input “fast” and “CPU”, the system selects TORPID with the possible

syntactic skeleton:

< adv >T < adj >O Rapid Processor < prep > < adj >I < noun >D

or

< adj >T < adj >O Rapid Processor < prep > < noun >I < noun >D

where “rapid” and “processor” are synonyms respectively of “fast” and “CPU” and the notation
< Part of Speech >Letter means a word of that particular part of speech with Letter as initial.
Then the system ﬁlls this syntactic skeleton with strategies similar to those described for

re-analysis.

5 Examples and Preliminary Evaluation
Here below some examples of acronym re-analysis are reported. As far as semantic ﬁeld opposition
is concerned we have slightly tuned the system towards the domains Food, Religion and Sex.
For each example we report the original acronym, the re-analysis and some comments about the
strategies followed by the system.

ACM - Association for Computing Machinery
→ Association for Confusing Machinery
The acronym expansion is simple. The system keeps all the heads (the head of the whole NP
and the head of the PP) and works on the adjective, considering mainly the rhyme and using the
a-semantic dictionary.

CCTT - Close Combat Tactical Trainer (Army second generation virtual trainer.)
→ Cold Combat Theological Trainer
This is an example of two changes: antonym strategy for the ﬁrst adjective and semantic opposition
found in the Religion domain that modiﬁes ‘Tactical’ into ‘Theological’.

CHI - Computer Human Interface
→ Computer Harry Truman Interface
An unexpected result, mainly achieved exploiting rhyme.

DMSO - Defense Modeling and Simulation Oﬃce.
→ Defense Meat eating and Salivation Office
In general the system can
The two modiﬁcations are coherent into the Food semantic ﬁelds.
choose either to keep coherence among the modiﬁcation or to exploit contrast picking them from
diﬀerent ‘opposite’ semantic ﬁelds, as in the following example:

132

IST - Institute for Simulation and Training.
→ Institute for Sexual abstention and Thanksgiving
FCCSET - Federal Coordinating Committee for Science, Engineering and Technology
→ Femoral Coordinating Committee for Sword dance Earring and Theology
This example shows how too many modiﬁcations can produce a re-analysis that does not resemble
the original acronym at all, with poor irony eﬀect.
FLOPS - Floating Point Operations Per Second (A measure of computing power.)
→ Fucking Point Operations Per Second
Typical use of a taboo world.

Testing the humorous quality of texts or other verbal results is not an easy task. There are
some relevant studies though, such as (Ruch, 1996; K¨ohler and Ruch, 1996). HAHAcronym for
the moment has only some initial results for the re-analysis part. A preliminary evaluation with a
group of about 30 university students has shown good results. The students had to choose among
ﬁve levels of amusement (from very funny to not funny). The result are very encouraging. None
of the re-analyses proposed to the students were been rejected as completely non-humorous. More
than 50% were considered good enough.

At the writing time we have not started the evaluation of the complete prototype. The evalu-

ation experiments will be organized as described in the schemas that follow.

Acronym re-analysis evaluation: Acronym humorous re-analysis, given an existing
acronym

• Number of panel members: 20
• Method:

for every re-analysis, each panelist gives from 1 to 5 (max) points.

(100 pt is the maximum score given 20 testers)

• Number of experiments: 40
• Success threshold: in 60% of the given acronyms a re-analysis will have a score

that exceeds 55/100

• The results will also be diﬀerentially compared with the score obtained by ran-
domly generated (but syntactically correct) data obtained by the basic machin-
ery, disengaging the speciﬁc resources and heuristics. 65% of acronyms will have
a more humorous evaluation with the full machinery.

Acronym creation evaluation. Acronym humorous creation from scratch (i.e. from a
set of concepts).

• Number of panel members: 20
• Method: for every acronym generation, each panelist gives from 1 to 5 (max)

points. (100 pt is the maximum score given 20 testers)

• Number of experiments: 30
• Success threshold :

solution, a generated acronym will have a score that exceeds 55/100

in 45% of the sets of input concepts, provided there is a

6 Problems and Conclusions
At the time of this writing the acronym re-analyzer is completed in its main structure and one of
the main question is the ranking of possible re-analyses so that the ones that are supposed to be
funnier appear at the top. The system is ﬂexible and novel strategies can be added. Ranking a

133

priori is easy: it is based on a combination of values attributed by hand to the various strategies.
Ranking a posteriori is much more diﬃcult and involves some initial steps in modeling humor
appreciation.

The generator is not completed yet, but the whole prototype will be completed within two

months.

The implementation is in Allegro CommonLisp and the system could be easily integrated

within a number of hosting applications.

We consider this as a ﬁrst step of a set of possible developments of practical impact.
Some possible applied scenarios:

1. educational software for children based on the idea of machine assisted joke generation, thus

helping children explore word-meanings;

2. a system that uses humor as a means to promote products and to get the user’s attention

in an electronic commerce environment;

3. an appealing names generator for products and merchandise (e.g. goods, commodities,
pharmaceutical products, etc. . . ). A ﬁnal version of the prototype could be put on the Web
to be tested: e.g. as a service for ﬁnding humorous acronyms for European Projects.

If there doubts about the possible practical utility of a system like this, let us just consider the
case of European project proposals. The ﬁrst ﬁeld of the proposal is for the name, that must be
an acronym. When a proposal is prepared, the energy of the most senior scientists involved in the
consortium goes in ﬁnding a a good acronym. Being funny is a plus. A very conservative estimate
is that on average to prepare a proposal may require a couple of person-months. For the name
we think it is fair to say that it may take two person-days fo the best senior scientists. Every
year proposals are submitted to the European Commission, numbering well over 10.000. So at
minimum 20.000 days are spent on (if possible funny) acronyms, i.e. some 100 person-year of the
most senior personnel involved: the cost can be estimated at over 10 million euro. A computational
humor system resulting from this prototype would cost much less. . .

References
Attardo, S. (1994). Linguistic Theory of Humor. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.

Attardo, S. and Raskin, V. (1991). Script theory revis(it)ed: joke similarity and joke representation

model. Humour, 4(3):293–347.

Barsoux, J. L. (1994). Funny Business. Cassel.

Bergson, H. (1899). Le rire. Essai sur la signiﬁcation du comique. Paris.

Binsted, K. and Ritchie, G. (1994). An implemented model of punning riddles. In Proc. of the

12th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-94), Seattle.

Binsted, K. and Ritchie, G. (1997). Computational rules for punning riddles. Humor, 10(1).

Ephratt, M. (1990). What’s in a joke. In Golumbic, M., editor, Advances in AI: Natural Language

and Knowledge Based Systems, pages 406–450. Springer Verlag.

Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet. An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.

Freud, S. (1905). Der Witz und Seine Beziehung sum Unbewussten. Deutike, Leipzig and Vienna.

Gibson, D. (1994). Humor consulting laughs for power and proﬁts in organizations. Humor,

7(4):403–428.

Giora, R. and Fein, O. (1999). Irony: Context and salience. Metaphor and Symbol, 14:241–257.

134

Goldberg, K., Roeder, T., Gupta, D., and Perkins, C. (2001). Eigentaste: A constant time

collaborative ﬁltering algorithm. Information Retrieval, 4(2):133–151.

Gupta, D., Digiovanni, M., Narita, H.,

and Goldberg, K.

Eﬃ-
Technical report, UC Berkeley.

(1999).

ester:

cient rating prediction for statistical
http://shadow.ieor.berkeley.edu/humor.

joke retrieval.

Hofstadter, D., Gabora, L., Raskin, V., and Attardo, S. (1989). Synopsis of the workshop on

humor and cognition. Humor, 2(4):293–347.

Katz, B. F. (1993). A neural resolution of the incongruity and incongruity-resolution theories of

humor. Connection Science, 5(1):59–75.

K¨ohler, G. and Ruch, W. (1996). Sources of variance in current sense of humor inventories:
How much substance, how much method variance? Humor: International Journal of Humor
Research, 9:363–397.

K¨ostler, A. (1964). The act of creation. Hutchinson, London.

McGhee, P. (1989). Humor and Children’s Development. Haworth Press.

Miller, G. (1990). An on-line lexical database. International Journal of Lexicography, 13(4):235–

312.

Minsky, M. (1980). Jokes and the logic of the cognitive unconscious. Technical report, MIT

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory. AI memo 603.

Morkes, J., Kerna, H., and Nass, C. (1998). Humor in task-oriented computer-mediated commu-

nication and human-computer interaction. In Proc. of CHI 98.

Morkes, J., Kernal, H., and Nass, C. (1999). Eﬀects of humor in task-oriented human-computer
interaction and computer-mediated communication: A direct test of SRCT theory. Human-
Computer Interaction, 14:395–435.

Palma, P. D. and Weiner, E. J. (1992). Riddles: accessibility and knowledge representation.
In Proc. of the 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-92),
volume 4, pages 1121–1125, Nantes.

Pepicello, W. and Green, T. (1984). The language of the riddles. Ohio State University.

Raskin, V. (1985). Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. Dordrecht/Boston/Lancaster.

Ruch, W. (1996). Special issue: Measurement approaches to the sense of humor. Humor: Inter-

national Journal of Humor Research, 9.

Stock, O. (1996). ”Password Swordﬁsh”: Verbal humor in the interface.

In Hulstijn, J. and
Nijholt, A., editors, Proc. of International Workshop on Computational Humour (TWLT 12),
University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.

Utsumi, A. (1996). Implicit display theory of verbal irony: Towards a computational theory of
irony. In Hulstijn, J. and Nijholt, A., editors, Proc. of International Workshop on Computational
Humour (TWLT 12), University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.

135

Cleverness Versus Funniness

Greg Lessard
French Studies

Queen’s University

Michael Levison

Computing and Information Science

Queen’s University

Chris Venour

Computing and Information Science

Queen’s University

Abstract

The traditional distinctions between verbal and non-verbal humour and between lexical and
encyclopedic bases of humour are examined by means of the analysis of corpus and generated
data and shown to be more complex than is usually assumed. Tendencies found in the data
analysed are used as the basis for proposing a distinction between cleverness and funniness,
the ﬁrst based on the factor of surprise, the second based on script opposition, as proposed
by Raskin. It is suggested that use of the distinction would be of value in the evaluation of
computer-generated humour.

Keywords: Humour, Puns, Natural Language Generation

1 Introduction
Traditionally, humour researchers have accepted a distinction between verbal and non-verbal hu-
mour, based on criteria such as the use of linguistic materials versus the use of gestures, images,
etc., the possibility or impossibility of alternate formulations, ease or diﬃculty of translation, and
cultural contingency versus non-speciﬁcity of culture. A prototypical example of verbal humour
is provided by anagrams of the simplest sort, in which the letters of a word are reordered to form
another word of the same language. Use of the device is strictly language-internal and untranslat-
able. A prototypical example of non-verbal humour is provided by the slapstick routine based on
a man in the middle who holds a ladder and who, when turning it, hits ﬁrst one then the other of
two men preceding and following him. No verbal devices are required to understand this and it is
in principle capable of being found funny by a human speaking any language.

Another facet of the same distinction turns on the opposition between verbal humour based
on manipulation of lexical relations between words, versus that which makes use of encyclopedic
or ‘real world’ knowledge. Examples of the ﬁrst are found in riddles based on single word
substitutions, such as in the following, which make use of relations of homonymy or synonymy:

What do you call a naked bruin?
What has a tongue and can’t speak? A shoe.

A bare bear.

Examples of the second can be found in other riddles which require more complex knowledge

of how the world works, such as:

What did the boy octopus say to the girl octopus?
How many Xs does it take to change a light bulb? Ten, one to hold the bulb and

I want hold your hand, hand, ...

nine to turn the ladder.

as well as in jokes of the more traditional sort.
Verbal humour of the ﬁrst kind would represent an in principle enumerable (albeit large) set,
based on the systematic enumeration of all the lexical relations holding between all items of a

given lexicon, while verbal humour of the second kind would represent an open set relying on
serendipity, the ability to creatively establish links based on world knowledge, or the ability to
construct a humorous scenario.

Taken together, these two distinctions suggest a diﬀerence in kind between basic forms
of verbal humour such as puns and simple riddles, which turn on lexical relations, and more
complex phenomena such as jokes, which turn on real-world or encyclopedic knowledge. However,
categories leak, and meaning appears to be one of the most corrosive substances in causing such
leaks. Thus, in the case of anagrams, a variant exists in which the re-ordered letters form an
explicit or implicit judgement on the real-world entity referred to by the base form. The following
examples, taken from www.genius2000.com, illustrate the mechanism:

Houses of Parliament
House of Commons
Tony Blair MP

– Meet piranhas so foul
– O home of honest scum
–

I’m Tory Plan B

In these examples, there exists a semantic (and evaluative) relation between the base form and
the anagram and to a limited extent a ‘script opposition’ between the two terms. Similarly, the
slapstick routine mentioned above takes on new signiﬁcance if the characters hit by the ladder are
one to the left of the ladder-carrier and one to the right, particularly if their clothing marks them
as prototypically members of a political group. In fact, despite their formal diﬀerences, both the
anagrams and the slapstick routine can come to carry the same message: ‘the indistinguishability
(and low value) of political ﬁgures or parties’.

These simultaneous diﬀerences and similarities suggest a problem for the analysis of humour.
Should we treat anagrams, puns, and jokes as more or less complex points along a single dimension,
and measure their eﬀect in terms of the factor of ‘funniness’, or should we see a diﬀerence in kind
between basic verbal humour and more complex forms of humour such as that found in jokes?
The question has some importance for the computational generation of humour, since presumably
a diﬀerence in kind would also require a diﬀerence of approach. To gain a clearer sense of the
details involved, we will begin by studying in more detail two sets of examples, one a corpus of
human-generated puns, and the other a corpus of computer-generated puns.

2 Two sets of examples
The ﬁrst set of examples is drawn from a web page (http://thinks.com/words/tomswift.htm)
which provides 374 examples of Tom Swifties, a type of pun based on a quoted utterance having
both a formal and semantic link to the quoting utterance, as in:

I hate chemistry, said Tom acidly.

In what follows, we will use the terminology proposed in Lessard and Levison (1992, 1993,
1995) to identify the parts of a Tom Swifty: the pivot represents the element of the quoting
sentence which describes the nature of Tom’s aﬃrmation (in the example above, acidly), the base
represents the subset of the pivot which enters into a semantic link with one or more elements of
the quoted utterance (here, the base is acid) and the target represents the element or elements
of the quoted utterance linked to the base (here, chemistry, which is linked to acid). The relation
between base and pivot is called the formal bridge, while that between base and target is called
the semantic bridge.

There are actually a number of formal variants on the canonical Tom Swifty, including those

where the pivot is represented by another part of speech:

I think I’ve caught one, said Tom with baited breath.
I have to cut the grass again, Tom moaned.

(cf. bated breath)
(cf. mow-ned)

but all share the same essential characteristics.
As a ﬁrst step in the analysis, the collection from thinks.com was tagged with a number of

138

The prisoner escaped down a rope, said Tom condescendingly.
Types of simple lexico-semantic relations (see Cruse 1986)
syn = a semantic bridge based on synonym

I have no idea, said Tom thoughtlessly.

ant = a semantic bridge based on antonymy, of whatever subtype

You must be my host, Tom guessed.

hyp = a semantic bridge based on hyponymy

This tuna is excellent, said Tom superﬁcially.

(prisoner – con, down – descend)

(idea – thought)

(host – guest)

(tuna – ﬁsh)

mer = a semantic bridge based on meronymy (a part-whole relation)

I’ve still got two ﬁngers left, said Tom handsomely.

(ﬁnger – hand)

seq = sequential or cyclic relations

We’ve just brought gold and frankincense, the Magi demurred.

(gold, frankincense, myrrh)

Types of complex lexical or semantic relations
p = a paraphrase in which one word of the base is linked to a phrase or sentence of the target

It’s where we store the hay, Tom said loftily.

enc = a relation in based on world knowledge

Do you play the guitar?, Tom asked callously

(where we store the hay = loft)

(playing guitar may produce callouses
on the ﬁngers)

categories, including the following:

Number of bridges
m = multiple semantic bridges

npr = a relation in which understanding of the Tom Swifty depends on knowledge of the
characteristics of an individual:

(un-thin-king)

Henry the Eighth, Tom said unthinkingly.
One upon a time there was a beautiful princess
Tom began grimly.
In the ﬁrst instance, it is the distinction between simple and complex lexical relations which
will concern us. We will assume that the ﬁrst (synonymy, antonymy, etc.) are lexicalized and thus
relatively static, as well as being language-speciﬁc. Complex lexical relations such as encyclopedic
links or relations based on paraphrase or traits associated with proper names, on the other hand,
are not lexicalized, but rather produced dynamically, and are not language-speciﬁc, in the sense
that many diﬀerent formulations may be imagined. Compare, for example, the following variants
of the examples appearing above:

(Grimms’ fairy tales)

Look above the stable, Tom said loftily.
I like the spacious new apartment, Tom said loftily.
I’m a hardworking stonemason, said Tom callously.
And they lived happily ever after, said Tom grimly.
Once upon a time there were two brothers, said Tom grimly.

Analysis of the 374 examples of Tom Swifties in the thinks.com corpus reveals the following

distribution of the types:

enc
npr
p
simple

92
38
52
192

(25%)
(10%)
(14%)
(51%)

It is likely that the npr class should be considered a subset of the enc class, and the relationship
between enc and p remains to be elicited. Be that as it may, it remains that between a quarter
and a half of the examples cannot be constructed on the basis of simple lexical links. And yet,
these encyclopedic, paraphrase and proper name Tom Swifties are interspersed among the others
with no sense of a diﬀerence in kind. This suggests that an adequate computational model of Tom

139

Swifties should not limit itself to lexical links but must seamlessly move from lexical, to proper
name, to paraphrase and to encyclopedic generation devices.

Consider now a second corpus of puns generated and then analysed in Venour (1999). Known
as homonym common phrase puns (HCPP) these make use of idioms (”kick the habit”, ”pass the
buck”, ”jump ship”) or collocations (”knead the dough”, ”serial killer”, ”tip the waiter”) which
contain a homophone. Some typical examples:

John is violent. He is razing cattle.
John ate a dollar coin. He is passing the buck.

As is the case with Tom Swifties, HCPPs can be formally deﬁned in terms of a target phrase,
a base, and a pivot. The pivot in the ﬁrst example above is the common phrase ”raising cattle”,
the base is ”raising”, whose homophonous meaning ”razing” (deﬁned as ”completely destroying”)
is reinforced by the target phrase ”John is violent”. (The word ”raising” actually has a second
homophone: ”raising” in the sense of lifting up, which might be used to create the pun ”John is
lifting up cows. He raises cattle.”)

The HCPPs discussed in Venour were generated using a version of the VINCI nat-
ural
language generation environment (Levison and Lessard, 1992; and more generally
www.cs.queensu.ca/CompLing). Prior to generation, the following procedures were used to con-
struct the relations which underlie the puns. Note in passing that in all cases, care was taken
to ensure that the lexicon would be ”general and neutral”, i.e. not humour-speciﬁc (Binsted and
Ritchie, 1994).

a) As a ﬁrst step, seventy adjectives with noun homophones and seventy nouns with noun
homophones were taken from a list on the web (Cooper, 1999). Since these contained only
homophones spelled diﬀerently, they were supplemented from another source (Franklyn,
1966). Sixteen words were obscure enough that the persons judging the puns would be
unlikely to recognize them. These were removed.

b) The second step involved picking collocations of these words from the Oxford English dic-
tionary. Each of the homophones was looked up, and the ﬁrst common phrase agreeing with
our syntax requirements was chosen. If a common phrase with the proper syntax could not
be found for a word or its homophone, both words were deleted. The resulting phrases were
added to the lexicon as units, as were the individual words of the phrases.

c) For each of the words, volunteers were given a questionnaire and asked to provide words
related to the various nouns, adjectives and verbs in the lexicon. It is interesting to note
the diversity which this produced. Thus, apart from the usual basic lexical relations like
synonymy, antonymy, meronymy, etc., we ﬁnd encyclopedic relationships such as sailor –
pier, diver – coral, grave – bier. In the ﬁrst two cases, the relationship between the two
words is based on typical locations associated with the ﬁrst term, while in the third example,
the relationship is based on shared membership in a common semantic domain (cemetery
and burial rituals and objects).

d) In a last step, other words were added to the lexicon, including determiners, conjunctions,

prepositions, etc. called for by the syntax speciﬁcations.

After the addition of morphological and syntactic speciﬁcations, the VINCI system was used
to generate possible HCPPs. Of the 11 HCPP schemata identiﬁed by Venour, three were used. In
all, 50 jokes were generated. These were distributed to 16 volunteer judges, each receiving either
the ﬁrst or the second half of the list. One volunteer did not follow the instructions and that
reply set was discarded. Thus, 375 votes were cast in total. The judges were asked to evaluate
each joke on the following scale, taken from Binsted and Ritchie (1994):

140

1: Not a joke. Does not make sense.

2: Recognizably a joke but a pathetic one.

3: OK. A joke you might tell a child.

4: Quite good.

5: Really good.

Some typical average scores are given below, with examples for each range of scores.

1-2

2-3

3-4

4-5

The butcher commits a carelessness. A gross negligence.
Joan visits a grave in the basement. A bier cellar

The diver joins a coalition. A choral society.
A store-keeper boards a ship. A sale boat.

The sailor earns a diploma. A berth certiﬁcate.
The juvenile studies a writer. A minor poet.

The pheasant breathes oxygen. Fowl air.
The sailor bears a stress. Pier pressure.

The average score for all the jokes was 2.81, between pathetic and child-like. This statistic,
however, obscures the fact that a signiﬁcant number of good jokes were generated. Nearly half
(22 out of 50) scored between 3-5; and about one-third of the total votes were 4 or 5.

What is more interesting here is the fact that there is no particular correlation between degree
of funniness attributed to these examples and the mechanisms used to produce them. More
precisely, encyclopedic sources of humour are neither more nor less funny than those based on
standard lexical relations such as synonymy, as the following table shows:

141

Generated pun

Lexical relations

Avg score Standard deviation

The housewife captures a murderer.
A cereal killer.
Joan looks at a musical sign on the
station. A bass clef.
John gives a peck in the home.
A buss shelter.
The chimney sweep digs a burrow.
A grate hole.
Joan visits a relation on the mound.
An aunt hill.
Joan visits a grave in the basement.
A bier cellar.
The butcher commits a carelessness.
A gross negligence.
The social worker hates a foe.
A hostel enemy.
The cleaner loves an individual.
A pail person.
The vocalist arrives at a settlement.
A bass camp.
Joan bears stress on the boardwalk.
Pier pressure.
The textile worker fulﬁls a
requirement. A dyer need.
The general performs an operation.
A major surgery.
Joan kisses a hero at the disco.
A knight club.
The sailor bears a stress.
Pier pressure.

Encyclopedic/synonymy

1.43

Hyponymy/encyclopedic

1.43

Synonymy/hyponymy

1.71

Encyclopedic/synonymy

1.86

Hyponymy/synonymy

1.88

Encyclopedic/synonymy

1.88

Encyclopedic/synonymy

Encyclopedic/synonymy

Encyclopedic/synonymy

2

2

2

Hyponymy/synonymy

2.13

Hyponymy/synonymy

Encyclopedic/synonymy

Sequence/synonymy

4

4

4

Encyclopedic/synonymy

4.25

Encyclopedic/synonymy

4.38

0.5

0.76

1.46

1

0.5

0.82

1.46

1.07

1.34

0.69

1.15

0.75

0.5

0.82

0.47

3 Discussion
One of the fundamental challenges for the analysis of computationally generated humour has been
to determine how good it is, and to correlate the reactions elicited in humans with characteristics
of the system used to produce diﬀerent sorts of humorous utterances. The examples discussed
above suggest that, at least in the case of Tom Swifties and HCPPs, signiﬁcant use is made of all
sorts of relations to generate puns, and there is no particular correlation between the nature of
the mechanisms used to produce puns (static lexical relations versus encyclopedic knowledge) and
the degree of funniness attributed by humans to the products of these relations.

This suggests that perhaps we should rethink the perspective adopted.

Instead of asking
whether puns of the sort are funny, perhaps we should instead be asking whether they are clever.
In other words, we should ask whether goodness is correlated with the ability to pleasantly
surprise the reader or hearer. (One might speak of an aha versus a haha factor.) Note that this
still requires a delicate balancing act. On the one hand, a pun based on a simple and predictable
lexical relation is not particularly clever:

It’s freezing in here, said Tom coldly

but on the other, a pun which requires a level of knowledge unavailable to the reader or hearer
will also fail. For example, the following, taken from the ﬁrst corpus above:

I’m from a Humberside port, said Tom ghoulishly

relies on the reader or hearer knowing that there is a city called Goole in this region, knowledge

142

that is far from universal. If this knowledge is not available to the hearer or reader of the pun,
the pun will fail.

Nevertheless, if we take as a starting point that cleverness is a function of the number and
possibly the nature of the links between the elements of the pun, then empirical analysis is
possible using computer-generated data and human raters. Variables would include the kinds of
links, and also their number. Among other things, we noted above that Tom Swifties at least
may include more than one simultaneously operating link (see the m tag above). The following
examples illustrate the range of values observed to date in corpus data:

I wonder why the hive’s still empty, said Tom belatedly.
I’ve gone back to my wife, was Tom’s rejoinder.
I had to ask her to leave the yacht because she was
too heavy, said Tom excruciatingly.

(bee – late; m = 2)
(re – joined – her; m = 3)

(ex-crew-she-ate; m = 4)

As an initial working hypothesis, we could suggest that if the type of lexical relation is held
constant, then the number of active links in a pun will be correlated with its cleverness. In a
second test, if the number of links is held constant, we can ask whether cleverness is correlated
with diﬀerent types of links. For example, it appears, intuitively, that synonym-based Tom Swifties
are less clever than those based on more complex lexical relations.

Another related point has to do with the nature of encyclopedic links. It may be that two
distinctions are required: one between simple lexical relations and encyclopedic relations, and
another between script oppositions and hermetic games. Consider for example the anagram
presented at the beginning of this paper:

Tony Blair MP –

I’m Tory Plan B

This creation is funny, in that it summarizes a political judgement with respect to the Labour
government in the UK. The funniness may be a function of its value judgement coupled with
the ‘script opposition’ (Raskin, 1985) implicit in the simultaneous occurrence of the name of a
Labour PM with the name of the party he opposes. The Tom Swifties and HCPPs found in the
corpora discussed above, however, even those based on proper names and those which are based
on encyclopedic relations, do not possess this script opposition, but represent rather hermetic
games. That is not to say that the addition of a script opposition is impossible in the case of a
Tom Swifty. Consider, for example:

I’m sticking to my Labour principles, said Tony Blair rightly.

However, it does mean that instead of answering a single large question (how funny is this
element of verbal humour, and why?), we are left with two simpler questions: (a) how clever is this
pun, and how does this correlate with its formal characteristics; and (b) does this pun instantiate
a script opposition and does this correlate with its funniness? In fact, this also provides some hope
for the computational modelling of puns. If we can assume that there is no particular diﬀerence in
kind between the various sorts of relations which underlie cleverness of the class of Tom Swifties
or HCPPs (and probably riddles as well), then we can begin to think about a single formalism
designed to capture all such relations.

Of course all of this is very preliminary. Among other things, it is unclear what correlates can
be found for these two measures beyond the simple verbal labels. It might be that cleverness is
based on a non-involved attitude (we spoke earlier of ‘hermetic games’) while funniness requires
involvement on the part of the hearer. Ideally, there would be two distinct neurological correlates
involved. A second question concerns the relation between the two measures of cleverness and
funniness. For the moment, it would seem most prudent to assume that the two are orthogonal,
in that we could assume examples which instantiate each of the following diﬀerent combinations,
to varying degrees:

143

Not clever and not funny
Clever but not funny
Not clever but funny
Clever and funny

(a simple Tom Swifty)
(a complex Tom Swifty)
(slapstick, or a simple joke)
(a clever joke, or a pun with funny implications)

Certainly, much work has already been done which would be applicable to this issue, includ-
ing, for example, the formalism for the representation of world knowledge proposed within the
CYC project (Lenat, 1989) and in new initiatives in lexical modelling such as the notion of the
generative lexicon (Pustejovsky, 1995). Our own work is based on use of the VINCI natural
language generation environment, under development since 1986. Originally conceived to create
drill exercises for language learning, the system provides a collection of metalanguages (semantics,
syntax, lexical items and lexical relations, inﬂectional and derivational morphology, phonology)
and an interpreter allowing the generation of utterances based on grammars written in the various
metalanguages. The two principal tasks of the VINCI system are sentence or text generation and
word creation. Word creation involves the systematic application of word-formation rules (lexical
transformations) to an existing lexicon to obtain all possible new forms which the rules specify.
Sentence generation involves the creation of phrases or sentences in a language speciﬁed by the
user, either at random or under the control of semantic or formal constraints, including semantic
expressions or traits, frequency, orthographic or phonological characteristics, and lexical relations.
In our current research, we are experimenting with complex lexical items which embody not
just basic lexical relations (links to synonyms, antonyms, hyperonyms, derived forms, etc.) but also
encyclopedic information with respect to individuals. All of this information is captured by means
of a common system of attribute classes and values enhanced by a partial ordering mechanism,
devices for the construction and deconstruction of complex attributes, and a translation mechanism
for movement between a logical formalism and attribute speciﬁcations.

References
Binsted, K. (1996). Machine humour: An implemented model of puns. Dissertation, University

of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Binsted, K. and G. Ritchie (1994). A symbolic description of punning riddles and its computer

implementation. Research Paper 688, University of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Cooper, A. (1999) Alan Cooper’s Homonyms. Available at http://www.cooper.com/alan/

homonym.html.

Cruse, D.A. (1986). Lexical Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Franklyn, J.H. (1966) (Ed.) Which Witch? Being a grouping of phonetically compatible words.

Hamish Hamilton, London, 1966.

Lenat, D., R.V. Gupta (1989). Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems: Representation and

Inference in the CYC Project. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Lessard, G. and M. Levison (1992).

ALLC/ACH92, Oxford, England.

Lessard, G. and M. Levison (1993).

ACH/ALLC93, Georgetown, USA.

Computational Modelling of Linguistic Humour.

Computational Modelling of Riddle Strategies.

Lessard, G. and M. Levison (1995). Linguistic and cognitive underpinnings of verbal humour.

International Cognitive Linguistics Association conference, Albuquerque, NM.

Levison, M. and G. Lessard (1992). A System for Natural Language Generation. Computers and

the Humanities, 26:43-58.

Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The Generative Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

144

Raskin, V. (1985). The Semantic Mechanisms of Humour. Dordrecht, Reidel.

Venour, C. (1999) The Computational Generation of a Class of Puns. Master’s thesis, Queen’s

University, Kingston, Ontario.

145

Twente Workshops
on Language Technology

The TWLT workshops are organised by the PARLEVINK project of the University of Twente.
The ﬁrst workshop was held in Enschede, the Netherlands on March 22, 1991. The workshop
was attended by about 40 participants. The contents of the proceedings are given below.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 1 (TWLT 1)
Tomita’s Algorithm: Extensions and Applications
Eds. R. Heemels, A. Nijholt & K. Sikkel, 103 pages.

Preface and Contents
A. Nijholt (University of Twente, Enschede.) (Generalised) LR Parsing: From Knuth to Tomita.
R. Leermakers (Philips Research Labs, Eindhoven.) Recursive Ascent Parsing.
H. Harkema & M. Tomita (University of Twente, Enschede & Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh)

A Parsing Algorithm for Non-Deterministic Context-Sensitive Languages.

G.J. van der Steen (Vleermuis Software Research, Utrecht) Unrestricted On-Line Parsing and Transduc-

tion with Graph Structured Stacks.

J. Rekers & W. Koorn (CWI, Amsterdam & University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam) Substring Parsing for

Arbitrary Context-Free Grammars.

T. Vosse (NICI, Nijmegen.) Detection and Correction of Morpho-Syntactic Errors in Shift-Reduce Pars-

ing.

R. Heemels (Oc´e Nederland, Venlo) Tomita’s Algorithm in Practical Applications.
M. Lankhorst (University of Twente, Enschede) An Empirical Comparison of Generalised LR Tables.
K. Sikkel (University of Twente, Enschede) Bottom-Up Parallellization of Tomita’s Algorithm.

The second workshop in the series (TWLT 2) has been held on November 20, 1991. The work-
shop was attended by more than 70 researchers from industry and university. The contents of the
proceedings are given below.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 2 (TWLT 2)
Linguistic Engineering: Tools and Products.
Eds. H.J. op den Akker, A. Nijholt & W. ter Stal, 115 pages.

Preface and Contents
A. Nijholt (University of Twente, Enschede) Linguistic Engineering: A Survey.
B. van Bakel (University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen) Semantic Analysis of Chemical Texts.
G.J. van der Steen & A.J. Dijenborgh (Vleermuis Software Research, Utrecht) Lingware: The Transla-

tion Tools of the Future.

T. Vosse (NICI, Nijmegen) Detecting and Correcting Morpho-syntactic Errors in Real Texts.
C. Barkey (TNO/ITI, Delft) Indexing Large Quantities of Documents Using Computational Linguistics.
A. van Rijn (CIAD/Delft University of Technology, Delft) A Natural Language Interface for a Flexible

Assembly Cell.

J. Honig (Delft University of Technology, Delft) Using Deltra in Natural Language Front-ends.
J. Odijk (Philips Research Labs, Eindhoven) The Automatic Translation System ROSETTA3.
D. van den Akker (IBM Research, Amsterdam) Language Technology at IBM Nederland.
M.-J. Nederhof, C.H.A. Koster, C. Dekkers & A. van Zwol (University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen) The

Grammar Workbench: A First Step Toward Lingware Engineering.

The third workshop in the series (TWLT 3) was held on May 12 and 13, 1992. Contrary to the
previous workshops it had an international character with eighty participants from the U.S.A.,
India, Great Britain, Ireland, Italy, Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands. The proceed-
ings were available at the workshop. The contents of the proceedings are given below.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 3 (TWLT 3)
Connectionism and Natural Language Processing.
Eds. M.F.J. Drossaers & A. Nijholt, 142 pages.

Preface and Contents
L.P.J. Veelenturf (University of Twente, Enschede) Representation of Spoken Words in a Self-Organising

Neural Net.

P. Wittenburg & U. H. Frauenfelder (Max-Planck Institute, Nijmegen) Modelling the Human Mental

Lexicon with Self-Organising Feature Maps.

A.J.M.M. Weijters & J. Thole (University of Limburg, Maastricht) Speech Synthesis with Artiﬁcial

Neural Networks.

W. Daelemans & A. van den Bosch (Tilburg University, Tilburg) Generalisation Performance of Back

Propagation Learning on a Syllabiﬁcation Task.

E.-J. van der Linden & W. Kraaij (Tilburg University, Tilburg) Representation of Idioms in Connec-

tionist Models.

J.C. Scholtes (University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam) Neural Data Oriented Parsing.
E.F. Tjong Kim Sang (University of Groningen, Groningen) A connectionist Representation for Phrase

Structures.

M.F.J. Drossaers (University of Twente, Enschede) Hopﬁeld Models as Neural-Network Acceptors.
P. Wyard (British Telecom, Ipswich) A Single Layer Higher Order Neural Net and its Application to

Grammar Recognition.

N.E. Sharkey & A.J.C. Sharkey (University of Exeter, Exeter) A Modular Design for Connectionist

Parsing.

R. Reilly (University College, Dublin) An Exploration of Clause Boundary Effects in SRN Representa-

tions.

S.M. Lucas (University of Essex, Colchester) Syntactic Neural Networks for Natural Language Process-

ing.

R. Miikkulainen (University of Texas, Austin) DISCERN: A Distributed Neural Network Model of Script

Processing and Memory.

The fourth workshop in the series has been held on September 23, 1992. The theme of this
workshop was ”Pragmatics in Language Technology”. Its aim was to bring together the several
approaches to this subject: philosophical, linguistic and logic. The workshop was visited by more

than 50 researchers in these ﬁelds, together with several computer scientists. The contents of the
proceedings are given below.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 4 (TWLT 4)
Pragmatics in Language Technology
Eds. D. Nauta, A. Nijholt & J. Schaake, 114 pages.

Preface and Contents
D. Nauta, A. Nijholt & J. Schaake (University of Twente, Enschede) Pragmatics in Language technol-

ogy: Introduction.

Part 1: Pragmatics and Semiotics
J. van der Lubbe & D. Nauta (Delft University of Technology & University of Twente, Enschede) Semi-

otics, Pragmatism, and Expert Systems.

F. Vandamme (Ghent) Semiotics, Epistemology, and Human Action.
H. de Jong & W. Werner (University of Twente, Enschede) Separation of Powers and Semiotic Pro-

cesses.

Part 2: Functional Approach in Linguistics
C. de Groot (University of Amsterdam) Pragmatics in Functional Grammar.
E. Steiner (University of Saarland, Saarbr¨ucken) Systemic Functional Grammar.
R. Bartsch (University of Amsterdam) Concept Formation on the Basis of Utterances in Situations.
Part 3: Logic of Belief, Utterance, and Intention
J. Ginzburg (University of Edinburgh) Enriching Answerhood and Truth: Questions within Situation

Semantics.

J. Schaake (University of Twente, Enschede) The Logic of Peirce’s Existential Graphs.
H. Bunt (Tilburg University) Belief Contexts in Human-Computer Dialogue.

The ﬁfth workshop in the series took place on 3 and 4 June 1993. It was devoted to the topic
”Natural Language Interfaces”. The aim was to provide an international platform for commerce,
technology and science to present the advances and current state of the art in this area of research.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 5 (TWLT 5)
Natural Language Interfaces
Eds. F.M.G. de Jong & A. Nijholt, 124 pages.

Preface and Contents
F.M.G. de Jong & A. Nijholt (University of Twente) Natural Language Interfaces: Introduction.
R. Scha (University of Amsterdam) Understanding Media: Language vs. Graphics.
L. Boves (University of Nijmegen) Spoken Language Interfaces.
J. Nerbonne (University of Groningen) NL Interfaces and the Turing Test.
K. Simons (Digimaster, Amstelveen) ”Natural Language”: A Working System.
P. Horsman (Dutch National Archives, The Hague) Accessibility of Archival Documents.
W. Sijtsma & O. Zweekhorst (ITK, Tilburg) Comparison and Review of Commercial Natural Language

Interfaces.

J. Schaake (University of Twente) The Reactive Dialogue Model: Integration of Syntax, Semantics, and

Pragmatics in a Functional Design.

D. Speelman (University of Leuven) A Natural Language Interface that Uses Generalised Quantiﬁers.
R.-J. Beun (IPO, Eindhoven) The DENK Program: Modeling Pragmatics in Natural Language Interfaces.
W. Menzel (University of Hamburg) ASL: Architectures for Speech and Language Processing
C. Huls & E. Bos (NICI, Nijmegen) EDWARD: A Multimodal Interface.
G. Neumann (University of Saarbr¨ucken) Design Principles of the DISCO system.
O. Stock & C. Strapparava (IRST, Trento) NL-Based Interaction in a Multimodal Environment.

The sixth workshop in the series took place on 16 and 17 December 1993. It was devoted to
the topic ”Natural Language Parsing”. The aim was to provide an international platform for
technology and science to present the advances and current state of the art in this area of research,
in particular research that aims at analysing real-world text and real-world speech and keyboard
input.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 6 (TWLT 6)
Natural Language Parsing: Methods and Formalisms
Eds. K. Sikkel & A. Nijholt, 190 pages.

Preface and Contents
A. Nijholt (University of Twente) Natural Language Parsing: An Introduction.
V. Manca (University of Pisa) Typology and Logical Structure of Natural Languages.
R. Bod (University of Amsterdam) Data Oriented Parsing as a General Framework for Stochastic Lan-

guage Processing.

M. Stefanova & W. ter Stal (University of Soﬁa / University of Twente) A Comparison of ALE and

PATR: Practical Experiences.

J.P.M. de Vreught (University of Delft) A Practical Comparison between Parallel Tabular Recognizers.
M. Verlinden (University of Twente) Head-Corner Parsing of Uniﬁcation Grammars: A Case Study.
M.-J. Nederhof (University of Nijmegen) A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to a Parsing Algorithm.
Th. St¨urmer (University of Saarbr¨ucken) Semantic-Oriented Chart Parsing with Defaults.
G. Satta (University of Venice) The Parsing Problem for Tree-Adjoining Grammars.
F. Barth´elemy (University of Lisbon) A Single Formalism for a Wide Range of Parsers for DCGs.
E. Csuhaj-Varj´u & R. Abo-Alez (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest) Multi-Agent Systems in

Natural Language Processing.

C. Cremers (University of Leiden) Coordination as a Parsing Problem.
M. Wir´en (University of Saarbr¨ucken) Bounded Incremental Parsing.
V. Kubon & M. Platek (Charles University, Prague) Robust Parsing and Grammar Checking of Free

Word Order Languages.

V. Srinivasan (University of Mainz) Punctuation and Parsing of Real-World Texts.
T.G. Vosse (University of Leiden) Robust GLR Parsing for Grammar-Based Spelling Correction.

The seventh workshop in the series took place on 15 and 16 june 1994. It was devoted to the
topic ”Computer-Assisted Language Learning” (CALL). The aim was to present both the state
of the art in CALL and the new perspectives in the research and development of software that
is meant to be used in a language curriculum. By the mix of themes addressed in the papers

and demonstrations, we hoped to bring about the exchange of ideas between people of various
backgrounds.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 7 (TWLT 7)
Computer-Assisted Language Learning
Eds. L. Appelo, F.M.G. de Jong, 133 pages.

Preface and Contents
L.Appelo, F.M.G. de Jong (IPO / University of Twente) Computer-Assisted Language Learning: Prole-

gomena

M. van Bodegom (Eurolinguist Language House, Nijmegen, The Netherlands) Eurolinguist test: An

adaptive testing system.

B. Cartigny (Escape, Tilburg, The Netherlands) Discatex CD-ROM XA.
H.Altay Guvenir, K. Oﬂazer (Bilkent University, Ankara) Using a Corpus for Teaching Turkish Mor-

phology.

H. Hamburger (GMU, Washington, USA) Viewpoint Abstraction: a Key to Conversational Learning.
J. Jaspers, G. Kanselaar, W. Kok (University of Utrecht, The Netherlands) Learning English with It’s

English.

G. Kempen, A. Dijkstra (University of Leiden, The Netherlands) Towards an integrated system for

spelling, grammar and writing instruction.

F. Kronenberg, A. Krueger, P. Ludewig (University of Osnabruek, Germany) Contextual vocabulary

learning with CAVOL.

S. Lobbe (Rotterdam Polytechnic Informatica Centrum, The Netherlands) Teachers, Students and IT: how

to get teachers to integrate IT into the (language) curriculum.

J. Rous, L. Appelo (Institute for Perception Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) APPEAL: Interac-

tive language learning in a multimedia environment.

B. Salverda (SLO, Enschede, The Netherlands) Developing a Multimedia Course for Learning Dutch as

a Second Language.

C. Schwind (Universite de Marseille, France) Error analysis and explanation in knowledge based lan-

guage tutoring.

J. Thompson (CTI, Hull, United Kingdom/EUROCALL) TELL into the mainstream curriculum.
M. Zock (Limsi, Paris, France) Language in action, or learning a language by whatching how it works.

The eighth workshop in the series took place on 1 and 2 December 1994. It was devoted to
speech, the integration of speech and natural language processing, and the application of this
integration in natural language interfaces. The program emphasized research of interest for the
themes in the framework of the Dutch NWO programme on Speech and Natural Language that
started in 1994.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 8 (TWLT 8)
Speech and Language Engineering
Eds. L. Boves & A. Nijholt, 176 pages.

Preface and Contents

Chr. Dugast (Philips, Aachen, Germany) The North American Business News Task: Speaker Indepen-

dent, Unlimited Vocabulary Article Dictation

P. van Alphen, C. in’t Veld & W. Schelvis (PTT Research, Leidschendam, The Netherlands) Analysis

of the Dutch Polyphone Corpus.

H.J.M. Steenken & D.A. van Leeuwen (TNO Human factors Research, Soesterberg, The Netherlands)

Assessment of Speech Recognition Systems.

J.M. McQueen (Max Planck Institute, Nijmegen, The Netherlands) The Role of Prosody in Human

Speech Recognition.

L. ten Bosch (IPO, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) The Potential Role of Prosody in Automatic Speech

Recognition.

P. Baggia, E. Gerbino, E. Giachin & C. Rullent (CSELT, Torino, Italy) Spontaneous Speech Phenom-

ena in Naive-User Interactions.

M.F.J. Drossaers & D. Dokter (University of Twente, Enschede,

the Netherlands) Simple Speech

Recognition with Little Linguistic Creatures.

H. Helbig & A. Mertens (FernUniversit¨at Hagen, Germany) Word Agent Based Natural Language Pro-

cessing.

Geunbae Lee et al. (Pohang University, Hyoja-Dong, Pohang, Korea) Phoneme-Level Speech and natu-

ral Language Integration for Agglutinative Languages.

K. van Deemter, J. Landsbergen, R. Leermakers & J. Odijk (IPO, Eindhoven, The Netherlands)

Generation of Spoken Monologues by Means of Templates

D. Carter & M. Rayner (SRI International, Cambridge, UK) The Speech-Language Interface in the

Spoken Language Translator

H. Weber (University of Erlangen, Germany) Time-synchronous Chart Parsing of Speech Integrating

Uniﬁcation Grammars with Statistics.

G. Veldhuijzen van Zanten & R. op den Akker (University of Twente, Enschede,
More Efﬁcient Head and Left Corner Parsing of Uniﬁcation-based Formalisms.

the Netherlands)

G.F. van der Hoeven et al. (University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands) SCHISMA: A natural

Language Accessible Theatre Information and Booking System.

G. van Noord (University of Groningen, the Netherlands) On the Intersection of Finite Staate Automata

and Deﬁnite Clause Grammars.

R. Bod & R. Scha (University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands) Prediction and Disambiguation by Means

of Data-Oriented Parsing.

The ninth workshop in the series took place on 9 June 1995. It was devoted to empirical methods
in the analysis of dialogues, and the use of corpora of dialogues in building dialogue systems.
The aim was to discuss the methods of corpus analysis, as well as results of corpus analysis and
the application of such results.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 9 (TWLT 9)
Corpus-based Approaches to Dialogue Modelling
Eds. J.A. Andernach, S.P. van de Burgt & G.F. van der Hoeven, 124 pages.

Preface and Contents
N. Dahlb¨ack (NLP Laboratory, Link¨oping, Sweden) Kinds of agents and types of dialogues.

J.H. Connolly, A.A. Clarke, S.W. Garner & H.K. Palm´en (Loughborough University of Technology,

UK) Clause-internal structure in spoken dialogue.

J. Carletta, A. Isard, S. Isard, J. Kowtko, G. Doherty-Sneddon & A. Anderson (HCRC, Edinburgh,

UK) The coding of dialogue structure in a corpus.

J. Alexandersson & N. Reithinger (DFKI, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany) Designing the dialogue component

in a speech translation system - a corpus-based approach.

H. Aust & M. Oerder (Philips, Aachen, Germany) Dialogue control in automatic inquiry systems.
M. Rats (ITK, Tilburg, the Netherlands) Referring to topics - a corpus-based study.
H. Dybkjær, L. Dybkjær & N.O. Bernsen (Centre for Cognitive Science, Roskilde, Denmark) Design,

formalization and evaluation of spoken language dialogue.

D.G. Novick & B. Hansen (Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology, Portland, USA) Mu-

tuality strategies for reference in task-oriented dialogue.

N. Fraser (Vocalis Ltd, Cambridge, UK) Messy data, what can we learn from it?
J.A. Andernach (University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands) Predicting and interpreting speech

acts in a theatre information and booking system.

The tenth workshop in the series took place on 6-8 December 1995. This workshop was organized
in the framework provided by the Algebraic Methodology and Software Technology movement
(AMAST). It focussed on algebraic methods in formal languages, programming langauges and
natural languages. Its aim was to bring together those researchers on formal language theory,
programming language theory and natural language description theory, that have a common in-
terest in the use of algebraic methods to describe syntactic, semantic and pragmatic properties of
language.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 10 (TWLT 10)
Algebraic Methods in Language Processing
Eds. A. Nijholt, G. Scollo & R. Steetskamp, 263 pages.

Preface and Contents
Teodor Rus (Iowa City, USA) Algebraic Processing of Programming Languages.
Eelco Visser (Amsterdam, NL) Polymorphic Syntax Deﬁnition.
J.C. Ramalho, J.J. Almeida & P.R. Henriques (Braga, P) Algebraic Speciﬁcation of Documents.
Teodor Rus & James, S. Jones (Iowa City, USA) Multi-layered Pipeline Parsing from Multi-axiom

Grammars.

Klaas Sikkel (Sankt Augustin, D) Parsing Schemata and Correctness of Parsing Algorithms.
Franc¸ois Barth´elemy (Paris, F) A Generic Tabular Scheme for Parsing.
Frederic Tendeau (INRIA, F) Parsing Algebraic Power Series Using Dymanic Programming.
Michael Moortgat (Utrecht, NL) Mutimodal Linguistic Inference.
R.C. Berwick (MIT, USA) Computational Minimalism: The Convergence of the Minimalistic Syntactic

Program and Categorial Grammar.

Annius V. Groenink (Amsterdam, NL) A Simple Uniform Semantics for Concatenation-Based Grammar.
Grzegorz Rozenberg (Leiden, NL) Theory of Texts (abstract only).
Jan Rekers (Leiden, NL) & A Sch¨urr (Aachen, D) A Graph Grammar Approach to Graphical Parsing.
S´andor Horvath (Debrecen, H) Strong Interchangeability and Nonlinearity of Primitive Words.
Wojciech Buszkowski (Poznan, P) Algebraic Methods in Categorial Grammar.

Vladimir A. Fomichov (Moscow, R) A Variant of a Universal Metagrammar of Conceptual Structures.

Algebraic Systems of Conceptual Syntax.

Theo M.V. Jansen (Amsterdam, NL) The Method of ROSETTA, Natural Language Translation Using

Algebras.

C.M. Mart´ın-Vide, J. Miquel-Verges & Gh. Paun (Tarragona, E) Contextual Grammars with Depth-

First Derivation.

P´al D¨om¨osi & J¨urgen Duske (Kussuth University H, University of Hannover, G) Subword Membership

Problem for Linear Indexed Languages.

C. Rico Perez & J.S. Granda (Madrid, E) Algebraic Methods for Anaphora Resolution.
Vincenzo Manca (Pisa, I) A Logical Formalism for Intergrammatical Representation.

The eleventh workshop in the series took place on 19-21 June 1996. It focussed on the task of di-
alogue management in natural-language processing systems. The aim was to discuss advances in
dialogue management strategies and design methods. During the workshop, there was a separate
session concerned with evalutation methods.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 11 (TWLT 11)
Dialogue Management in Natural Language Systems
Eds. S. LuperFoy, A. Nijholt and G. Veldhuijzen van Zanten, 228 pages.

Preface and Contents
David R. Traum (Universit´e de Gen`eve, CH) Conversational Agency: The TRAINS-93 Dialogue Man-

ager.

Scott McGlashan (SICS, SW) Towards Multimodal Dialogue Management.
Pierre Nugues, Christophe God´ereaux, Pierre-Olivier and Fr´ed´eric Revolta (GREYC, F) A Conver-

sational Agent to Navigate in Virtual Worlds.

Anne Vilnat (LIMSI-CNRS, F) Which Processes to Manage Human-Machine Dialogue?
Susann LuperFoy (MITRE, USA) Tutoring versus Training: A Mediating Dialogue Manager for Spoken

Language Systems.

David G. Novick & Stephen Sutton (Portland, USA) Building on Experience: Managing Spoken Inter-

action through Library Subdialogues.

Latifa Taleb (INRIA, F) Communicational Deviation in Finalized InformativeDialogue Management.
Robbert-Jan Beun (IPO, NL) Speech Act Generation in Cooperative Dialogue.
Gert Veldhuijzen van Zanten (IPO, NL) Pragmatic Interpretation and Dialogue Management

in

Spoken-Language Systems.

Joris Hulstijn, Ren´e Steetskamp, Hugo ter Doest, Anton Nijholt & Stan van de Burgt (University

of Twente, NL & KPN Research, NL) Topics in SCHISMA Dialogues.

Gavin Churcher, Clive Souter & Eric S. Atwell (Leeds University, UK) Dialogues in Air Trafﬁc Con-

trol

Elisabeth Maier (DFKI, D) Context Construction as Subtask of Dialogue Processing – the VERBMO-

BIL Case.

Anders Baekgaard (CPK, DK) Dialogue Management in a Generic Dialogue System.
Wayne Ward (Carnegie Mellon University, USA) Dialog Management in the CMU Spoken Language

Systems Toolkit.

Wieland Eckert (University of Erlangen, D) Understanding of Spontaneous Utterances in Human-

Machine-Dialog.

Jan Alexandersson (DFKI, D) Some Ideas for the Automatic Acquisition of Dialogue Structure.
Kristiina Jokinen (Nara Institute of Science and Technology, JP) Cooperative Response Planning in

CDM: Reasoning about Communicative Strategies.

Elizabeth Hinkelman (Kurzweil Applied Science, USA) Dialogue Grounding for Speech Recognition

Systems.

Jennifer Chu-Carroll (University of Delaware, USA) Response Generation in Collaborative Dialogue

Interactions.

Harry Bunt (Tilburg University, NL) Interaction Management Functions and Context Representation Re-

quirements.

Peter Wyard & Sandra Williams (BT, GB) Dialogue Management in a Mixed-Initiative, Cooperative,

Spoken Language System.

Rolf Carlson (KTH, SW) The Dialog Component in the Waxholm System.
Laila Dybkjær, Niels Ole Bernsen & Hans Dybkjaer (Roskilde University, DK) Evaluation of Spoken

Dialogue Systems.

Vincenzo Manca (Pisa, I) A Logical Formalism for Intergrammatical Representation.

TWLT 12 took place on 11-14 September 1996. It focussed on ’computational humor’ and in
particular on verbal humor. TWLT12 consisted of a symposium (Marvin Minsky, Douglas Hofs-
tadter, John Allen Paulos, Hugo Brandt Corstius, Oliviero Stock and Gerrit Krol as main speak-
ers), an essay contest for computer science students, two panels, a seminar organized by Salva-
tore Attardo and Wladyslaw Chlopicki and a two-day workshop (Automatic interpretation and
Generation of Verbal Humor) with a mix of invited papers and papers obtained from a Call for
Papers.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 12 (TWLT 12)
Computational Humor: Automatic Interpretation and Generation of Verbal Humor
Eds. J. Hulstijn and A. Nijholt, 208 pages.

Preface and Contents
Oliviero Stock ’Password Swordﬁsh’: Verbal Humor in the Interface.
Victor Raskin Computer Implementation of the General Theory of Verbal Humor.
Akira Ito & Osamu Takizawa Why do People use Irony? - The Pragmatics of Irony Usage.
Akira Utsumi. Implicit Display Theory of Verbal Irony: Towards a Computational Model of Irony.
Osamu Takizawa, Masuzo Yanagida, Akira Ito & Hitoshi Isahara On Computational Processing of

Rhetorical Expressions - Puns, Ironies and Tautologies.

Carmen Curc´o Relevance Theory and Humorous Interpretations.
Ephraim Nissan From ALIBI to COLOMBUS. The Long March to Self-aware Computational Models

of Humor.

Salvatore Attardo Humor Theory beyond Jokes: The Treatment of Humorous Texts at Large.
Bruce Katz A Neural Invariant of Humour.
E. Judith Weiner Why is a Riddle not Like a Metaphor?
Tone Veale No Laughing Matter: The Cognitive Structure of Humour, Metaphor and Creativity.

Tony Veale & Mark Keane Bad Vibes Catastrophes of Goal Activation in the Appreciation of Dispar-

agement Humour and General Poor Taste.

Kim Binsted & Graeme Ritchie Speculations on Story Pun.
Dan Loehr An Integration of a Pun Generator with a Natural Language Robot.
Cameron Shelley, Toby Donaldson & Kim Parsons Humorous Analogy: Modeling ’The Devils Dic-

tionary’.

Michal Ephratt More on Humor Act: What Sort of Speech Act is the Joke?

TWLT 13 took place on 13-15 May 1998. It was the follow-up of the Mundial workshop, that
took place in M¨unchen in 1997. Both the Mundial workshop as TWLT13 focussed on the formal
semantics and pragmatics of dialogues. In addition to the three-day workshop in Twente, with
invited and accepted papers, on 18 May a workshop titled ’Communication and Attitudes’ was
organized at ILLC/University of Amsterdam.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 13 (TWLT 13)
Formal Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (Twendial’98)
Eds. J. Hulstijn and A. Nijholt, 274 pages.

Preface and Contents
Nicholas Asher Varieties of Discourse Structure in Dialogue
Jonathan Ginzburg Clarifying Utterances
Steve Pulman The TRINDI Project: Some Preliminary Themes
Henk Zeevat Contracts in the Common Ground
John Barnden Uncertain Reasoning About Agents’ Beliefs and Reasoning, with special attention to

Metaphorical Mental State Reports

Thomas Clermont, Marc Pomplun, Elke Prestin and Hannes Rieser Eye-movement Research and

the Investigation of Dialogue Structure

Robin Cooper Mixing Situation Theory and Type Theory to Formalize Information States in Dialogue
Jean-louis Dessalles The Interplay of Desire and Necessity in Dialogue
Wieland Eckert Automatic Evaluation of Dialogue Systems
Jelle Gerbrandy Some Remarks on Distributed Knowledge
Jeroen Groenendijk Questions in Update Semantics
Wolfgang Heydrich Theory of Mutuality (Syntactic Skeleton)
Wolfgang Heydrich, Peter K¨uhnlein and Hannes Rieser A DRT-style Modelling of Agents’ Mental

States in Discourse

Staffan Larsson Questions Under Discussion and Dialogue Moves
Ian Lewin Formal Design, Veriﬁcation and Simulation of Multi-Modal Dialogues
Nicolas Maudet & Fabrice Evrard A Generic framework for Dialogue Game Implementation
Soo-Jun Park, Keon-Hoe Cha, Won-Kyung Sung, Do Gyu Song, Hyun-A Lee, Jay Duke Park,

Dong-In Park & J¨org H¨ohle MALBOT: An Intelligent Dialogue Model using User Modeling

Massimo Poesio & David Traum Towards an Axiomatization of Dialogue Acts
Mieke Rats Making DRT Suitable for the Description of Information Exchange in a Dialogue
Robert van Rooy Modal subordination in Questions
Adam Zachary Wyner A Discourse Theory of Manner and Factive Adverbial Modiﬁcation
Marc Blasband A Simple Semantic Model

TWLT14 was held on 7-8 December 1998. It focussed on the role of human language technology
in the indexing and accessing of written and spoken documents, video material and/or images,
and on the role of language technology for cross-language retrieval and information extraction.
The workshop consisted of a series of accepted papers.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 14 (TWLT 14)
Language Technology in Multimedia Information Retrieval
Eds. D. Hiemstra, F.M.G. de Jong and K. Netter, 194 pages.

Preface and Contents
Hans Uszkoreit

(DFKI, Saarbr¨ucken) Cross-language information retrieval: from naive concepts to re-

alistic applications

Paul Buitelaar, Klaus Netter & Feiyu Xu (DFKI, Saarbr¨ucken) Integrating Different Strategies for

Cross-Language Retrieval in the MIETTA Project

Djoerd Hiemstra & Franciska de Jong (University of Twente) Cross-language Retrieval in Twenty-

One: using one, some or all possible translations?

David A. Hull (Xerox Research Center Europe) Information Extraction from Bilingual Corpora and its

application to Machine-aided Translation

Arjen P. de Vries (University of Twente) Mirror: Multimedia Query Processing in Extensible Databases
Douglas E. Appelt (SRI International) An Overview of Information Extraction Technology and its Ap-

plication to Information Retrieval

Paul E. van der Vet & Bas van Bakel (University of Twente) Combining Linguistic and Knowledge-

based Engineering for Information Retrieval and Information Extraction

Karen Sparck Jones (Cambridge University) Information retrieval: how far will really simple methods

take you?

Raymond Flournoy, Hiroshi Masuichi & Stanley Peters (Stanford University and Fuji Xerox Co. Ltd.)

Cross-Language Information Retrieval: Some Methods and Tools

Andrew Salway & Khurshid Ahmad (University of Surrey) Talking Pictures: Indexing and Represent-

ing Video with Collateral Texts

Wim van Bruxvoort (VDA informatiebeheersing) Pop-Eye: Using Language Technology in Video Re-

trieval

Istar Buscher (S¨udwestrundfunk, Baden Baden) Going digital at SWR TV-archives: New dimensions of

information management professional and public demands

Arnold W.M. Smeulders, Theo Gevers & Martin L. Kersten (University of Amsterdam) Computer vi-

sion and image search engines

Kees van Deemter (University of Brighton) Retrieving Pictures for Document Generation
Steve Renals & Dave Abberly (University of Shefﬁeld) The THISL Spoken Document Retrieval System
Wessel Kraaij, Joop van Gent, Rudie Ekkelenkamp & David van Leeuwen (TNO-TPD Delft and

TNO-HFRI Soesterberg) Phoneme Based Spoken Document Retrieval

Jade Goldstein & Jaime Carbonell (Carnegie Mellon University) The use of MMR, diversity-based

reranking in document reranking and summarization

Michael P. Oakes, Chris D. Paice (Lancaster University) Evaluation of an automatic abstractic system
Danny H. Lie (Carp Technologies, The Netherlands) Sumatra: A system for Automatic Summary Gen-

eration

Marten den Uyl, Ed S. Tan, Heimo M¨uller & Peter Uray (SMR Amsterdam, Vrije Universiteit Ams-
terdam, Joanneum Research) Towards Automatic Indexing and Retrieval of Video Content: the
VICAR system

Anton Nijholt (University of Twente) Access, Exploration and Visualization of Interest Communities:

The VMC Case Study (in Progress)

Joanne Capstick, Abdel Kader Diagne, Gregor Erbach & Hans Uszkoreit (DFKI,

Saarbr¨ucken)

MULINEX: Multilingual Web Search and Navigation

Klaus Netter & Franciska de Jong (DFKI, Saarbr¨ucken and University of Twente) OLIVE: speech

based video retrieval

Franciska de Jong (University of Twente) Twenty-One: a baseline for multilingual multimedia

TWLT15 was held on 19-21 May 1999. It focussed on the interactions in Virtual World. Contri-
butions were invited on theoretical, empirical, computational, experimental, anthropological or
philosophical approaches to VR environments. Invited talks were given by Russell Eames (Mi-
crosoft), Lewis Johnson (USC), James Lester (North Carolina State University), Pierre Nugues
(ISMRA-Caen) and Stephan Matsuba (VRML Dream Company)

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 15 (TWLT 15)
Interactions in Virtual Worlds
Eds. Anton Nijholt, Olaf Donk and Betsy van Dijk, 240 pages.

Preface and Contents
Riccardo Antonini (University of Rome) Let’s-Improvise-Together
Philip Brey (Twente University) Design and the Social Ontology of Virtual Worlds
Dimitrios Charitos, Alan H. Bridges amd Drakoulis Martakos (University of Athens & University of

Strathclyde) Investigating Navigation and Orientation within Virtual Worlds

M. Cibelli, G. Costagliola, G. Polese & G. Tortora (University of Salerno) VR-Spider for (non) Im-

mersive WWW navigation

Bruce Damer, Stuart Gold, Jan A.W. de Bruin & Dirk-Jan G. de Bruin (The Contact Consortium &
Tilburg University) Steps toward Learning in Virtual World Cyberspace: TheU Virtual University
and BOWorld

Russell Eames (Microsoft Research, Seattle) Virtual Worlds Applications
Hauke Ernst, Kai Schafer & Willi Bruns (University of Bremen) Creating Virtual Worlds with a Gras-

pable User Interface

Denis Gracanin & Kecia E. Wright (University of Southwestern Louisiana) Virtual Reality Interface

for the World Wide Web

Geert de Haan (IPO, Eindhoven University of Technology) The Usability of Interacting with the Virtual

and the Real in COMRIS

G. M. P. O’Hare, A. J. Murphy, T. Delahunty & K. Sewell (University College Dublin) ECHOES: A

Collaborative Virtual Training Environment

Mikael Jakobsson (Ume University) Why Bill was killed – understanding social interaction in virtual

worlds

W. Lewis Johnson (Marina del Rey) Natural Interaction with Pedagogical Agents in Virtual Worlds
Kulwinder Kaur Deol, Alistair Sutcliffe & Neil Maiden (City University London) Modelling Interac-

tion to Inform Information Requirements in Virtual Environments

Rainer Kuhn & Sigrun Gujonsdottir (University of Karlsruhe) Virtual Campus Project – A Framework

for a 3D Multimedia Educational Environment

James C. Lester (North Carolina State University) Natural Language Generation in Multimodal Learn-

ing Environments

Stephen N. Matsuba (The VRML Dream Company, Vancouver) Lifelike Agents and 3D Animated Ex-
planation Generation Speaking Spaces: Virtual Reality, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Construction
of Meaning

Pierre Nugues (ISMRA-Caen) Verbal and Written Interaction in Virtual Worlds – Some application ex-

amples

Anton Nijholt (University of Twente) The Twente Virtual Theatre Environment: Agents and Interactions
Sandy Ressler, Brian Antonishek, Qiming Wang, Afzal Godil & Keith Stouffer (National
Institute
of Standards and Technology) When Worlds Collide –Interactions between the Virtual and the
Real

Lakshmi Sastry & D. R. S. Boyd (Rutherford Appleton Laboratory) EISCAT Virtual Reality Training

Simulation: A Study on Usability and Effectiveness

Frank Schaap (University of Amsterdam) ”Males say ’blue,’ females say ’aqua,’ ’sapphire,’ and ’dark

navy’” The Importance of Gender in Computer-Mediated Communication

Boris van Schooten, Olaf Donk & Job Zwiers (University of Twente) Modelling Interaction in Virtual

Environments using Process Algebra

Martijn J. Schuemie & Charles A. P. G. van der Mast (Delft University of Technology) Presence: In-

teracting in Virtual Reality?

Jarke J. van Wijk, Bauke de Vries & Cornelius W. A. M. van Overveld (Eindhoven University of

Technology) Towards an Understanding 3D Virtual Reality Architectural Design System

Peter J. Wyard & Gavin E. Churcher (BT Laboratories, Ipswich, Suffolk) Spoken Language Interac-

tion with a Virtual World in the MUeSLI Multimodal 3D Retail System

J. M. Zheng, K. W. Chan & I. Gibson (University of Hong Kong) Real Time Gesture Based 3D Graph-

ics User Interface for CAD Modelling System

TWLT16/AMiLP 2000 is the second AMAST workshop on Algebraic Methods in Language
Processing. Like its predecessor, organized in 1995 at the University of Twente in the TWLT
series, papers were presented on formal language theory, programming language theory and nat-
ural language theory. A common theme in these papers was the use of mathematics, in particular
the use of an algebraic approach. AMiLP 2000 was held in Iowa City, Iowa, USA, from May
20–22 2000, just before the AMAST 2000 conference.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 16 (TWLT 16)
Algebraic Methods in Language Processing (AMiLP2000)
Eds. D. Heylen, A. Nijholt, and G. Scollo, 274 pages.

Preface and Contents
Peter R.J. Asveld (University of Twente) Algebraic Aspects of Families of Fuzzy Languages
P. Boullier (INRIA-Rocquencourt) ‘Counting’ with Range Concatenation Grammars
D. Cantone, A. Formisano, E.G. Omodreo & C.G. Zarbu (University of Catania,

University L’Aiquila & University of Perugia) Compiling Dyadic First-Order Speciﬁcations into
Map Algebra

Denys Duchier (Universit¨at des Saarlandes) A Model Eliminative Treatment of Quantiﬁer-Free Tree

Descriptions

Theo M.V. Janssen (University of Amsterdam) An Algebraic Approach to Grammatical Theories for Nat-

ural Languages

Aravind K. Joshi (University of Pennsylvania) Strong Generative Power of Formal Systems
Jozef Kelemen, Alica Kelemenov & Carlos Martin-Vide (Silesian University & Rovira I Virgili Uni-

versity) On the Emergence of Inﬁnite Languages from Finite Ones

Stephan Kepser (University of T¨ubingen) A Coalgebraic Modelling of Head-Driven Phrase Structure

Grammar

Hubert Dubois & H´el`ene Kirchner (LORIA-UHP & CNRS) Objects, Rules and Strategies in ELAN
Jens Michaelis & Uwe M¨onnich & Frank Morawietz (Universit¨at T¨ubingen) Algebraic Description of

Derivational Minimalism

Rani Nelken & Nissim Francez (Dept. of Compute Science, Technion, Israel) A Calculus for Interrog-

atives Based on Their Algebraic Semantics

Gheorghe P˘aun (Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy) Molecular Computing and Formal

Languages: A Mutually Beneﬁcial Cooperation

G. Reggio, M. Cerioli & E. Astesiano (University of Genova) An Algebraic Semantics of UML Sup-

porting its Multiview Approach

James Rogers (University of Central Florida) wMSO Theories as Grammar Formalisms.
Teodor Rus (University of Iowa) Algebraic Deﬁnition of Programming Languages.
Karl-Michael Schneider (University of Passau) Tabular Parsing and Algebraic Transformations
Edward Stabler & Ed Keenan (University of California) Structural Similarity
Thomas L. Cornell (Cymfony Net, Inc.) Parsing and Grammar Engineering with Tree Automata.

TWLT 17, Interacting Agents, was co-organised with the Centre for Evolutionary Language En-
gineering (CELE) and as such is also the ﬁrst workshop in the CELE Workshops on Evolution-
ary Language Engineering (CEvoLE) series. Together with TWLT18/CEvoLE2 these workshops
are jointly titled “Learning to Behave”. The workshops investigate human-agent interaction and
knowledge both on the level of agents communicating with the external environment and on the
level of the internal agent processes that guide the modelling and understanding of the external
sensory input in the brain.
TWLT 17 focussed on the interaction of an agent with the environment. This covers many topics
such as the use of conversational strategies, natural language and non-verbal communication,
turn-taking, protocols, cross-media references, the effect of context, affect and emotion in agents.
A special session is devoted to theatre applications. TWLT 17 was held in Enschede from October
18–20 2000.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 17 (TWLT 17)
Learning to Behave, Workshop I: Interacting Agents
Eds. A. Nijholt, D. Heylen and K. Jokinen, 205 pages.

Preface and Contents
Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann, Sumedha Kshirsagar (MIRALab, CUI, University of Geneva) Commu-

nication with Autonomous Virtual Humans

Sabine S. Geldof (AI-Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel) Co-habited Mixed Reality and Context
Zs´oﬁa Ruttkay, Jeroen Hendrix, Paul ten Hagen, Alban Leli`evre, Han Noot & Behr de Ruiter
(Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science, Amsterdam) A Facial Repertoire for Avatars

Kristina H¨o¨ok (SICS, Kista, Sweden) Evaluating Interactive Characters – going beyond body language
Fr´ed´eric Kaplan (Sony Computer Science Laboratory, Paris) Talking AIBO : First Experimentation of

Verbal Interactions with an Autonomous Four-legged Robot

Jan-Thorsten Milde (Universit¨at Bielefeld) The Instructable Agent Lokutor
Patrizia Paggio & Bart Jongejan (Center for Sprogteknologi, Copenhagen) Uniﬁcation-Based Multi-

modal Analysis in a 3D Virtual World: the Staging Project

Boris van Schooten (Parlevink Group, University of Twente, Enschede) A Speciﬁcation Technique for

Building Interface Agents in a Web Environment

Bernard Spanlang, Tzvetomir I Vassilev (Department of Computer Science, University College,

London) Efﬁcient Cloth Model for Dressing Animated Virtual People

Luc van Tichelen and Alex Schoenmakers (Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products, Ieper) A Conversa-

tional Agent for a Multi-Modal Information Kiosk

Job Zwiers, Betsy van Dijk, Anton Nijholt & Rieks op den Akker (Parlevink/CTIT, University

of
Twente, Enschede) Design Issues for Intelligent Navigation and Assistance Agents in Virtual
Environment

Marc Cavazza (University of Teesside) Mapping Dialogue Acts to Narrative Functions for Interactive

Storytelling

Ricardo Imbert & Ang´elica de Antonio (Universidad Polit´enica de Madrid) The Bunny Dilemma:

Stepping Between Agents and Avatars

Patrizia Palamidese (CNR-CNUCE, Pisa) Composing and Editing Structured 3D Stories
Rachel Price, Chraig Douther, Mervyn A. Jack (Center for CIR, University of Edinburgh) Using

Choreographed Electronic Motion to Create Mood in Virtual Environments

Nikitas M. Sgouros (University of Piraeus) Empowering the Audience in Virtual Performances
Elisabeth Andr´e (DFKI, Germany) Adding Lifelike Synthetic Charaters to the Web
Roel Vertegaal (Queens University, Kingston) Agents as Attention-based Interfaces

TWLT 18, Internalising Knowledge, was co-organised with the Centre for Evolutionary Lan-
guage Engineering (CELE) and as such is also the second workshop in the CELE Workshops on
Evolutionary Language Engineering (CEvoLE) series. Together with TWLT17/CEvoLE1 these
workshops are jointly titled “Learning to Behave”. The workshops investigate human-agent inter-
action and knowledge both on the level of agents communicating with the external environment
and on the level of the internal agent processes that guide the modelling and understanding of
the external sensory input in the brain.
TWLT 18 focussed on internal aspects of learning and interaction: computation in brain-like
systens. The goal is to investigate cognitive models for information processing and coordination,
especially how symbolic processing, conceptualising and language learning take place in neural
models.
TWLT 18 was held in Ieper (Belgium) from November 22-24 2000.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 18 (TWLT 18)
Learning to Behave, Workshop II: Internalising Knowledge

Eds. K. Jokinen, D. Heylen and A. Nijholt, 221 pages.

Preface and Contents
Joseph Bruce and Risto Miikulainen (University of Texas at Austin, Austin) Evolving Populations of

Expert Neural Networks

Charlotte K. Hemelrijk (University of Z¨urich) Social Phenomena Emerging by Self-organisation in a

Competitive, Virtual World (“Domworld”)

Marc Leman (IPEM – Dept. Of Musicology, Ghent University) Spatio-temporal Processing of Musical

Texture, Pitch/Tonality and Rhythm

Erik Robert (AZ MM Gent, Belgium; KaHoG, Gent/Foundation ”Brain and Behaviour” Erasmus Uni-

versity, Rotterdam) Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia

Luc Berthouze and Nadia Bianchi–Berthouze (Electrotechnical Laboratory, Tsukuba & Aizu Univer-
sity, Aizu-Wakamatsu) Dynamics of Sensorimotor Categorization and Language Formation: A Co-
evolution?

L. Andrew Coward (Murdoch University, Perth) Modeling Cognitive Processes with the Recommenda-

tion Architecture

A. Dhunay, C.J.Hinde & J.H.Connolly (Loughborough University, UK) Induction of a Second Lan-

guage by Transformation and Augmentation

Thomas Liebscher (University of Potsdam) Modelling Reaction Times with Neural Networks using

Leaky Integrator Units

Jaime J. D´avila (School of Cognitive Science, Amherst) Genetic Algorithms and the Evolution of Neural

Networks for Language Processing

Yvan Saeys & Herwig Van Marck (Sail Port Western Europe, Centre for Evolutionary Language En-
gineering (CELE), Ieper) A Study and Improvement of the Genetic Algorithm in the CAM-Brain
Machine

Peter beim Graben, Thomas Liebscher & Douglas Saddy (University of Potsdam) Parsing Ambigu-
ous Context-Free Languages by Dynamical Systems: Disambiguation and Phase Transitions in
Neural Networks with Evidence from Event-Related Brain Potentials

Aard-Jan van Kesteren, Rieks op den Akker, Mannes Poel & Anton Nijholt (University of Twente)

Simulation of Emotions of Agents in Virtual Environments using Neural Networks

R´egine Kolinksky, Vincent Goetry, Monique Radeau and Jos´e Morais (Unit´e de Universit´e Libre de
Bruxelles, Fonds National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque) Human Cognitive Processes in Speech
Perception and World Recognition

Mehdi Dastani, Bipin Indurkhya and Remko Scha (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and Tokyo Univer-
sity of Agriculture and Technology) Modelling Analogical Projection based on Pattern Perception
Marc Leman & Bart Verbeke (Ghent University) The Concept of Minimal ’Energy’ Change (MEC) in
Relation to Fourier Transform, Auto-Correlation, Wavelets, AMDF and Brain-like Timing Net-
works – Application to the Recognition of Reptitive Rhythmical Patterns in Acoustical Musical
Signals

Jakub Zavrel, Sven Degroeve, Anne Kool, Walter Daelemans & Kristiina Jokinen (University

of
Antwerp & CELE, Ieper) Diverse Classiﬁers for NLP Disambiguation Tasks. Comparison,
Optimization, Combination and Evolution

TWLT 19, Information Extraction in Molecular Biology, was organised in the context of the Sci-
entiﬁc Programme on Integrated Approaches for Functional Genomics funded by the European

Science Foundation (ESF). In TWLT19, Information Extraction for Molecular Biology, the fo-
cus is on the published literature. Authors of journal articles identify relations between genes,
regulators and proteins, and each such relation is a piece of the puzzle. We do not know most
pathways, but we do know that more systematic perusal of the available literature will no doubt
uncover many more pieces of the puzzle. It is therefore in order to bring together workers in rele-
vant disciplines to exchange ideas, views and approaches. The main goal of TWLT19 is to further
informal and formal collaborations between different disciplines in order to promote better use
of existing literature.
TWLT 19 was held in Enschede from November 11-14 2001.

Proceedings Twente Workshop on Language Technology 19 (TWLT 19)
Information Extraction in Molecular Biology
Eds. P. van der Vet, G. van Ommen, A. Nijholt and A. Valencia, 78 pages.

Preface and Contents
Pieter Adriaans (University of Amsterdam) Sematic Induction with Emile, Opportunities in Bioinfor-

matics

Sophia Ananiadou, Goran Nenadi´c & Hideki Mima (University of Salford, UK & University of Tokyo,

Japan) A Terminology Management Workbench for Molecular Biology

Christian Blaschke, Juan Carlos Oliveros, Alfonso Valencia & & Luis Cornide (Universidad

Au-
tonoma, Madrid, Spain & ALMA Bioinformatica, Tres Cantos, Spain) Biological Function and
DNA Expression Arrays

Udo Hahn, Stefan Schulz & Martin Romacker (Freiburg University, Freiburg, Germany & Freiburg
University Hospital, Freiburg, Germany) ‘Deep’ Information Extraction From Biomedical Docu-
ments in the MEDSYNDIKATE System

Jerry R. Hobbs (Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center, SRI International, California) Information Extraction

from Biomedical Text

U. Reyle & J. ˇSari´c (University of Stuttgart, Germany & European Media Laboratory, Heidelberg, Ger-

many) Ontology Driven Information Extraction

B.J. Stapley, L.A. Kelley & M.J.E. Sternberg (Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK) Protein

Functional Classiﬁcation by Text Data-Mining

The proceedings of the workshops can be ordered from Leerstoel TKI, Department of Computer
Science, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, NL-7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands. E-mail
orders are possible: bijron@cs.utwente.nl. Each of the proceedings costs EURO 25,=.

