188

I E E E TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUTNEICCHANTIOOLNOGY,

VOLN. OC.OM-19,

2, APRIL 1971

Techniques for Designing Finite-Duration
Impulse-Response Digital Filters

LAWRENCE R. RABINER, MEMBER, IEEE

Abslract-Several newtechniques for designing finite-duration impulse-response digital filters havebecome available in the past fewyears.The motivationbehindthree designtechniques that have been proposed are reviewed here, and the resulting designs arecomparedwith respect to filtercharacteristics, ease of design, and methods of realization. The design techniques to be discussed include window, frequency-sampling, and equiripple designs.

I. INTRODUCTION

INTEREST in design techniques for finite-duration impulse-response (FIR) digitalfiltershas been renewed in the past few years because of the application of powerfuloptimizat,ionalgorithms to the design problem. Although closed-form solutions to the approximat,ion problemcannot,, in general, be obtained explicitly, iterative techniques can be made to yield optimum solut,ions. Two optimization techniques havebeen proposed recently [1][4] which, along wit.h t.he classical window design method [5], [SI, providet.heuserwithseveralpossibilitiesfor approximatingfilterswit'harbitraryfrequency-response characterist,ics. I n this paper wewill discusst'hegeneral theorybehindwindowingandtwooptimizationtechniques-frequency-sampling and equiripple designs-and thencompare thesemethodswithrespectoseveral practical and theoretical criteria.

11. TERMINOLOGY

Beforediscussing the design issues, it is import.ant to distinguish the various t,ypes of digital filters that can be designed and to separate t,he way in which a filter is realized from t,he filter characteristics themselves. The following terms will be used throughout this paper.
1) Finite-durationi,mpulse-response ( F I R ): Thisterm means that the durat,ion of the filter impulse response h, is finite; i.e.,

h,=0, h, = 0,

n > N 1 < CD
< >n N z ---a,

(1)

and
N1 > Nz.

2 ) Infinite-duration imnpulse-response ( I I R ): This term means that t.he duration of the filter impulse response h,

Paper approvedby the Data Communication Systems Committee of the IEEE Communication Technology Groupfor publication without oral presentation. Manuscript receivedOctober 2, 1970.
The author is with Bell Telephone Laboratories,Murray Hill, N. J. 07974.

is infinite; i.e., there exists no finite values of either Nl or

N , such that (1) is satisfied.

3) Recursiverealization: Thisterm describes theway

a filter (either IIR or FIR) is realized. It means that

the current filter output y , is obtained explicitly in terms
- .of past filter outputs yn-l, as well as in terms of past
- -and presentfilter inputs xnrxn-l, -. Thus t,he output

of a recursive realization can be written as

- 1.yn = F (yn-l,Yn-z, * , ~ n , ~ n 9- l ,*

(2)

4) Nonrecursiverealization: This term means that the current filter output yn is obtained explicitly in terms of onlypastandpresentinputs; i.e.,previousoutputsare not used to generate t.he current output. The representation on a nonrecursive realization canbe written as

yn = F (G,z,-I, * * 1.

(3)

The mot,ivat,ion behind this terminology is t,hat it has been shown [7], [SI that FIRfilters as well as IIRfilters can be realized bothnonrecursivelyandrecursively. ( I t should be noted that,in general,recursiverealizations of I I R filters and nonrecursive realizations of FIR filters aremost efficient andare usuallyused.) Thus a term describing filter characteristics should be .distinct from a term describing how the filter is realized. This is not how the terminology has t,raditionally been used.

111. SOME ADVANTAGOFEFSI R FILTERS

Althoughouraim is t,o describe andcompare design

techniques for F I R filters, it is of interest to first discuss

somereasonswhy FIR filters are of importance.These

include the following.

1) F I R filters can easily be designed to approximate a

prescribedmagnitudefrequency

response toarbitrary

accuracywithanexactlylinearphasecharacteristic.

In

addition, FIR filters can approximate arbitrary frequency

characteristics (bothmagnitudeandphase)b, ut

IIR

filters can also do this.

2) F I R filterscan be realized efficiently both nonre-

cursively(using direct convolution, or high-speed con-

volution by using the fast Fourier transform (FFT) [SI,

[lo]) and recursively (using a comb filter and a bank of
resonators [ll]) .

3) An F I R filter realized nonrecursivelyis always stable.

F I R filters realized nonrecursively contain only zeros in

the finite z plane, and hence are alwaysstable.

4) Quantization and roundoff problems inherent in re-

cursive realizations of I I R filters are generally negligible

in nonrecursiverealizations of FIR filters.

RABINER:FINITE-DURATIONIMPULSE-RESPONSE DIGITAL FILTERS
...........
wn
n-

..
: 0. n-

189

Fig. 1. Two examples of windowsandtheirFouriertransforms.

5) The coefficient accuracy problems inherent in sharp cation of the series, however, leads tothe well-known

cutoff I I R filters can often be made less severe for real- Gibbs phenomenon, i.e., a fixed percentage overshoot and

izat.ions of equally sharp F I R filters.

ripple before andafteranapproximateddiscontinuity,

IV. THEOROYF DESIGK

making this techniqueunsat,isfactoryforapproximating manystandardtypes of filters. ,In orderto control the

Since one of the most important reasons for designing F I R filters is that they can be designed wit.h an exactly linear phase, wewill restrict our discussion to this type. The generalcharacteristics of the frequency response of a digital filter whose impulse-response coefficients are real are
[ [ ( 3 1 1+H[kxp ( j w T ) ] = H exp j o n - T ,

convergence of the Fourier series a weighting function is used to modify the Fourier coefficients. This time-limited weighting function is called a window. Since the multiplication of Fourier coefficients by a window corresponds to convolving t'he original frequency response with the Fourietrransform of the window, a design criterionfor windows is to find a finite window whose Fourier transform has relativelysmall sidelobes. Fig. 1 shows two choices of windows andtheir respectivefrequency re-

n = O , = t l , f 2 , . . .( 4 )

sponses. The rectangular window at the top left corresponds todirecttruncation of the Fourier series. The

I HCexp ( j 0 T ) 1 I = I HCexp (-juT)I I, 0 I u I T Fouriertransform of the rect.angular window, shown at
the lower left, has a narrow center lobe, but has sidelobes (5) which cont,ain a large part of t.he total energy and which

e(O> = -e(+,

O I O I T decay quite slowly. Another window, the triangular win-
dow, is shown in t,he upperright of Pig. 1. I t s Fourier (6) transform, shown atthe lower right',hasamainlobe

where

twice the width of the rectangular window main lobe,

HCexp (

1= I HCexp (

1I exp Cje(O>1 (7)

but has much less energy in the sidelobes. The search for windows to meet the criterion previously

where H[exp ( j w T ) ] is the frequency response of t,he filter and T is the sampling period. Equat,ion (4) shows the periodicity of sampled-datasystemsinfrequency. Equations (5) and (6) show the symmetry of the magni-

mentioned, i.e., afinite window withmost of its energy in the main lobe of its Fourier transform, has led to several useful andin some sense optimum designs. The Hamming window, which is of the form:

tude function and asymmetry of the phasefunctionfor filterswithrealimpulse responses. In the remainder of this section we will discuss three techniques for approxi-

+W , = 0.54 0.46 COS

N - I n < - - 2 (8)

matingthe desired magnitude response characteristics, has 99.96 percent of its energy initsmain lobe, with

assuming linear phase, with an FIR filter.

the peak amplitude of the sidelobes down more than 40

A . Windowing

dB from the peak. The width of the main lobe is twice the width of the rectangular window's main lobe. The

Since the frequency response of adigitalsystem is Blackman window, which is

periodic, it canbeexpanded in aFourier series. The coefficients of thisFourier series are the filter impulse-

+ +(7) (7)2?m
w, = 0.42 0.5 cos

0.08 cos 4 m ,

response coefficients. Generally, there are aninfinite num-

ber of nonzero Fourier-series coefficients. To obt.ain an F I R filter which approximates the original frequency response, the Fourier series must be truncated. Direct trun-

-- N5 n 5 - N (9)
22

further reduces peak sidelobe ripple to less than 0.0001

of the main-lobe peak at theexpense of a main lobewhose

widthistriplet,hewidth

of the rectangular window

main lobe. Optimum window designs have been proposed

by Kaiser [SI and Helms [SI. The Kaiser window is an

approximat.ion to t,heprolatespheroidalwavefunctions

whose band-limiting properties are well known [12]. By

adjusting a parameter of the window, a tradeoff can be

obtainedbetweenpeak sidelobe ripple and the width of

the main lobe. The main disadvantage oT these windows

is that one mustcompute Bessel functionstogetthe

window coefficients.' Helms [6] has proposed the Dolph-

Chebyshev window, which is optimum in the sense that

the main-lobe widt.h is as smallas possible for a given

peak ripple. The maindisadvantage of this window is

that inversehyperbolic cosines must beevaluatedto

determine the window coefficients.

Onedisadvantage of the window design technique is

that one must beable tocompute Fourier-series coeffi-

cients for the periodic frequency response being approxi-

mated. Generally it isnottrivialtodetermine

closed-

form expressions forthese coefficients. The solution to

this problemisfound byapproximatelyobtainingthe

Fourier-series coefficients asthe discreteFouriertrans-

form (DFT) of a sampled version of the continuous fre-

quency response. By sampling the frequency response a t

a number of frequencies M much larger than the number

of Fourier-series coefficients under the window N , one can

obtain fairly good approximations to the first N Fourier

coefficients. Fig. 2presents a summary of the window

design procedure. Fig. 2(a) shows the desired frequency

response. Fig. 2(b) shows the samefrequency response

sampled at M equispaced frequencies, as well asa con-

t,inuous iriterpolat,ion in frequency.Through the use of

the DFT formula [Fig. 2(c)]the M-pointimpulse re-

sponse h, isobtainedandis shown below the formula.

An N-point window w, [Fig. 2(d)] with the Fourier

t,ransform W ( e j w T )[Fig. 2 (e)] weights the impulse re-

sponse to yield the N-point sequence a, [Fig. 2 (f)]. The

sequence a, is the filter impulse response and its Fourier

t,ransform [Fig. 2(g)] shows t.he final approximationto

t'he desired response.

..I.;

Frequency Sampling

A second technique for approximating a filter wgitihven frequency-response specifications is tosamplethe desiredfrequency response at N equispaced frequencies, where N is the number of samples in the filterimpulse response. By setting thesefrequencysamplestobe the D F T coefficients of the filterimpulse response, one can derive an approximationtoany desired continuous frequency response. For many types of filters, such as lowpass, bandpass, and high-pass filters, one can optimize the values of the frequencysamplesintransitionbands to
1 Kaiser has a simple 12-line Fortran 4 program which computes a power-series expansion (upto 25terms) of the Bessel function
IO(4.

0'.0 * O r
A(OlUT) = M(rjuT) 4t w(rju')
(9) Fig. 2. Step by step realization of windowing. (a) Desiredfre-
quency response. (b) Sampled frequency response, N << M .
(c) Impulse response obtained using DFT. (d) Typical wmdow functlon.(e) Wlndowfrequencyresponse. ( f) Windowedimpulse response. (g) Frequency response correspondingto windowed impulse response.

RABINER: FINITE-DURATION IMPULSE-RESPONSE DIGITAL FILTERS

191

the interpolated frequency response is seen to consist of elementary functions of t.he form:

sin (wNTI2) sin ( w T / 2 - 0)

(14)

which, in the design of standard filters such as a low-pass

filter, provide good ripple cancellation. Thus, by allowing

variable frequency samples in a transit'ion band between

the in- and out-of-band regions, one can choose the fre-

quencysamples in this band to provide optimum ripple

cancellation for either the out-of-band region, inband re-

gion, or a combinat,ion of the two. As the numberof sam-

ples in the transition bandincreases, ever finer ripple can-

Fig. 3. Set of frequency-response specifications forlinearphase filter. Solid curves show continuoufsrequency response and

cellation is possible. Fig. 4 shows an example of a lowpass filter wit,h an impulse-response duration of 256 sam-

heavy dots show frequency samples.

ples, and 3 variable frequency samples in the transition

band.Thirty-t.woinbandfrequencysamples were s t to

opt,i~nize thfeilter design. The resulting filter designs will be shown to be quite efficient..
I n Fig. 3 frequency-response specificat>ionsfor a desired filter are shown(the solid curves) along withthe frequency

1.0, and the out-of-band samples set to 0.0. An optimizat,ion program determined the transition samples to minimize peak out-of-band ripple. As seen in Fig. 4 (a), a peak out-of-band ripple of -88 dB was obtained. An expanded

samples of this filter (the heavy points). The frequency samples are defined by the relat'ion

Ir=expHk = I H k I exp ( j e k ) = H(2)

[j(2r/N)k],

view of t,hefrequency response of the filter is shown in
Fig. 4 (b).
Fig. 5 shows a frequency-sampling design for an ideal
full-band differentiator. I n this figure the filterimpulse

k = 0 , 1 , * . . , N- 1 (10) response (of 256-sample duration)t,hemagnitude re-

sponse, andthemagnitudeerrorareplotted.The

peak

where H(z) is the x transform of the FIR filter. By using magnitude error is less t.han 0.1 percent (the average error

the inversediscreteFouriertransform (IDFT), we can is considerably less than this) and there is no phase error

determine the filter impulse-response coefficients h, in a t all.

terms of the frequency samples as

It shouldbenoted t,hat the mathematical solution of

theoptimization problem is straightforward because of

the linearity of the frequency response withrespect to

the unconstrained variables.

The x-transform relation gives

N-1
H(z) = h,z-"
n=O

c( 1 - z-N)
-
N

N-1
b=O 1 - x-'

H k . (12)
exp [ j ( Z ? / N ) k ]

Evaluation of ( 1 2 ) on the unit circle gives the continuous interpolation formula

H[exp

(jwT)]

exp [ - j ( w N T / 2 )
=

(1 - l/N)]

N

- CN-l H k exp [ - j ( ? r k / N ) ] sin ( w N T I 2 )
b=0 sin ( w T / 2 - a k / N )
(13)
which can easily be evaluated using the FFT algorithm. The basic ideas behind frequency sampling can be seen
in ( 1 3 ) . The filterfrequency response is seen t o be linearlyrelated to the frequency samples, andthuslinear optimizationtechniquescanbe used to optimally select values of several, or all, the frequencysamples to give the best approximation to the desired filter. Furthermore,

C. Equiripple Designs

A third technique for designing F I R filters solves a
system of nonlinear equations to generate a filter with an
+equirippleapproximationerror [ 3 ] ,[ 4 ] ,[ 1 4 ] . I n this
method the unknown quantities are both the ( N l ) / 2 coefficients in t,he impulse response (assuming N odd, and a symmetrical impulse response) and a set of ( N - 3 ) / 2 frequencies a t which ext,rema of the approximation error
occur. By writingconst.raintequationson the extrema andonthederivatives, asystem of ( N - 1 ) nonlinear equations in ( N - 1 ) unknowns can be obtained. Standard nonlinearoptimizationtechniquesare used to solve
t,hese equations.
For simplicity, we assume the filterimpulse response h,, is symmetricand existsfrom n = - ( N - 1 ) / 2 to n = ( N - 1 ) / 2 ,where N is odd. Thus thefilter frequency
response can be written as

(N-1) 12

H[exp ( j w T ) ] =

h, exp ( -jwnT)

n=-(N-1)/2

+ .(N-1) 12

= ho

2h, cos (wnT) ( 1 5 )

n-1

192
20

LOW PASSFILTERDESIGN TYPE I DATA
B W = 32 M=3 N = 256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY, APRIL 1971

EXPANDED FREOUENCY RESPONSE
-ir"Ii

-2 -3
6750500250

1000 1250

00

.-., 257050

3000 323535070~500

I

+-1800

1000

2000

3000

4000 5000

-1m37t50 40I00

4250

4500

I4750 ' 5000

FREOUENCY IN Hz

FREOUENCY IN Hz

( 4 (b)

Fig. 4. (a) Low-pass filter with three transition samples and impulse-response duration of 256 samples, designed by frequency-sampling techniques. (b) Expanded view of filter frequency response.

NONRECURSIVE D I F F E R E N T I A T O R S

IMPULSE RESPONSE

N =256

0.0 0.0
1.a

0.f 0.2 0.3 0.4 NORMALIZED FREQUENCY

0.5 10-4

0 -0

-4

- 8 .99 -10-4

0 255

TIMEINSAMPLES MAGNITUDECURVE
o.mo80.4

0

0.00.o

0.25

0.50

0.75

NORMALIZED FREOUENCY

I.MI

t

1.0

#

I

I

I

I.

I

ERROR CURVE

0.0

-1.0
0.0

I

I
0.25

I

I
0.50

1

I
0.75

100

NORMALIZED FREOUENCY

5. 256-point impulse response full-band differentiator designed by frequency-sampling technique.

Fig. 6.

oo
(b)
(a) 41-point equiripple low-pass filter. (b)Plot positions of zeros of filter.

of 2-plane

RABINER: FINITE-DURATION IMPULSE-RESPONSE DIGITAL FILTERS

193

A. Transition Bandwidth for Low-Pass Filters

01 I

I1

L

io-' 10-4 10-3 10-2 lo-'

82-

Fig. 7. Comparison of filter designs in terms of normalized width of transition band as function of out-of-band ripple 62.

The derivat'ive of t.he frequency response can be evaluated as

One of the most basic ways of comparing low-pass filters is to compare t.he width of the t.ransition band for differentvalues of peakout-of-band andinband ripple. Fig. 7 shows acomparison of thistypefortheKaiser window, frequencysampling, and equiripple designs. I n this figure, the normalized width of the transition band as afunction of the out-of-band ripple is plotted. The normalizedwidth of thetransitionband is defined as folloivs2 :
D(81,62) = NT[FH(&,&) - F L ( ~ I , & ) ] (19)
where
FH(B1,&) upper cutoff frequency in Hz F~(61,62) lower cutoff frequencyinHz 61 inrpbipeaapnklde 6 2 out-of-pbea&ndk ripple.

(N-1) /z

H'Cexp ( j o T ) ] = -

2h,-nT sin (wnT). (16)

n=l

At each extremum of the approximation error, an equation can be written relating thefrequency response to the desired value and the allowed error, i.e.,

where Hd[exp ( j w T ) ] is the desired value at thefrequency wZ, 6z is t,he allowable approximationerror, and oz is an unknownfrequency.A second equationcanbewritten because the value of the frequency response at frequency
is an ext'remum of the error, i.e.,

N'Cexp ( j w l T ) ] = 0.

(18)

A series of equations of the form of (17) and (18) can

be solved using nonlinear optimization techniques to give

the filter coefficients and the frequencies of the extrema.

Fig. 6 shows typical results for the design of a low-pass

filter with equiripple error both inband and out-of-band.

The impulse-response duration is 41samples long. The

inbandripple in t'his case is 0.01, andthe out-of-band

ripple is

or -80 dBF.ig. 6(b) shows the z-plane

positions of the zeros of this filter. The out-of-band zeros

are all ontheunit circle, andtheinband zeros lie in

quadrouplets. For each zero a t z = r exp ( j e ) , there are

corresponding zeros a t z = r exp (-jt9), and z =

( l / r ) exp ( , t j e ) . .This geometric symmetry of the zeros,

when they are off the unit circle, accounts for the linear

phase response which is obtained.

I n this figure the inband ripple 61 is shown as an addi-

tional parameter of the curves. The upper dashed curve

shows the results for the Kaiser window, which, because

of its time-limit'ing and band-limitingproperties, tends

to have the smallest normalized bandwidth. For an out-

of-band ripple of -80 dB (& =

the normalized

bandwidth is 5.01, whereas for a -40 dB ripple (82 = lov2)

t'he normalized bandwidth is about 2.22. For these data

points t.he inband peak ripple 61 is equal to 62.3

The middle dashedcurve shows the resultsfor fre-

quency-sampling designs. Foran out-of-band ripple of

-86 dB, the normalized 1vidt.h of the transit,ion band is

4, or about $ that of the Kaiser window. For values of

6 2 of -66 and -46 dB, t'he transition width decreases to

3 and 2 forthese designs. The design tradeoff between

t,heKaiser window and equiripple designs is t.he larger

values of 61 for the latter case versus the larger value of

transit.ion width for the former case.

The lowest set of curves show the resultsfor equi-

ripple designs forvariousvalues of ijl. Since equiripple

designs areoptimum, i.e., they have the smallestwidth

of transitionbandfor fixed 61, thedata for this case

falls below the data for t,he other two cases. The percent-

age differencein normalized bandwidthbetween equi-

ripple designs and frequency-sampling designs, for fixed

61, 62, is onlyabout 30 percent.. Since the subopt,imal

frequency-sampling designs arenot much less efficient

t,han the optimal equiripple designs, there may be circum-

stancesin which it is preferable to use the suboptimal

design. We shall discuss such cases in the next sect.ion.

V. COMPARISOOFNDESIGNTECHNIQUES
There are many theoretical and practical ways of comparingdifferent filter-design techniques. In this section we will comparet'he threemethods discussed interms of 1)thetransitionbandwidthfor a standard low-pass filter, 2) the ease of desig-n of new filters, and 3) the methods of realization.

B. Ease of Design An important issue to any filter designer or user is how
easy it is to design a new filter to meet some particular
The multiplication by NT in (19) makes D(61,6z) a dimensionless quantity, independent of.AJT.
Low-pass filter designs, using the Kaiser window, have transition bandwidths that are within about 10 Dercent of the transition bandwidth of optimum equiripple filters. *

194

OINEEE TRANSACTIONS

COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY, APRIL 1971

specifications. For example, a user may desire an approxi- small cat.alog of equiripple designs for low-pass filters is

mation to a frequency response which is not one for which available from H e ~ ~ m a n n . ~ )

the coefficients have already been precataloged. The fol-

lowing issues then arise.

C. Realization of FIR Filters

1) What types of filtershave been cataloged and can be referenced readily?
2) How easily can the design technique be applied to arbitrary magnitude and phase specifications?
3) Can filterswithlongimpulse responses, i.e., large values of N , be designed to obtain sufficient,lysharp transition ratios to meet the most stringent of design specifications?
I n this section we shallt,ry to answerthesequestions with respcct to each of the three design techniques.
Since the window design technique is so stxaight,forward

Any F I R filter can be realized nonrecursively by direct convolution or fast convolution, or recursively using a cascade of a cpmb filter and a bank of parallel resonators. To use a nonrecursive realization requires the coefficients of the filterimpulse response h,. For directconvolution bhe output yn is determinedexplicitlyfrom theinputs xn as

N-1

Yn =

hmxn-me

m=O

(20)

to apply t,here is no need to catalog a large seot f reference For fast convolut.ion a block of output samples is obtained desigk, and hence this has not been done. The window froma block of input samples byFouriertransforming technique is readilyamenable to approximating any set the input,, multiplying t,he transformby theFourier trans-

of filter specifications >vit'h no limitationsonlength of impulse response. The problemsinherent in the window techniquearethe necessity tohave Fourier-series coefficients of the desired periodic frequency response and t,hecomputationrequired for using optimum windows such as the Kaiser window or the Dolpli-Chebychev window. The first problem is solved by the approximate procedure outlined in Fig. 2. Programs for comput,ing Bessel functionsfor the Kaiser window, or inversehyperbolic cosines for the Dolph-Chebychev window, are necessary. Thesearegenerallyavailableaslibrarysubroutineson most, computers. Thus the window technique tends to be relat'ively easy to use in the general design case.
I n order to use the frequency-sampling technique, the user must program the linear optimization procedure, or use some available optimizahion program and adapt it to his specific needs. Once t,his has been accomplished, there is no problem designing filters with arbitrary magnitude and phase characterist,ics, or with any length impulse response. The linear nature of the problem guarantees con-

form of the impulse response, and inverse Fourier transforming the product.Details of this t.echnique are ex-
plained in [SI, [lo].
The way in which an FIR filter may be realized recursively is seen from (11). Instead of the impulse-response coefficients, the DFT of the impulse response, or, as we have called t'hem, the frequency samples, can be used to realize the filter as a cascade of a comb filter (1 - z-") and a parallelbank of complex resonators. The significance of t.his realizat,ion is that for frequency-sampling designs, in many cases several, if not the majority, of the frequencysamples would be 0.0. Hencet'hisrealization can be muchmore efficient than nonrecursive realizations. For filters designed by the other techniques, all the DFT coefficients will be nonzero, in general, and this realization will be muchless efficient. Furthermore, for frequencysampling designs where the majorit,y of the frequency samples are 0.0 or 1.0, the effects of quantizationare much less severe in the recursive realization than in the nonrecursive realizat.ion.

vergence of the mathemat,icaal lgorithms. For several standard filters there exists an extensivecat'alog of fre-

VI. CONCLUSION

quency-sampling designs [2][,13]. Thetypes of filters As in the design of I I R digital filters, thereare now

included are low-pass and bandpass filters and wide-band several techniques available for designing F I R filters. The

(up to full-band)differentiators. Fromthis cat,alogone choice of techniquedependhseavily

onthe decision

could apply simple frequencytransformationstoobtain band-stop or high-pass filters [15].

whether to compromise accuracy of approximation,ease of design, or a method of realization with a fixed quanti-

I n orderto use t.he equiripple design techniques, the zation accuracy. user must program the nonlinear optimization procedure,

or use some availableroutine and again adapt it to 'his

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

needs. The procedure can only design equiripple approxi-

mat,ions t o the magnitude response (assuminglinear

The author is gratefulfortheinsights he has gained

phase). It may be possible to modify it for arbitrary phase into filter-design problems from discussions of this mate-

but this has not been done. The optimizationtechnique rial wit8hDr. R. W. Schafer, Dr. J. F. Kaiser, Dr. B. Gold,

used by Herrmann and Schuessler [SI, [4] was capable Dr. H. Helms, Prof.'A. V. Oppenheim, Prof. 0. Herrmann,

of obtaining solutions only for small values of N (on the and Prof. H. W. Schuessler.

order of 40). Recent work by Herrmann [lS] and Hof-

stetter et al. [14] have solved t.he mathematical problems and filterscanbe designed withlargevalues of N . (A

0. Herrmann, Institut fur Nachrichtentechnik,University Erlangen-Nurenberg, 8520 Erlangen,Germany.

of

RATION RABINER:

19.5

REFERENCES

[l] B. Goldand K. L. Jordan, "A directsearch procedurefor

designing finitdeuration impulse response filters," I E E E

Trans. Audio Electroacoust., vol. AU-17, Mar. 1969, pp. 33-36.

121 L. R. Rabiner, B. Gold, and C. A. McGonegal, "An approach

to the approximation problem for nonrecursive digital filters,"

ZEEETrans.AudioEledroawust.,

vol. AU-18. June 1970.

pp. 83-106.

[31 0.Herrmann and H. W. Schuessler, "On the design of selective

nonrecursive digital filters," presented at theIEEE Arden

House Workshop, Harriman, N. Y., Jan. 1970.

[41 0.Herrmann, "On the design on nonrecursive digital filters with linear phase," Electron. Lett., 1970.

I51 J. F. Kaiser, "Digital filters," in SystemAnalysisbyDigital Computer, FF. . Kuoand J. F. Kaiser, Eds. New York:

Wiley, 1966.

H. D. Helms,"Nonrecursive digital filters:design methods

for achieving specifications onfrequency response," Z E E E

Trans. Audio Electroacoust., vol. AU-16, Sept. 1968, pp. 336-

342.

B. Gold and K. L. Jordan, Jr., "A note on digital filter syn-

thesis," Proc. Z E E E (Lett.), vol. 56, Oct. 1968, pp. 1717-1718.

H. B. Voelcker and E.E. Hartquist,"Digital filtering via

block recursion," I E E ET r a n sA. u d i o

Electroacoust., vol.

AU-18, June 1970, pp. 169-176.

I91 T.G. Stockham, Jr., "Hlgh-speed convolution and correlation
with applications to digital filtering," in Digital Processing. of

SignaZs, B. Gold and C. M. Rader, Eds. New York: McGraw-

Hill, 1969, ch. 7.

H. D. Helms, "Fast Fourier transform met.hod of computing

difference equationsandsimulating filters," ZEEETrans.

Audio Electroacoust., vol. AU-15, June 1967, pp. 85-90.

B. Gold and C. M. Rader, DigitalProcessing of Signals. New

York: McGraw-Hill, 1969, pp. 78-86.

D. Slepian and H. 0. Pollak, "Prolate spheroidalwave func-

tions, Fourier analysis and uncertainty-I and 11," Bell Syst.

Tech. J . , vol. 40,1961, pp. 43-84.

[13] rLe.cuRrs.ivletaabaninndedr nonreKcu. rsSitveeiglditixg,it"aTl hdeifdfeerseingtniatoofrsw,"ideZ-bEaEnEd
TEr.aHnosf.fsAteutd,tieorE,lAec.t7ro.aOcoPuPset.n,hveoilm. A, aUn-1d8J,.JSuineege1&97P0a,ppepr.o2n04d-e2s0ig9n.
techniques for eqmripple filters, presented a t Princeton Conf.,

Mar. 1971.

(15j

fA-i-l.t-e-Grs,.,,CPornosct.aZnntisnt.idEelse,c."ESpngec.,trvaol l.tr1a1n7s,foArumga.ti1o9n7s0,fpopr .

digital 1585-

15YU.
[16] 0.Herrmann, personal communicat,ion.

Lawrence R. Rabiner (SJ62-M'67) was born

in Brooklyn, N. Y., on September 28, 1943.

He received the S.B. and S.Md.egrees

simultaneously in 1964, antdhPeh.D.

degree in electricalengineering in 1967, a11

fromtheMassachusettsInstitute of Tech-

nology, Cambridge.

From 1962 through 1964, heparticipated

in the cooperative plan inelectrical engi-

neering a t Bell Telephone Laboratories,

Inc., WhippanyandMurray Hill, N. J.,

where he worked ondigitalcircuitry,military

communications

problems, and problems inbinaural hearing. He is presently en-

gaged in researchon speech communications anddigital signal

processing techniques a t Bell TelephoneLaboratories, Murray

Hill.

Dr. Rabineris amember of EtaKappaNu, SigmaXi, Tau

Beta Pi, and the Acoustical Society of America.

