PERSPECTIVE

Bayesian Network Approach to Cell Signaling Pathway Modeling

Karen Sachs,1 David Gifford,2 Tommi Jaakkola,2 Peter Sorger,1,3 and Douglas A. Lauffenburger1,3,4*
(Published 3 September 2002)

Introduction Advances in the understanding and prediction of how complex biomolecular signaling pathways operate in regulating cell functions will increasingly depend on the emerging spectrum of multivariable, high-throughput, quantitative, integrative methodologies gathered under the term "systems biology" (1). This field encompasses interrelated developments in experimental measurement and manipulation that allow the collection of larger, more complete data sets, coupled with computational analysis of the data to find patterns and formulate new hypotheses. Modeling approaches for signaling pathways can range from Boolean algebraic (2) to differential equation (3) frameworks. It can be envisioned that a hierarchical matrix of "highlevel" (showing which components influence which other components) and "low-level" (including details such as the kinetics and stoichiometries of the interactions) models might usefully be connected for comprehensive, yet efficient, analysis purposes (4). An appealing approach falling between Boolean algebra and differential equation frameworks on this modeling spectrum is the graphical modeling methodology known as Bayesian network analysis (5). This methodology has recently proven to be very useful for hypothesis generation and testing in gene expression regulation problems (6-9). In this article, we describe the novel application of graphical modeling to model discovery and model selection, an important preliminary step in hypothesis testing, in protein signaling networks. Our purpose here is to outline the procedure for analysis of this kind of problem and illustrate it with a very simple preliminary example.
We have begun to explore the application of Bayesian networks to represent multivariate probabilistic relationships among variables of interest (in this context, phosphorylated receptors, activated enzymes, and other biomolecules). Bayesian networks can uncover statistical relationships among variables from a set of data. Revealed relationships are not restricted to pairwise or linear functions and, in fact, can be arbitrarily complex, so there is no limitation on the number of factors involved in each dependence relationship or on the form that this dependence must take. One example is an "exclusive or" (XOR) dependence relationship. If an XOR relationship describes the dependence of variable C on variables A and B, C will be in the active state when A is on and B is off, and when A is off and B is on, but not when A and B are both on or when both are off. This slightly more complex instance of combinatorial regulation comprises a nonlinear relationship between the variables. If such a relationship, or even one of far greater complexity, does in fact exist

among the considered variables, the Bayesian network approach will be able to uncover it, given sufficient data. Because statistical relationships may imply a physical or functional connection, we can use Bayesian networks to refine existing knowledge or uncover potential relationships in signaling pathways.
In a Bayesian network, a directed acyclic graph structure (DAG) summarizes dependence relationships among variables: Graph nodes (the geometric shapes) depict variables, and edges (the lines) represent dependencies among variables (more precisely, the lack of an edge indicates conditional independence) (Fig. 1) (5, 10). The DAG enables a biologically interpretable model structure, although dependence relationships must be interpreted with care, as described below. Graph structures depicting interactions among biomolecules can be scored against data to determine their relative probability. The Bayesian score of a model S is the conditional probability that the model S is the correct one, given specific data D (Fig. 2). Thus, when more than one model is scored using the same data, it is possible to judge which model best ex-
ABC
Fig. 1. A DAG showing dependence relationships among variables A, B, and C. C is dependent on B, and B is dependent on A. Variables A and C are conditionally independent of each other. B is the child of parent node A, and C is the child of parent node B.
plains the observed data. A more detailed description of the Bayesian scoring metric is given elsewhere (5, 10).
Because the Bayesian scoring metric determines the relative probability of each model structure, it can be applied to rank competing models according to their ability to explain available data. This is a form of model selection in which the data set defies interpretation through classic application of biological intuition and instead necessitates a computational tool to determine which hypothesis the data support best. In the case of Bayesian networks, that selected hypothesis is simply the model with the highest relative probability, given the data. When we extend this approach to model discovery, however, we examine features common to the set of highest scoring models (rather than the single highest scoring model) in order to avoid selecting one particular high-scoring model when others may score nearly as well.

1Biological Engineering Division, 2Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 3Department of Biology, 4Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
*Corresponding author. 56-341 MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139. Telephone, 617-252-1629; fax, 617-258-0204; e-mail, lauffen@mit.edu

Model Selection Model selection can be an important stage in hypothesis testing, when a single model out of a number of equally favored candidates must be singled out for wet-lab verification--in particular, when parallel verification of all candidate models is infeasible or prohibitively expensive. As a simple preliminary exam-

www.stke.org/cgi/content/full/sigtrans;2002/148/pe38

Page 1

PERSPECTIVE

ple, we illustrate here an attempt at model selection analysis grin activate ERK2, which activates FAK. Model 3 (M3) shows

within the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, a ERK2 and FAK both linked to fn and integrin but conditionally in-

ubiquitous pathway vital for such processes as the survival, pro- dependent of each other. Finally, Model 4 (M4) is a mixture of the

liferation, differentiation, and migration of eukaryotic cells.

previous models and has no conditional independencies. Our goal

In particular, we address the activation of focal adhesion kinase was to score the models against data from Asthagiri et al. to discov-

(FAK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) that results er which model might be best supported by these data.

from the interaction between the extracellular matrix protein fi-

In addition to the four candidate models, we also consider the in-

bronectin (fn) and the integrin 51. There has been literature con- dependence model, M0, as a control. Because some dependence is troversy about the pathway(s) relating FAK and ERK activation, in known to exist between fn-integrin signaling and FAK and ERK2

terms of the relative directions of influence of FAK activation on activity, this model lacks at least one dependence relationship, so it

ERK activation and vice versa; for example, see (11-15). We con- is intentionally designed to score poorly. A total of eight measure-

sider several possible models of the signaling events. To score them, ments of initial activation rate and 10 measurements of overall acti-

we take advantage of an existing, relatively large-scale, quantitative, vation for FAK and ERK2 were used. Data were grouped to two or

dynamic data set of this system (16). We emphasize here that, to three levels using a discretization method that strives to preserve

date, efforts to generate quantitative dynamic

data on protein signaling pathway component

activities in a systematic multivariable mode

are exceedingly scarce in comparison to gene Equation 1

expression (and protein level) studies. Astha-

giri et al. cultured CHO-B2 cells, transfected
with human 5 integrin, on fn-coated plates. Two levels of integrin expression and five

Equation 2

concentrations of fn were employed. A transient time course of ERK2 activity measure-

Equation 3

1 n

1 n

ments was made for each of the 10 possible

fn-integrin combinations, using a high-

throughput kinase activity assay. FAK activa- Fig. 2. Equations that define the Bayesian Score (Eq. 1). The Bayesian score of a graph

tion time courses were measured by Western is the relative probability of that graph structure (S), given the available data (D). Eq. 2

blotting. We use two metrics (data sets) for comes from application of Bayes' rule, and Eq. 3 defines the P(D|S) term. P(D|S) is the

FAK and ERK2 from Asthagiri et al.: an overall activation level and the initial rate of activation under the 10 fn-integrin combinations (Table 1).
We pose four candidate models (Fig. 3). It is important to keep in mind that links indicate a statistical dependence of relative influence, but they do not necessarily imply a

likelihood; P(S) is the prior, which incorporates any bias that the experimenter has for a particular structure(s) due to prior knowledge; and c is the constant term, which cancels in the comparison between models. P(S|D) is termed the posterior, because it is determined after observation of the data. i is the parameter vector for the conditional probability distribution over variable I, conditioned on its parent variables. The likelihood term is computed as an average, with a distribution over the parameters of each local conditional probability distribution. Given a set of assumptions, including discrete valued variables, the multivariate integral can be computed analytically.

direct functional or physical connection

(17). For instance, a link from vari-

able A to B may imply that A acti-

vates B, but it may also exist if an

Model selection - Static models

additional, unobserved variable regu-

lates both A and B, resulting in a statistical dependence between them.

Data set I: Initial rate

Eight datapoints each for FAK and ERK. Expressed as the slope between an early timepoint and the zero

On the other hand, a functional con- of activation

timepoint.

nection will generally result in statis-

tical dependence, and some level of

prior knowledge in the domain may help us decipher which connections are likely to be causal rather than

Data set II: Overall activation

Ten datapoints each for FAK and ERK. For FAK, this is the steady-state level achieved by the 90-min timepoint; for ERK, it is the integral of the timecourse curve.

merely statistical.

Model 1 (M1) shows a link from fn and integrin to FAK, and one from

Model discovery - Dynamic models

FAK to ERK2. Such a dependence structure is expected if fn and integrin activate (activate is used to indicate

Eight datapoints for each of ERK at 5,10,15, and 20 min, and FAK at 7.5 and 90 min.

regulation in the general sense, and

may include repression or combinato-

rial regulation) FAK, which activates Table 1. Data summary. For model selection, data sets I and II are used to score static models. Data

ERK2. Model 2 (M2) is consistent set I is the initial rate of activation from (16); data set II is overall activation. Model discovery exam-

with a pathway in which fn and inte- ines dynamic models and therefore employs the unprocessed time course data.

www.stke.org/cgi/content/full/sigtrans;2002/148/pe38

Page 2

PERSPECTIVE

Model Data set I Approximate Data set II Approximate

similar systematic, quantitative, dynamic, and multivariable approach.

scores

fold difference scores from MI

fold difference from M4

Hypothesis Discovery We can extend our use of the Bayesian

M0 -50.5

2150

-60.8

1700

scoring metric to search for high-scor-

M1 -42.8

1

-58.0

104

ing graphs among all possible model

M2 -43.8 M3 -44.3

3 4

-57.6 -55.6

73 10

structures. Although we cannot find the single highest scoring model (because this problem is computationally infeasi-

M4 -44.3

4

-53.4

1

ble), we can look for features common

to high-scoring models and consider

them as hypothesized dependencies,

Table 2. Model scores. Data set I is initial rate of activation from (16); data set II is overall activation. Columns 3 and 5 indicate to what degree the top-scoring model explains the data better than the indicated model. This fold difference is equal to e to the power of (difference in model scores).

automatically generating hypotheses of links, subpathways, and networks of biomolecules of interest. In contrast to model selection, this approach can be used even in a very poorly character-

ized domain where few or no hypothe-

ses of network structure exist.

M0 Cue M1 Cue M2 Cue
M3 Cue

E F E F

To search for high-scoring graphs, we pick at random an edge

F E

Fig. 3. Candidate and control models. "Cue" represents the signal from the interaction betwen fn and integrin, F is

to add, delete, or reverse; score the new graph; and retain the change if the score improves. To avoid local minima, we also incorporate changes that reduce the score with some small probability. Finally, to minimize overfitting to a particular high-scoring model,

FAK, and E is ERK2. we consider features common to a set of highest scoring models.

M0 is the control model.

We searched for high-scoring dynamic graphs using time series

F An additional model data from Asthagiri et al. We used a dynamic Bayesian network

identical to M4, but with graph expanded in time, in such a way that each time point of each

the edge from F to E re- variable is represented as a node (18). This representation confers a

versed, is not represent- number of advantages, including time resolution of dependencies.

ed because it is in the The search is constrained to forbid dependence of early time points

E

same equivalence class on later ones and of the cue node on downstream signals. We samas M4 and will, there- ple from the high-scoring region of the model space; thus, the

fore, always score the search algorithm will find a subset of the highest scoring models.

M4 Cue

F

same.

(Results shown here represent 200 runs of 1000 or more iterations each. The high-scoring graph in each run was typically found by approximately iteration 500.) The resulting graph comprises a weight-

E ed average of high-scoring models visited over 200 runs (Fig. 4).
Darker arcs represent edges with higher posterior probability (0.86

to 1); lighter arcs indicate a posterior probability of 0.50 to 0.85.

The data appear to support a dependence between the signaling

mutual information between pairs of variables while reducing the cue (the signal generated by fn binding integrin) and FAK levels at

number of discretization levels (6). Resulting model score compar- the early time point, as well as ERK levels at 5, 10, and 15 min (Fig.

isons are presented (Table 2). M0, the control, scores poorly, as an- 3, arcs 1 through 4). An arc connects later time points with their re-

ticipated. Of the four hypothesized structures, data set I (initial acti- spective predecessor(s) for ERK nodes (Fig. 3, arcs 8 through 10).

vation rate) best supports M1, which scores ~3 times higher than The graph suggests an interesting dynamic between FAK and ERK:

M2 and ~4 times higher than M3 and M4. Data set II (overall acti- A dependence is seen between ERK at 5 and 10 min and FAK at 90

vation level) supports M4 ~100 times better than M1, ~70 times min, and between FAK at 7.5 min and ERK at 15 min. Thus, the

better than M2, and ~10 times better than M3. These differences in- model predicts a bidirectional dependence between the two

dicate to what degree the high-scoring model explains the data set molecules. This cyclic relationship could not be elucidated with

better than the other models. These results support distinct depen- static Bayesian networks, which do not permit cycles. It is interest-

dence structures for the processes resulting in initial activation rates ing to appreciate that the apparent complexity of these dynamic

and overall activation of FAK and ERK2.

ERK-FAK interactions is quite likely responsible for the difficulty

Although M1 and M4 emerged as the most likely model struc- in determining clear "upstream" versus "downstream" influence re-

tures of the candidates tested under data sets I and II, respectively, lationships by means of standard molecular cell biology methods.

they are superior in likelihood to the remaining models by only

small or moderate margins (large or decisive margins may be on the Discussion

order of 1000-fold or more). Therefore, based on these results, we Given a set of data, Bayesian networks can determine the rela-

cannot select M1 or M4 with high degrees of confidence. A useful tive probability of statistical dependence models of arbitrary

conclusion is that we will need a larger data set, acquired through a complexity. For this and other reasons, they are well suited for

www.stke.org/cgi/content/full/sigtrans;2002/148/pe38

Page 3

PERSPECTIVE

analyzing data in a biological domain. We have applied them times larger at least) would be expected to yield larger differ-

here as a tool for performing hypothesis selection and formula- ences between scored models. Thus, we conclude that we cur-

tion, in the context of a simple preliminary problem in the rently have insufficient data to select M1 or M4 definitively.

realm of cell signaling pathways for illustration purposes. This

The use of dynamic Bayesian networks enables the elucida-

problem is the influence relationship between FAK and ERK af- tion of regulatory loops and dynamic dependencies not evident

ter fn-mediated integrin activation, and we used two dynamic in static networks. The data used to search for dynamic graphs

data sets incorporating multiple levels of integrin expression are a measurement of the level of active FAK and ERK at each

and concentrations of fn (16).

time point, in contrast to the rate of initial activation and overall

Of the static graphs considered for model selection analysis activation levels used for scoring the static models (Table 1).

(Fig. 3), data set I (initial activation rate) best supports M1, in Because the nodes physically represent different measurements,

which FAK is dependent on the fn-integrin cue and ERK is de- comparing the static and dynamic models is not completely

pendent on FAK, but conditionally independent of the fn-inte- straightforward. Nevertheless, the link between the cue and ear-

grin cue. Data set II (activation level) supports M4, in which ly time points of FAK and ERK and later dependence between

FAK and ERK in the dynamic graph (Fig.

4) are consistent with M4, a top-scoring

static graph, suggesting dependence

among all the variables. However, the ear-

F7.5

F90

ly dependence of both FAK and ERK on the cue alone lends support, for the initial

1 activation data set, to static M3, showing

5 conditional independence between ERK

and FAK, yet M3 scores about four times

E5
28

7 6

lower than the top-scoring model, M1. This discrepancy may point to inaccuracies in either model.
The search results (Fig. 4) suggest an in-

3 E10

teresting model of FAK-ERK dependence, combining a number of hypotheses previ-

Cue

4

E15

ously proposed (11-15). However, this has resulted from an average of high-scoring models rather than the definitive best

model, and it is very likely overfitting to

10 the small data set. (Indeed, the number of

9 model parameters in some places exceed-

E20

ed the number of available data points.)

Although the data set we studied here is

relatively large by traditional molecular

cell biology standards, it nonetheless ap-

pears to be too limited to compellingly ad-

Fig. 4. Features common to high-scoring graphs. The model presented comprises a vance the current state of understanding

weighted average of high-scoring graphs from 200 runs of the search algorithm. "Cue" regarding FAK and ERK activation. We

represents the signal from fn and integrin, E is ERK2, and F is FAK. Subscripts indicate thus emphasize again that this example

time in minutes. Thinner arrows are features with a posterior probability of 0.5 to 0.85; was provided for illustration purposes on-

thicker arrows represent consensus arcs or arcs with posterior probability >0.85. Arcs 1 ly. The effective utility of Bayesian net-

through 10 are numbered for convenience.

work approaches to modeling cell signal-

ing pathways may depend on higher

throughput measurement methods, such

there are no conditional independencies (that is, M4 indicates as flow cytometry, protein arrays, and microfabricated analyti-

dependence among all the variables). This result implies that the cal devices. Because the systems biology field generally ex-

dependence structure leading to initial activation rate is distinct pects rapid developments in these measurement techniques, we

from that resulting in overall activation levels of FAK and ERK. anticipate that Bayesian networks will become increasingly

We have no a priori reason to doubt this result, which could in useful in this problem area, as they are in the analysis of gene

fact implicate an interesting mechanism for short-term versus expression problems.

long-term effects of fn-integrin signaling. However, in this case

we cannot determine with certainty that M1 and M4 are the

References

most probable dependence structures for initial and overall FAK and ERK activation, respectively, for a number of reasons. All the noncontrol models are defeated by a small or moderate mar-

1. T. Ideker, T. Galitski, L. Hood, A new approach to decoding life: Systems biology. Annu. Rev. Genom. Hum. Genet. 2, 343-372 (2001).
2. S. Huang, D. E. Ingber, Shape-dependent control of cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis: Switching between attractors in cell regulatory net-

gin, which may be attributed to noise. Moreover, the data sets are very small in probabilistic terms, in particular in comparison to the number of model parameters. A larger data set (five

works. Exp. Cell Res. 261, 91-103 (2000). 3. B. Schoeberl, C. Eichler-Jonsson, E. D. Gilles, G. Muller, Computational
modeling of the dynamics of the MAP kinase cascade activated by surface and internalized EGF receptors. Nat. Biotechnol. 20, 370-375 (2002).

www.stke.org/cgi/content/full/sigtrans;2002/148/pe38

Page 4

PERSPECTIVE

4. A. R. Asthagiri, D. A. Lauffenburger, Bioengineering models of cell signaling. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2, 31-53 (2000).
5. G. E. Cooper, E. Herskovits, A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic networks from data. Mach. Learn. 9, 309-347 (1992).
6. A. J. Hartemink, Principled computational methods for the validation and discovery of genetic regulatory networks. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA (2001).
7. A. J. Hartemink, D. K. Gifford, T. S. Jaakkola, R. A. Young, Using graphical models and genomic expression data to statistically validate models of genetic regulatory networks. Pac. Symp. Biocomput. 2001, 422-433 (2001).
8. E. Segal, B. Taskar, A. Gasch, N. Friedman, D. Kollar, Rich probabilistic models for gene expression. Bioinformatics 17 (suppl. 1), S243-S252 (2001).
9. N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, D. Pe'er, Using Bayesian networks to analyze expression data. J. Comp. Biol. 7, 601-620 (2000).
10. D. Heckerman, A Tutorial on Learning with Bayesian Networks (Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, 1995).
11. F. G. Giancotti, Integrin signaling: Specificity and control of cell survival and cell cycle progression. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 144, 1295-1309 (1997).
12. T. H. Lin, A. E. Aplin, Y. Shen, Q. Chen, M. Schaller, L. Romer, I. Aukhil, R. L. Juliano, Integrin-mediated activation of MAP kinase is independent of FAK: Evidence for dual integrin signaling pathways in fibroblasts. J. Cell Biol. 136, 1385-1395 (1997).
13. D. D. Schlaepfer, S. K. Hanks, T. Hunter, P. van der Geer, Integrin-mediated signal transduction linked to Ras pathway by GRB2 binding to focal adhesion kinase. Nature 372, 786-791 (1994).
14. D. D. Schlaepfer, T. Hunter, Evidence for in vivo phosphorylation of the Grb2 SH2-domain binding site on focal adhesion kinase by Src-family

protein-tyrosine kinases. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 5623-5633 (1996). 15. K. K. Wary, F. Mainiero, S. J. Isakoff, E. E. Marcantonio, F. G. Giancotti, The
adaptor protein Shc couples a class of integrins to the control of cell cycle progression. Cell 87, 733-743 (1996). 16. A. R. Asthagiri, C. M. Nelson, A. F. Horwitz, D. A. Lauffenburger, Quantitative relationship among integrin-ligand binding, adhesion, and signaling via focal adhesion kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 27119-27127 (1999). 17. J. Pearl, in Second International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (Morgan Kaufman, San Mateo, CA, 1991), pp. 441-452. 18. N. Friedman, K. Murphy, S. Russell, in Fourteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco, 1998), pp. 139-147. 19. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Bio-Info-Micro program, the NIH National Institute of General Medical Sciences Cell Migration Consortium, and the Merck-MIT Partnership. We also thank A. Asthagiri and A. Hartemink for access to original data, programming assistance, and helpful technical discussions.
Citation: K. Sachs, D. Gifford, T. Jaakkola, P. Sorger, D. A. Lauffenburger, Bayesian network approach to cell signaling pathway modeling. Science's STKE (2002), http://stke.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/sigtrans;2002/148/pe38.

www.stke.org/cgi/content/full/sigtrans;2002/148/pe38

Page 5

