Copyright by
David Michael Musson 2003
iii

The Dissertation Committee for David Michael Musson certifies that this is the approved version of the following dissertation:
Personality Determinants of Professional Culture: Evidence from Astronauts, Pilots and Physicians
Committee:
Robert L. Helmreich, Supervisor Wallace T. Fowler Samuel D. Gosling James C. Guckian Joseph M. Horn Patrick K. Randall iv

Personality Determinants of Professional Culture: Evidence from Astronauts, Pilots and Physicians
by David Michael Musson, M.D.
Dissertation Presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of
The University of Texas at Austin in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy
The University of Texas at Austin December, 2003
v

This dissertation is dedicated to my mother and father, Joan and Martin Musson,
and to my wife, Donna
vi

Acknowledgements
There are many people who deserve acknowledgement for their help, support and guidance in helping to make this dissertation possible. First and foremost, I would like to thank Robert Helmreich not only for his guidance and counsel over the last few years, but also for his friendship and for his unending enthusiasm for the research presented in this dissertation.
I would also like to thank my dissertation committee for their counsel and willingness to participate in this process. Many thanks to Drs. Wallace Fowler, Samuel Gosling, James Guckian, Joseph Horn, and Patrick Randall for your time and efforts on both this dissertation, as well as with assorted other endeavors over the last five years.
I also wish to thank my friends and colleagues at The Human Factors Research Project at The University of Texas. Thanks to James Klinect, Michelle Harper, Chris Henry, Bill Taggart, and John Wilhelm for their friendship, support and insightful comments. Special thanks to John for his diligence and efforts in archiving much of the data that is presented in this dissertation. I would like to extend a very special thank you to Lou Montgomery for her efforts to impose a little order on the natural chaos of our lab and for her willingness to act as a sounding board whenever the need arose.
I would also like to thank our undergraduate research assistants Anna Hardigree, Shelley Haferkamp, Akansha Dayal and Katherine Dayton whose efforts in tracking down resources, entering data, administering surveys and proofreading manuscripts were invaluable in the preparation of this dissertation as well as numerous other reports, papers, and presentations over the last several years.
v

In addition, I would like to thank my friend and colleague Dr. Gro Mjeldheim Sandal at the University of Bergen for her insights and feedback on much of the research leading to this dissertation.
I would also like to thank Captain Bruce Tesmer of Continental Airlines for his friendship and insights into the many aspects of aviation and aviation culture, and for his enthusiastic support of our research at The University of Texas. Thanks also to Bill Taggart for his friendship and support as our crucial link to the training world in aviation and medicine, and for his many helpful insights and suggestions over the last few years.
It is also important that I acknowledge the efforts of many who have helped produce the material, data and instruments I have used in this research. Thanks to Drs. Janet Spence, Robert Rose, Tom Chidester, Ashleigh Merritt, Bill Hines, Bryan Sexton, Terry McFadden, and Randy Law for all of your collective work.
I would also like to thank my parents, Joan and Martin Musson for their unwavering love, support and encouragement at all stages of my life.
Finally, I would like to thank my wife Donna for her love and support and for her eager willingness in making the big move to Austin back in 1998.
vi

Personality Determinants of Professional Culture: Evidence from Astronauts, Pilots and Physicians
Publication No. _________
David Michael Musson, Ph.D. The University of Texas at Austin, 2003
Supervisor: Robert Louis Helmreich
This dissertation proposes that similarity of personality traits among individuals is a key aspect of what may be termed professional culture. Specifically, it is hypothesized that professional groups are characterized by high achievement motivation and high conscientiousness. It is suggested that this similarity of personality results from the achievement-oriented, competitive selection process that determines entry into various professions. It is hypothesized that individual professions are further characterized by a professionspecific profile of traits. This profile is proposed to result from an initial attraction to a profession, and by profession-specific, non-academic requirements that play a role in successful entry into professional workgroups.
Four studies are presented to test these hypotheses. The Helmreich Personal Characteristics Inventory (PCI) and a modified version of the NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) were used to assess personality traits in all four studies. Study 1, involving 344 undergraduate students, validated the modified
vii

NEO-FFI scales, and examined differences between students with differing career aspirations. Study 2 compared astronaut applicants (N=259) to the dataset from Study 1, and demonstrated significant differences on achievement motivation and neuroticism between astronaut applicants and a normative population. Study 3 examined active astronauts (N=66), pilots from two airlines (N=152), and three groups of physicians (N=134). All three professional groups are found to share high levels of achievement motivation and conscientiousness as well as low levels of neuroticism. Differences between subgroups within professions are also discussed. Finally, Study 4 compared active astronauts (N=66) to Antarctic research station personnel (N=111) and normative data. While some similarities were found between astronauts and Antarctic personnel, significant differences between those two groups were also identified.
Two major implications from these findings are discussed. The first is that any attempt to understand and manage professional cultures must involve consideration of the shared personality characteristics of the members of those professions. The second is that generalizing psychological research findings from one profession to another may be unreliable. Specific examples discussed include the transfer of human factors training from aviation to medicine, and the use of Antarctica as a behavioral analogue for long duration spaceflight. Specific recommendations for future research are presented.
viii

Table of Contents
List of Tables ......................................................................................................... x List of Figures....................................................................................................... xi Chapter One .......................................................................................................... 1
Overview............................................................................................................. 1 Human factors in safety critical work environments: Aviation, Space and Medicine ............................................................................................................. 2 Determinants of behavior ­ the case for personality ........................................ 13 Personality and performance............................................................................. 21 Personality and culture...................................................................................... 25 The questions at hand........................................................................................ 29 Chapter Two........................................................................................................ 34 Background ....................................................................................................... 34 A theory of attraction, achievement, selection and specialization in professional culture ............................................................................................................... 36 Chapter Three ..................................................................................................... 40 The instruments................................................................................................. 40 Study 1 ­ Personality and career intent in undergraduate students .................. 42 Study 2 ­ Personality assessments of astronaut applicants............................... 44 Study 3 ­ Astronauts, pilots and physicians ..................................................... 46 Study 4 ­ Antarctic personnel and active astronauts ........................................ 49 Analytic strategy and statistical approach......................................................... 51 Chapter Four....................................................................................................... 53 Study 1 ­ Personality and career intent in undergraduate students .................. 53 Study 2 ­ Personality assessments of astronaut applicants............................... 64 Study 3 ­ Astronauts, pilots and physicians ..................................................... 71 Study 4 ­ Antarctic personnel and active astronauts ........................................ 86 Chapter Five ........................................................................................................ 98 Chapter Six ........................................................................................................ 106 Appendix A ........................................................................................................ 116 Appendix B ........................................................................................................ 118 Appendix C ........................................................................................................ 119 Appendix D ........................................................................................................ 121 References.......................................................................................................... 122 Vita ..................................................................................................................... 134
ix

List of Tables

Table 1.1 The Big Five and their definitions. Table 1.2 Scales of the Helmreich Personal Characteristics Inventory. Table 4.1. Internal consistencies and inter-correlationsfor the NEO-FFI. Table 4.2. Scale correlations between the PCI and the NEO-FFI. Table 4.3. ANOVA for gender differences for the PCI. Table 4.4. ANOVA for gender differences for the 8-item NEO-FFI. Table 4.5. ANOVA for gender differences for the 12-item NEO-FFI. Table 4.6. Indicated career preferences by gender for Study 1 Table 4.7. Demographic breakdown of astronaut applicants. Table 4.8. ANOVA for male participants ­ Study 2. Table 4.9. Characteristics of male astronaut applicants. Table 4.10. ANOVA for female participants ­ Study 2. Table 4.11. Characteristics of female astronaut applicants. Table 4.12. Demographic breakdown of participant groups ­ Study 3. Table 4.13. ANOVA for males by occupation for the PCI and NEO-FFI. Table 4.14. Characteristics of male astronauts, pilots and physicians. Table 4.15. ANOVA for females by occupation for the PCI and NEO-FFI. Table 4.16. Characteristics of female astronauts and physicians. Table 4.17. Subjects by gender and group ­ Study 4. Table 4.18. ANOVA for males for the PCI and modified NEO-FFI. Table 4.19. Characteristics of male astronauts and Antarctic personnel. Table 4.20. ANOVA for females for the PCI and modified NEO-FFI. Table 4.21. Characteristics of female astronauts and Antarctic personnel. Table C.1. Inter-correlations for the 8-item NEO-FFI. Table C.2. Inter-correlations for the 12-item NEO-FFI. Table C.3. Inter-correlations for 8-item and 12-item NEO-FFI. Table D.1. Inter-correlations for the scales of the PCI and EPAQ. Table D.2. Inter-correlations for the PCI, WOFO and the JAS.

16 19 54 55 56 56 57 58 64 65 66 67 68 71 74 75 80 81 86 89 90 94 95 119 119 120 121 121

x

List of Figures
Figure 1.1 A model of threat and error management. Figure 4.1 Male scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3. Figure 4.2 Male scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3. Figure 4.3 Male scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 3. Figure 4.4 Female scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3. Figure 4.5 Female scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3. Figure 4.6 Female scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 3. Figure 4.7 Male scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4. Figure 4.8 Male scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4. Figure 4.9 Male scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 4. Figure 4.10 Female scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4. Figure 4.11 Female scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­Study 4. Figure 4.12 Female scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 4.

11 72 73 73 78 79 79 87 87 88 92 93 93

xi

Chapter One Introduction
Overview This dissertation examines the role played by personality in the
professional cultures of astronauts, pilots and physicians. It is a central tenet of this dissertation that a specific personality trait profile characterizes these groups as distinct from the general population, and to some extent from each other. Specifically, it will be shown that the combination of attraction, achievement and selection that are required for entry into these fields results in members uniformly sharing personality traits associated with both overall attainment and vocationspecific requirements. It is proposed that these pre-existing dispositional attributes of the individual members of these professions are a key contributing element to what is sometimes referred to as professional culture. Initiatives whose aim is to improve performance and reduce error in these environments, particularly interventions involving selection, team training, or other aspects of the human element will benefit from a more through understanding of the driving forces that shape the behavior of individuals in these professions.
This chapter begins with an overview of aviation, space and medicine ­ including the process of selection into these fields and the subsequent forces that shape the behavior of individuals within those professions. This is followed by a brief summary of human error ­ with particular emphasis on recent research into human error in complex and safety-critical work settings, and by a discussion of current strategies employed to reduce error in such environments. Key psychological constructs that will be the focus of the research presented in this dissertation will then be presented. This review will begin with a look at the different philosophical approaches to understanding behavior ­ namely individual, group, and environmental determinants of behavior as well as
1

integrated (or interactionist) approaches. This will be followed by a more detailed review of personality trait assessment, personality and performance, organizational culture, and recent work on the role of personality in helping define organizational cultures. Finally this chapter will conclude with a discussion of the questions that currently face those who study human performance in aviation, space and medicine, and by those who are attempting to devise strategies to improve that performance.
Human factors in safety critical work environments: Aviation, Space and Medicine
Why aviation, space and medicine? These are fields that are selective and competitive ­ they require high degrees of skills, but they are also characterized by work situations involving teamwork and where safety and perfection are critical. These are error intolerant fields. When mistakes happen in aviation the results can be catastrophic, and death tolls from accidents may run into the hundreds. Federal legislation, regulatory agencies, investigative boards and research funding all contribute to ongoing efforts to minimize the likelihood of such accidents. Accidents in the space program can be argued to have global impact, particularly in this age of international cooperation, and disasters such as those involving the shuttles Challenger in 1986 and, more recently, Columbia in 2003 take their toll not only in dollars and lives, but also on the national psyche and on the future of piloted spaceflight. When things go wrong in medicine, the impact of each event seldom has the impact of an aviation or space disaster, but to individuals and their families, the results can be devastating. Following the release of the Institute of Medicine's study on error in the U.S. healthcare system in 2000 (Institutes of Medicine, 2000), many Americans were shocked to hear that estimates of unnecessary deaths due to medical error ranged from 48,000 to
2

98,000 per year ­ making errors in the health care system the 7th leading cause of death in the country. For a time after the release of this report it became popular in the medical press to quote the comparison that the magnitude of the problem in medicine was roughly equivalent to "two jumbo jets crashing every three days" in the United States, a comparison originally made by long-time patient safety advocate Lucian Leape in 1994 (Leape, 1994). While that comparison was controversial, it served to ring the alarm bell of medical error and draw comparisons between the aviation and medical systems in both the popular press and the academic community.
Aviation The path to becoming a commercial pilot is a long one, and though it is
hard to estimate the degree of attrition along the way, it is reasonable to assume that many more individuals desire that distinction than achieve it. Among those aspiring to be military pilots, rigid medical standards ­ particularly visual acuity typically account for an attrition rate of up to 50% during initial application. Of those who make the first cut, many will not make it through officer training or ROTC, and of those who do, many will not make it through the rigors of flight training. While the U.S. and other air forces attempt to screen on a number of skills and aptitudes, attrition rates during initial flight training can be as high as 15% (Carretta, 2000). Traditionally, the air forces of the world have supplied airlines with highly trained and experienced pilots ­ a benefit for the airlines and a continual source of frustration for air forces. Recent years have seen an increase in the number of formal civilian training programs. Regardless of whether a pilot comes from a military or civilian training background, all must possess an airline transport pilot license (ATPL) in order to fly for a commercial carrier. Basic requirements for an ATPL include having attained a private pilot's license, then a multi engine certification, and finally a commercial pilot's license, 1500 hours of
3

flying time, 500 hours of cross country flying time, 75 hours of actual or simulated flight time, successful completion the FAA ATP written exam, and successful completion of the ATP oral and practical exams (source: FAA). In aviation, the receipt of one's "flight wings" marks the formal entry of an individual into the international community of pilots ­ a community that has included such mythical figures as the Wright brothers, the Red Baron, Charles Lindbergh and Chuck Yeager. Numerous books and movies have tried to capture the myth and the reality of this world ­ From Dawn Patrol (1930) to Top Gun (1986), pilots are portrayed as dashing, heroic, daring and independent. It is arguable that as an elite profession, flying has few equals.
Space While it can be argued that flying, as a profession, has few equals, it is
quite possible that being an astronaut has none. The first American and Soviet astronauts enjoyed global celebrity and true national hero status. These individuals were idealized as representing the very best of the human race. As explorers, their accomplishments were seen on par with those of Columbus and Magellan. The selection of the first seven American astronauts is chronicled in Tom Wolfe's 1979 classic book, The Right Stuff (made into a movie in 1983). From a pool of 500 candidates with the necessary jet aircraft flight time, seven military pilots were selected in 1959 as the first American astronauts. Further astronaut selections conducted in 1962 and 1963 included civilian pilots, and in 1965 the first scientist pilots were chosen from the fields of natural science, medicine, and engineering (NASA, 2003). Spurred on by the cold war and the race for technological (and military) superiority, the space race of the 1960's culminated in Neil Armstrong setting foot on the surface of the moon, an event witnessed by over 600 million people around the globe (NOVA, 2000).
4

Following the Mercury, Gemini and Apollo programs of the 1960s and early 1970s, the focus of the US space program shifted to orbital missions and the Space Shuttle. The first shuttle crew was named in 1978, and since then, 8 successive selections have been conducted that include a mix of pilots and scientists. In the shuttle era, astronauts are classified as either Pilot Astronauts or Mission Specialists. Pilot Astronauts are typically (but not exclusively) pilots of military background whose role is to command and pilot the Shuttle. Mission Specialist Astronauts are scientists, engineers, and physicians whose primary responsibilities include a mix of on-board science and mission operations. There are also International Astronauts and Payload Specialists. International Astronauts are those from other countries who typically function as Mission Specialists, and Payload Specialists are individuals with payload-specific training who have not gone through the full astronaut selection or training process.
Some have argued that the title of astronaut does not hold the same prestige today as it did in the early days of space flight. Indeed, the space program can be seen somewhat as a victim of its own remarkable successes, unfortunate accidents not withstanding. Public interest has waned somewhat in these last 20 years and funding has been continually cut as the focus of the space program seems far less clear than it did in the cold war. The dwindling public interest and support, along with the constant struggle for funding, were cited as contributing pressures to both the Challenger launch decision (Vaughan, 1996) and the more recent Columbia tragedy (Columbia Accident Investigation Board, 2003).
The last 10 years have seen a shift in focus in the U.S. space program to longer duration missions. Unlike the Soviet and Russian space program, the U.S. program has typically consisted of short duration missions of 10 to 14 days in length ­ with the exception of the Skylab program in 1973 (Skylab 1 ­ unmanned, Skylab 2 ­ 28 days, Skylab 3 ­ 59 days, and Skylab 4 ­ 84 days). Beginning in
5

1995, a series of seven US astronauts joined Russian crews on the space station Mir for periods ranging from 115 to 188 days. The most thorough account of this experience appears in Brian Burrough's book, Dragonfly (Burrough, 1998). Most recently, the construction of the International Space Station (ISS) has dominated both the Russian and American space programs. A truly multinational effort, ISS represents the collaborative efforts of 16 nations belonging to six Space Agencies. Since 1999, the station has been continually occupied by crews spending up to six months at a time on board. While originally planned to eventually house seven multinational crew members at any one time, budget cuts had recently reduced that number to three. The grounding of the shuttle fleet following the loss of the Columbia in February of 2003 has further reduced that number to only two. At the time of writing this dissertation, the futures of both the remaining shuttle fleet and the entire ISS program are uncertain.
Current astronaut selection is an extremely competitive process. Typically, NASA conducts a selection every 2 years, though this is not a formal requirement for the agency. For each selection opportunity, between two and four thousand individuals will typically apply. Formal application includes a personal statement and detailed biographical data including academic achievement, extracurricular interests, flight history including aircraft type and experience, ancillary qualifications and medical history. A detailed list of the information required on the official NASA astronaut application forms is provided in Appendix A. Of the thousands of applicants, approximately 120 are invited to the Johnson Space Center for a more thorough evaluation, from which around 20 will be offered employment as an Astronaut Candidate. Once selected, attrition from the Candidate pool has been nil (Santy, 1994) and all applicants can reasonably be expected to be certified eventually as qualified astronauts following one to two years of specialized training.
6

Medicine In comparison with aviation and space, medicine is truly an ancient
profession. A review of the history of medicine is far beyond the scope of this dissertation. Historical figures such as Hippocrates and Galen helped lay down foundations that have persisted through to the present, of which the most familiar is the Hippocratic Oath. In modern times, medicine has become an enormous and complex industry. Questions of access for those without insurance, litigation and rising court settlements and the subsequent increase in malpractice insurance, technological achievements, and ethical issues surrounding life, death and the individual's right to choose are increasingly prominent in the media. Despite this, entry into accredited medical colleges remains highly competitive (Association of American Medical Colleges, 2002) , though numbers of applicants seem to be declining recently for reasons that are not completely understood (Barzansky & Etzel, 2003).
Entry into medical school is typically based upon three criteria. Most well known among these is academic achievement, though standards vary according to the size and reputation of the medical school in question. While no formal curriculum must be completed in order to apply, required courses include biology, chemistry, physics and organic chemistry. In addition to academic achievement, standardized testing is also used in the selection process ­ specifically the Medical College Admission Test (MCAT), similar in content to the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) and other standardized measures of ability. Finally, as with other educational selection processes, a completed application package, including personal statements and letters of recommendation is used in the selection decision, though no universally accepted means of assessing application material beyond grade point average and MCAT scores currently exists.
First-year medical classes typically range from under 100 to 300 or more for larger medical schools. The program of study is typically 4 years, though
7

some modified programs may extend for 5. The classical curriculum consists of approximately 2 years of classroom studies followed by a year acquiring practical experience in hospitals and other clinical settings and a fourth year mixed with clinical studies and variable didactic instruction. Following graduation and receipt of the coveted degree, young physicians will embark upon internship and then residency training in general practice or any of a number of specialties. Residency training frequently occurs at an institution other than the one where the individual received their medical degree, ostensibly to assure variety and breadth of clinical experience in the physician's skill sets. The enrollment of young doctors into specific residency programs is controlled by a system referred to as "the Match" ­ an anxiety provoking affair where applicants and institutions list their training preferences and then wait to see who will be assigned where. In 1978, the experience of medical internship was immortalized by Samuel Shem in his book, House of God (Shem, 2003). In a less humorous fashion, Charles Bosk describes a surgical residency from the perspective of an anthropologist in his 1979 work, Forgive and Remember (Bosk, 1981). Both books give vastly different perspectives on medical training, though both can be profound and insightful.
Human Error In all three of the fields briefly described above ­ aviation, space and
medicine ­ there is tremendous interest in minimizing error and optimizing performance. Aviation is probably the most studied of the three fields in this aspect. The nature of the industry, public accountability for accidents involving commercial aircraft, and the high cost in lost hardware, human life, economic damage and litigation are all driving forces in making aviation as safe as possible. One outcome of such pressure to perform safely is high accountability of those individuals on the operational "sharp end." Pilots, astronauts, and physicians are
8

held ultimately accountable for their actions. Pilots fear loss of their flying privileges and of their livelihood as well as of their own lives in the event of a major accident. Indeed, there is an ironic joke in aviation that pilots are "the first at the scene of the accident" ­ dark-humored reference to both their position in the aircraft and the frequent lethality of aircraft mishaps. Astronauts fear loss of flight assignments in the event of perceived deficiencies ­ indeed, with only a handful of shuttle launches per year, and over 100 active astronauts in the corps at any one time, competition for flight assignments is intense, if not acknowledged (Santy, 1994). In medicine, the tort system holds physicians accountable for the outcome of their mistakes if not for their errors directly1. Such a system encourages secrecy, and it has been said that doctors "bury their mistakes" ­ another example of dark humor.
Historically, the study of human error has been in the domain of cognitive psychology. Problems of information processing limitations, memory failure, the effects of fatigue, and novice versus expert decision making have been the subject of much research over the years (Rasmussen, 2000; Orasanu & Martin, 1998; Dismukes, Barshi, & Loukopoulos, 2001). In applied settings, however, human limitation is determined by more than simply the shortcomings of any one person's cerebral capacities. In a series of studies commissioned by NASA in the late 1970's and early 1980's, over 70% of aviation disasters were found to have casual factors that included some element of human failure (Helmreich & Foushee, 1993). Such factors included poor teamwork, fatigue, miscommunication, failures of leadership, task saturation and poor crew coordination among others (Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, 1997). The response of the aviation community to these findings was to launch a series of
1 Recent studies have shown that the majority of those harmed by medical error are never compensated, and award settlements are typically based on outcomes as opposed to the nature of errors committed. For a more thorough discussion of medical error, blame, and reform, see Runciman, Merry, and Tito (2003).
9

interventions to try and reduce the number of accidents involving commercial aircraft. These included redesigning automated systems to try and minimize human error, increased reliance on checklists and other function-forcing devices that reduced reliance on fallible human memory, formal courses in captain leadership, and the development of a form of training called Crew Resource Management (or CRM). Proponents of CRM sought to maximize crew members' abilities to minimize crew-based errors through formal training in briefings, shared mental models, task delegation, flattened hierarchies, and open channels of communication (Helmreich et al., 1993). CRM has been adapted for use in other high risk settings, offshore oil platforms (Flin & O'Conner, 2001), ships' bridges (Meurn, 1995) and even spaceflight (Bishop, 1999).
Our understanding of human error in complex settings has been helped significantly through the seminal work of James Reason. Reason's Human Error (Reason, 1990) and Managing the Risk of Organizational Accidents (Reason, 1997) spanned the gap between the theoretical world of cognitive science and the practical world of front line operations. In these works Reason put forth his "Swiss-cheese model" of human error ­ a model now famous among risk managers and engineers in any number of high reliability industries. In brief, the model suggests a series of defenses exist between existing deficiencies (latent failures) and eventual failures (accidents). In this model, accidents occur when deficiencies in the defenses (the "holes" in the "cheese") align. The goal of everyone, he argued, should be to minimize the latent failures when detected and to minimize the deficiencies in existing defenses (or to close the "holes"). Readers are referred to Reason (1997) for a full explication of the model and the theory.
In a parallel and complementary line of research, Dr. Robert Helmreich at The University of Texas at Austin has studied the incidence and management of human error in applied settings ­ particularly in aviation, and more recently
10

medicine. His work has included both an analysis of the elements and effectiveness of CRM training in aviation (Helmreich, 1993) as well as modeling of error and error management processes in aviation (Helmreich, Klinect, & Wilhelm, 1999) and again more recently in medicine (Helmreich, 2000a; Helmreich & Musson, 2000). This model is reproduced below in Figure 1.1.

Environmental Factors

Latent Threats
National, Organizational, Professional culture

Overt Threats

Organizational

Individual

Factors

Factors

Team/Crew Factors

Threat Management Strategies and Countermeasures

Error

Error Management

Inconsequential

Inconsequential

Error Detection and Response

Undesired State

Further Error

Management of Undesired State

Adverse Outcome

Figure 1.1 A model of threat and error management (Helmreich et al., 2000).
Helmreich's work suggests that an understanding of national, organizational and professional cultures is imperative in any attempt to try and change the existing behavior of operational personnel in such safety critical work settings. Helmreich has also argued the importance of applied research in these settings, stating that the complex nature of human behavior in these socio-

11

technically complex settings cannot be adequately replicated in the laboratory (Helmreich, 1975; Helmreich, 1987).
In 1999, the U.S. Institutes of Medicine (IOM) released its highly influential report on human error in the medical system (Institutes of Medicine, 2000). In that report, aviation was cited as an industry that should be studied in order to provide error reducing strategies for medicine. Among the specific recommendations made in that report were implementation of national level incident and error reporting systems, the adoption of error reduction strategies such as checklists and automated processes, and the development of Crew Resource Management training for medical teams. This report has been almost solely responsible for a massive increase in both interest and in funding for research into medical error. The last three years have seen the appearance of interventions that address cognitive errors (Croskerry, 2003), system-wide error reporting systems (such as that recently initiated by the Veterans Affairs ­ viewable at http://psrs.arc.nasa.gov) and efforts to implement team training in medicine currently being researched at The University of Texas. Few of these interventions have been around long enough to be validated through the use of any firm end-point criteria, yet current public and governmental pressure to demonstrate progressive movement towards error reduction is growing. This has resulted in a situation where hospital administrations, quality improvement officers and risk managers have created a tremendous demand for error reducing interventions, such as the CRM programs in aviation described earlier, without waiting for their validation in medical settings. To meet this demand, training products are being rapidly adapted from industries such as aviation, and consequently are accompanied by a high degree of uncertainty as to their likely efficacy.
In aviation, transfers of CRM programs between airlines have been less than problem-free, and attempts to export North American training programs to
12

other cultures have been frequently unsuccessful (Helmreich & Merritt, 1998). Differences in national cultures ­ including differing attitudes towards authority, subtleties of communication, and issues of face ­ along with organizational differences and the resistances of professional cultures to change suggest that caution should be exercised in trying to import such error reduction strategies from one profession to another. Further, Helmreich has argued the importance of CRM training being rooted in data and a thorough analysis of the field in question (Helmreich, Merritt, & Wilhelm, 1999). It is to this end that this dissertation examines the role played by personality in the professional cultures of aviation, space and medicine. What follows is a brief review of those areas of psychology that seem most relevant to this issue.
Determinants of behavior ­ the case for personality A fundamental question about human behavior is the extent to which a
person's actions are due to dispositional attributes or are a result of the situation in which the individual is functioning. Over the decades, both explanations for human behavior have had their advocates. Those who believe the individual is the central determinant of behavior are generally termed personality psychologists, while those who believe the environment is the fundamental determining factor may be described as situationists. Historically, representatives of these two approaches have questioned the validity of the other position (Bowers, 1973; Mischel, 1969). The current prevailing view in psychology among the majority of scholars is, of course, that both the individual and the environment play a key role in determining behavior (Mischel & Shoda, 1999). Supporters of this dualistic approach are sometimes called interactionists, a term that communicates their belief that it is the interaction of personality and environmental forces that work together to produce behavior. The position taken
13

in this dissertation is that the debate of whether situation or individual disposition that determines behavior has largely been resolved, and that the interactionist perspective is most appropriate to understanding behavior.
In the following pages we will review three specific areas of research relevant to this dissertation. The first of these will be an overview of personality traits and trait assessment, particularly as they apply to the data collected for the present studies. This will be followed by a review of the use of personality traits to predict behavior in a variety of settings, including specific findings from aviation, space and medicine. Finally, we will review recent research into the role played by personality in shaping organizational cultures.
Personality traits and trait assessment Freud was perhaps the first of the modern personality psychologists,
though his theories now are viewed as both erroneous and unscientific by many in psychology. More representative of modern theorists is perhaps Gordon Allport who wrote extensively on personality traits (Allport & Allport, 1921; Allport, 1927) early in the last century, or later Raymond Cattell who, using one of the first computers, used the technique of factor analysis to identify 16 trait sets that lead to the development of the 16PF (one of the first personality trait assessment batteries (Cattell, 1946; Cattell, 1950)). Since Cattell, numerous other batteries have been designed to assess a wide array of personality traits. These include the California Psychological Inventory (CPI) (Gough, 1984), the Jackson Personality Research Form (PRF) (Jackson, 1997), the Eysenck Personality Inventory (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1968) and a host of others. The variety of tests available to assess personality is a result of both the specific aspects of personality that the test designer wished to assess and the degree of specificity that he or she chose to apply. Since the majority of tests were developed through factor analysis of adjectives, personality descriptors, or answers to survey questions designed to
14

assess personality, the number of traits identified by any one researcher is largely a result of the manner in which the factor analysis was performed and the philosophical viewpoint of the researcher. Some personality psychologists chose to identify a large number of distinct factors (such as the 16 identified by Cattell), whereas others chose to limit their instrument to a smaller number of "superfactors" ­ higher order factors onto which several lower ordered factors were found to load (such as Eysenck's 4 factors).
The Big Five In the last 20 years, trait researchers have generally come to agree upon
the idea that personality can be described by 5 super-ordinate factors ­ the socalled "Big Five." In 1981, personality psychologist Lewis Goldberg (1981) predicted:
"...it should be possible to argue the case that any model for structuring individual differences will have to encompass ­ at some level ­ something like these `big five' dimensions." (p. 159)
Subsequent research, lead principally by the team of Paul Costa and Robert McCrae, has confirmed the universal appeal of a Five Factor Model (FFM) of personality traits (McCrae & Costa, 1997; McCrae & Costa, 1999; McCrae & Costa, 1987). The Big Five, as described by Costa and McCrae are Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to new experience, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness (or N, E, O, A & C). Definitions of these scales are shown in Table 1.1.
15

Neuroticism Extraversion

The tendency to experience nervousness, tension, anxiety, emotional instability, hostility and sadness.
An energetic approach to the external world, including sociability, assertiveness and positive emotionality.

Openness to new experience Agreeableness
Conscientiousness

Describes the breadth, depth, originality and complexity of an individual's mental and experiential life.
The quality of one's interpersonal interactions along a continuum from compassion and altruism to antagonism.
Persistence, organization, and motivation in goal-directed behaviors, and socially prescribed impulse control.

Table 1.1 The Big Five and their definitions
Adapted from John and Srivastata (1999).

Costa and McCrae have developed a 60-item self report questionnaire to assess the Big Five called the Five Factor Inventory (FFI), as well as a 240-item questionnaire (the NEO-PI-R) designed to assess not only the Big Five, but also a number of subordinate facet traits that comprise each of the five factors. Details of a modified version of the FFI will be described in more detail in the methods section of this dissertation. While proponents of the Five Factor Model (FFM) do not discount the value of other personality tests, it is argued that the model provides a helpful framework with which to study personality from a trait perspective (Costa & McCrae, 1995). Research involving the Big Five and performance will be reviewed later in this chapter.
While the Big Five model of personality has dominated personality trait research over the past 10 years, some argue such models are overly restrictive. In a recent and influential paper, Saucier and Goldberg concluded that a number of traits believed to possibly reflect non Big Five traits were actually accounted for

16

within the Big Five framework (Saucier and Goldberg, 1998). However, in a reanalysis of data from that same study, Paunonen and Jackson (2000) concluded that there were indeed a number of traits that did NOT fall within the Big Five framework. Such conclusions would seem to support the use of alternate or at least adjunctive assessments of personality when using tests such designed to assess only the Big Five. Such additional measures, particularly if suggested by theory or previous research, may add considerable scope to personality trait assessments in experimental settings.
Instrumentality and expressivity Despite the importance of the Big Five as a global personality model,
there is continued interest in the use of more specific personality assessment batteries. The research in this dissertation has continued to use the personality batteries developed by Spence and Helmreich at The University of Texas, in addition to Big Five assessment instruments developed by Costa and McCrae. The Spence and Helmreich batteries arose from a body of research that examined gender differences in personality traits and are based around the two broad constructs of Instrumentality (defined as goal and achievement orientation ­ typically more strongly endorsed by male subjects) and Expressivity (or social and family orientation, typically endorsed more strongly by female subjects). Both positive and negative aspects of these dimensions are described by Spence and Helmreich (Spence & Helmreich, 1979). These traits may be assessed by a personality test entitled the Extended Personal Attributes Questionnaire (EPAQ) (Spence, Helmreich, & Stapp, 1974) which will be described in detail in the methods section of this dissertation. The EPAQ includes two scales that assess positive aspects of instrumentality and expressivity, and three scales that assess negative aspects of these traits: negative communion and verbal aggressiveness
17

which assess negative aspects of expressivity, and negative instrumentality which (as the name suggests) assesses the negative aspects of instrumentality. In addition to the EPAQ, Spence and Helmreich also developed the Work and Family Orientation Questionnaire ­ a survey designed to assess dispositions regarding employment and domestic values (Helmreich, 1978). The WOFO contains three scales, work orientation, competitiveness, and mastery. Scales from the EPAQ and WOFO, along with two modified scales from the Jenkins Activity Survey (Pred, Spence, & Helmreich, 1986) that assess achievement striving and impatience and irritability have been combined in a larger battery that has been referred to as the Personal Characteristics Inventory (PCI) (Rose, Fogg, Helmreich, & McFadden, 1994). It should be noted that this battery has been used for experimental purposes only and should not be confused with another battery of similar name developed by Mount and Barrick at the University of Iowa. These broad traits have proven to be useful in studies of behavior in applied settings and have been used extensively in studies of pilot and astronaut behavior. The PCI battery will be described in more detail under the methods section of this dissertation. The traits assessed by this battery, along with their definitions, are listed in Table 1.2.
18

Source test
Extended Personal Attributes Questionnaire (EPAQ)
Work and Family Orientation Questionnaire (WOFO)
Jenkins Activity Survey (JAS)

Scale
Instrumentality
Expressivity
Bipolar Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Negative Instrumentality
Mastery
Work Orientation
Competitiveness
Achievement Strivings Impatience/ Irritability

Definition
Refers to overall goal seeking and achievement motivation.
A measure of interpersonal orientation, sensitivity and concern.
A bipolar scale with traditionally feminine traits at one end and traditionally male traits at the other
Traits associated with a type of critical, verbal negativity.
Traits associated with a lack of instrumentality (weak, shy, submissive, etc.).
Traits associated with a negative form of goal seeking, such as being arrogant, dictatorial, etc.
A more focused measure of achievement motivation reflecting a need to undertake and master new and challenging activities.
Reflects a desire to work hard.
Reflects a desire to succeed in competitive interpersonal situations.
Traits associated with taking work seriously and working hard.
Reflects a sense of time urgency and impatience associated with a high degree of irritability.

Table 1.2 Scales of the Helmreich Personal Characteristics Inventory (PCI).

Trait stability over time While traditional models have suggested that personality remains
relatively constant throughout life (McCrae and Costa, 1990), there is some evidence that personality traits may change with age, and that environment may play a role in shaping personality over time (Helson, R., Kwan, V.S.Y., John, O.P., & Jones, C. 2002). Field and Millsap (1991) found levels of neuroticism and extraversion decreased with age, while levels of agreeableness increased.
19

Caspi (1998) suggest that while personality may be stable to some degree, the interaction between personality and environment does produce measurable changes in personality. In a recent meta-analysis, Roberts and DelVecchio (2000) found evidence to suggest personality differences between individuals increase through adulthood. Most recently, in an internet study involving 132, 515 participants, Srivastata, John, Gosling and Potter (2003) found evidence of variable degrees of change in certain Big Five traits over past the age of 30, suggesting that certain elements of personality continue to change throughout life. Presumably, the more extreme the environment and experience, the greater is the potential for its influence on personality. While formal studies on the subject have not been conducted, it could be that experiences such as spaceflight may exert such effects.
Gender differences and personality traits Males and females typically show some degree of difference on many of
the traits encompassed by both the Big Five and various aspects of instrumentality and expressivity.
In a comprehensive review of data from 23,031 individuals from 26 countries, Costa et al. (2001) found that gender differences on the Big Five were relatively consistent across cultures, though the magnitude of such differences did vary. Females reported themselves to be higher on neuroticism, agreeableness, warmth (a facet of extraversion), and openness to feelings (a facet of openness to new experience). Men, by contrast, scored higher on assertiveness (a facet of extraversion) and openness to ideas (another facet of openness to new experience). In all cases, it is important to note that variation due to gender in these studies was small relative to individual variation.
Gender differences have been well established in previous research on the various scales assessing instrumentality and expressivity. In fact, both the
20

positive and negative scales assessing the broad constructs of instrumentality and expressivity have their origins in the gender research of Spence and Helmreich. Scales assessing instrumentality and negative instrumentality were constructed to assess stereotypically male orientations with respect to achievement motivation, and males consistently score higher than females on these measures. Similarly, scales assessing positive expressivity and negative expressivity (verbal aggressiveness and negative communion) were designed to assess positive and negative aspects of stereotypically female orientation, and females consistently score higher than males on these measures (Spence and Helmreich, 1978). As with the gender differences in the scales assessing the Big Five, gender variation on these scales is considerably smaller than individual variation.
Personality and performance A complete review of the literature on personality and performance is
beyond the scope of this overview. A key point worth reviewing, however, is that early attempts to establish the validity of assessed personality traits as predictors of performance met with limited success and predictive validities were usually quite low (Guion & Gottier, 1965; Reilly & Chao, 1982). These difficulties in establishing the predictive validity of personality tests may have been due in part to the lack of any well accepted taxonomy for the classification of personality traits (Mount & Barrick, 1991). In an influential paper published in the American Psychologist in 1996, Hogan, Hogan and Roberts argued that well constructed assessments of personality were indeed valid predictors of performance, and that the use of personality in selecting both promoted social justice and improved organizational productivity (Hogan et al., 1996).
21

As personality psychology moved towards almost universal acceptance of the Big Five model of personality as a meaningful classification of traits, however, researchers have enjoyed increasing success at linking traits and performance. In one of the most frequently cited papers in applied psychology in the last 15 years, Mount and Barrick (Mount et al., 1991) used a meta-analytic approach to demonstrate that assessed personality traits were valid predictors of job performance. In a review of 117 studies encompassing 5 occupational groups and 23,994 subjects and using 3 separate criteria of job performance, they concluded that the Big Five trait of conscientiousness predicted all 3 measures of job performance in all five occupational groups, and that openness and extraversion together predicted training proficiency (one of the 3 performance measures) in all five occupational groups. In another meta-analysis published that same year, Tett, Jackson and Rothstein reviewed 494 studies of personality and performance and also concluded that personality was a reliable predictor of performance, but found that the validity of the findings in any one study varied considerably depending on the methodology employed (Tett, Jackson, & Rothstein, 1991). In particular, they noted that confirmatory studies produced higher levels of predictive validity than did exploratory studies, as one might predict. More recently, Salgado completed a meta-analysis of studies conducted using European workers, the results of which again confirmed the validity of the Big Five in predicting work performance across both military and civilian settings (Salgado, 1997).
Subsequent researchers have enjoyed success in predicting a variety of behaviors using the Big Five, including social behaviors such as alcohol consumption, tobacco use, and party attendance (Paunonen, 2003); personal work environment (Gosling, Ko, Mannarelli, & Margaret, 2002); grade point average (GPA) (Paunonen, 2003); expatriate success in foreign employment (Caligiuri, 2000); and in job performance over career and lifespan (Judge, Higgins,
22

Thoresen, & Barrick, 1999). Hogan and Holland have argued that using theory to align predictors and outcome criteria yields stronger results, suggesting that relatively atheoretical approaches thus far have underestimated the influence of personality on relevant outcomes (Hogan & Holland, 2003).
Research into personality and performance in aviation, space and medicine has been more limited than in other fields. This has been largely due to issues of restricted access for researchers to all three populations. Aviation has probably seen the most research into human performance, yet while cognitive and aptitude testing of pilots prior to training has been a long standing area of investigation, personality assessment is still in its early stages in this field. Much of the research in this area has been conducted using the scales developed by Spence and Helmreich described earlier. For example, in a series of studies conducted by researchers at The University of Texas and NASA Ames Research Center, it was shown that high levels of positive instrumentality and expressivity predicted receptivity to CRM training among pilots, and that personality assessments reliably predicted aviator attitudes regarding CRM and other flight management related issues (Gregorich, Helmreich, Wilhelm, & Chidester, 1989; Chidester, Helmreich, Gregorich, & Geis, 1991). Chidester et al. have shown that the combination of positive instrumental and positive expressive attributes, combined with low levels of interpersonal negativity predicted superior pilot performance in simulated flight training (Chidester & Foushee, 1991). Three clusters of personality traits were identified by Helmreich and Chidester in this line of research - the Positive Instrumental/ Positive Expressive cluster mentioned above, a Positive Instrumental/ Low Expressive cluster, and a Low Instrumental/ Low Expressive cluster. They termed these three clusters the Right Stuff, Wrong Stuff, and No Stuff clusters respectively, in reference to Tom Wolfe's The Right Stuff which had appeared several years earlier.
23

This Right Stuff cluster of traits has proved to predict performance in a number of domains relevant to this dissertation, including Antarctic teams (Sandal, 2000), submarine crews (Sandal, Endresen, Vaernes, & Ursin, 1999), and confinement studies (Sandal, Vaernes, & Ursin, 1995). Attempts to demonstrate the validity of this construct in an assessment of astronaut performance were only partially successful, most likely due to the uniformly high levels of instrumentality in that population (Rose et al., 1994). Studies of performance in settings such as confinement chambers and Antarctic research stations are of particular interest to the spaceflight research community. Since research access to astronauts is exceedingly difficult, actual flights are relatively infrequent and subject numbers rather small, NASA and other agencies have funded extensive research in settings considered to be analogous in one or more ways to spaceflight (Harrison, Clearwater, & McKay, 1991; Stuster, 2000). In addition to the Spence and Helmreich scales, other inventories have been used in these "space analogue" settings in attempts to predict different aspects of human behavior under conditions of isolation and confinement, including the Hogan Personality Inventory (HPI) (Biersner & Hogan, 1984), the Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation-Behavior (FIRO-B) Scale (Palinkas, Gunderson, Johnson, & Holland, 2000b), and the NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) (Steel, Suedfeld, Peri, & Palinkas, 1997). Key findings from this body of research have been that low levels of emotional instability, low extraversion and low conscientiousness have been positively correlated with performance (Palinkas, Gunderson, Holland, Miller, & Johnson, 2000a). The latter finding ­ that low levels of conscientiousness correlate positively with supervisor-assessed performance ­ is at odds with research from other employment settings where conscientiousness has consistently been positively correlated with multiple indices of performance. A proposed explanation for this finding is that individuals characterized by higher levels of contentiousness may have high needs
24

for achievement, and are frustrated by equipment failures, schedule delays and inadequate supplies which are often a reality of living and working under the harsh conditions of an isolated research station. Individuals with lower needs for achievement and perfection may show superior psychological adjustment under such circumstances (Gunderson, 1974; Palinkas et al., 2000a).
The validity of personality in predicting performance among physicians is a largely unexplored area of research. In a small number of studies, conscientiousness has been found to predict several indices of performance (Ferguson, Sanders, & James, 2000; Lievens, Coetsier, De Fruyt, & De Maeseneer, 2002; Ferguson, James, O'Hehir, & Sanders, 2003), with conscientiousness being found to predict academic performance even over previous academic performance as a predictor. Some researchers have postulated that other traits, such as agreeableness and extraversion are likely to hold significant potential for predicting ability in the communicative and collaborative aspects of medical practice, but such studies have yet to be conducted (Lievens et al., 2002).
Personality and culture Separate from the question of the predictive validity of trait assessments is
that of the role played by personality in shaping the culture of a population. The majority of current research along this line has centered on the role of personality in defining organizational culture, but the idea of a group having a characteristic personality profile has its roots in anthropology and in early attempts to characterize ethnic cultures. In the first half of the 20th century, anthropologist Ralph Linton and psychoanalyst Abram Kardiner developed the concept of the basic personality structure. They postulated that personality and culture were intimately related, and that each culture had its own characteristic personality.
25

Kardiner and Linton heavily influenced another anthropologist, Cora Dubois, who later proposed the idea of a modal personality. Dubois suggested that a certain personality structure occurred most frequently within a given society, but was not necessarily shared by all members.
In recent years, this concept of modal personality has resurfaced in the organizational psychology literature. Historically, attempts to understand and explain organization culture have centered along sociologic lines (Schneider, Smith, Taylor, & Fleenor, 1998). A complete review of organizational culture is beyond the scope of this dissertation, but an excellent overview may be found in Trice and Beyer (1993). Generally, however, organizational cultures are seen as beginning with an organization's founder. Through the installation of rules, regulations and practices, the founder and the first senior members of an organization create a system of beliefs, symbols, values and practices into which new members are socialized through a process of enculturation (Trice et al., 1993).
Organizational psychologists have tended to view professional groups, generally included under the descriptive occupational subcultures, as somewhat separate entities operating within the greater organization (Trice et al., 1993). Among the driving forces that shape these occupational subcultures, Trice describes intensive and lengthy socialization into certain beliefs, values, norms, and practices (Trice, 1993). By definition, organizational psychologists tend to be primarily concerned with the functioning of organizations, and occupational subcultures, as they are termed, are generally studied and described from their perspective as existing within larger, more complex organizations.
In 1987, Benjamin Schneider published the first in a series of monographs describing a theory of Attraction-Selection-Attrition (the ASA hypothesis) which proposed that shared personality traits among members of an organization were really the fundamental component of organizational culture (Schneider, 1987). In
26

brief, the ASA hypothesis suggests that through a process of attraction to an organization, selection for employment by that organization, and the subsequent attrition of those individuals who do not fit with an organization's culture, the population of an organization comes to possess common personality characteristics.
While he did not discount the importance of leadership and acculturative processes in creating and sustaining organizational cultures, Schneider suggested that such processes occur against a backdrop of personality homogeneity within a given organization (Schneider, Goldstein, & Smith, 1995). The ASA hypothesis does not proscribe what traits are specific to a given organization, nor does it attempt to define the specifics of attraction, selection or attrition ­ it simply suggests that the result of this gradual process is a significant degree of uniformity among the employees of each organization. Schneider has gone on to describe how the ASA hypothesis fits well with other existing theories of organizational culture ­ in particular that the founder of an organization plays a pivotal role in defining the modal personality of that organization, and that the acculturative processes work synergistically with attritional processes to retain employees who are compatible with the existing culture and to encourage the departure of those who are not. In a validation of his hypothesis, Schneider demonstrated significant degrees of organization-specific homogeneity in a study of 142 organizations by using archival personality data (Schneider et al., 1998).
Schneider points out several shortcomings of the abovementioned validation study. The measure of personality employed was the Meyers-Brigg Type Inventory (MBTI) (Myers, McCauley, Quenk, & Hammer, 1998), which he noted was not a favorite of personality researchers2. The selection of the MBTI
2Personality psychologists have generally been less than enthusiastic about the MBTI despite (or perhaps in part due to) the current popularity of the test. Complaints center on both the psychometrics of the test and in its theoretical basis. For a review of concerns see Stricker and
27

was a choice of convenience since those data had already been collected on the organizations being studied. Schneider elected to use continuous scores as opposed to types, which increased the validity of the instrument, and previous research has suggested that the MBTI covers four of the Big Five dimensions (Costa and McCrae, 1989). Another potential shortcoming of this study was that only managers were included in the data, which suggests the study did not confirm homogeneity of traits among employees below the level of management. Schneider (1998) also points out that it is difficult to confirm that the ASA process is solely the cause of homogeneity in the organizations studied, and that his study only confirmed the presence of trait similarity within an organization.
Following Schneider's 1998 validation, numerous other studies have supplied supporting evidence for the concept of personality homogeneity within organizations. Even before the introduction of the ASA hypothesis, there was a large body of research into person-organization fit (see Hogan, 2001, for a review) and vocational attraction (see Holland, 1985, for example). A significant body of work prior to and concurrent with the ASA hypothesis has suggested that vocational interests are closely related to personality (Murray, 1938; Eysenck, 1952; Jordan, Herriot, & Chalmers, 1991; Judge & Cable, 1997; Fruyt & Mervielde, 1999; Furnham, 2001). Furthermore, the work of Hogan, Judge and others has shown that an appropriate match between personal interest and vocational choice or between personality and work characteristics would seem to add supporting evidence to both the attraction phase and the attrition phase of the ASA cycle.
It would seem that the ASA hypothesis explains a clear link between personality (or more correctly modal personalities) and organizational cultures.
Ross (1964a, 1964b) and more recently, Hicks (1985) and DeVito (1985). Regardless, it is probably the most frequently employed personality assessment instrument in use today, particularly in the world of management consulting.
28

What is not quite so clear, however, are the implications for specialized work groups, such as those discussed at the beginning of this chapter. Are the professional cultures of pilots, astronauts and physicians shaped by similar forces of personality? Textbooks on organizational cultures touch on socialization into these professions, but generally do not explore them in great detail ­ perhaps because access to these groups for research is so difficult. Generally, explorations of professional group behavior and culture tend to center on observable practices, symbols, rites of passage, shared experiences and acculturation (Schermerhorn, Hunt, & Osborn, 1982; Trice et al., 1993; Trice, 1993). As in organizations, these elements are undoubtedly important factors in shaping cultures. It would seem that if one is to have success in changing the behavior in these professional groups, however, a more complete understanding of the role of personality is needed. And what of personality and performance studies that are conducted in general work settings? Is it appropriate to generalize the findings of those studies to the work settings under question? The last section of this chapter will clarify some of these issues and provide a clearer understanding of the research presented in this dissertation.
The questions at hand Where does this overview of aviation, space, medicine, error, personality
and culture leave us? In terms of the validity of personality as a predictor of performance, a key issue is the degree to which findings in one domain can reliably be generalized to another. As outlined in the previous section, traits such as conscientiousness and extraversion, which tend to predict success in most employment settings, have been shown to have opposite effects in performance studies conducted at Antarctic research stations (Palinkas et al., 2000b). How reliably can findings from this environment be applied to astronaut crews? This
29

is, after all, one of the main justifications for NASA funding behavioral research in Antarctica. A clear understanding of the norms of personality in those two environments would seem to be critical before applying research findings from one environment to the other.
Another case to consider would be the adoption of Crew Resource Management (CRM) strategies from aviation to medicine ­ an issue of much interest in the current nationwide effort to reduce medical error. In aviation we have seen that personality predicted training receptivity, crew behavior and crew performance. Again, it would seem prudent to understand fundamental personality differences between these two highly skilled yet potentially different groups of individuals before importing training materials and strategies from one domain to the other. It is unclear to what extent each of these three groups ­ pilots, astronauts, and physicians ­ are similar to or distinct from either the general population or from each other in terms of fundamental personality trait profiles. Large differences on one or more dimensions may have significant implications for those attempting to transfer psychologically relevant technologies between fields. A failure to understand what makes these groups "tick" can undermine attempts to effect changes in culture, attitudes and practices.
It is tempting to assume that the same forces that lead to homogeneity of personality traits in organizations lead to similar effects in the professional cultures under investigation in this dissertation. Schneider's ASA theory relies on a cycle of attraction, selection, and attrition. In some of the professions in question, attrition is almost unheard of. For example, in medicine, attrition for all reasons over the course of a typical 4-year program is extremely low (Association of American Medical Colleges, 2002) and in the astronaut corps, attrition after initial selection is essentially nil (Santy, 1994). While attrition during the long course of flight training is not insignificant, few pilots hired by a major commercial carrier will leave the organization prior to mandatory retirement (to
30

change airlines means to lose seniority, a key element in the pay and benefits structure of airline pilot employment). So if attrition is not a factor, this would suggest that attraction and selection play a much more significant role in defining common characteristics in selective professions than they do in organizations.
While competitive entry professions may not experience any appreciable attrition after final selection, they do experience sub-selection into areas of specialized practice (again with little room for subsequent departure). In medicine, specialty or sub-specialty selection does not generally occur prior to residency application in the fourth year of medical school. After residency training is completed, physicians will select the specific city, town, hospital, remuneration style (salary as opposed to fee for service, for example) and will choose between academic and community settings in which to practice. In aviation, pilots will self-select into fleets and aircraft types for a variety of reasons (Hines, 1998). There may be more opportunity for more typical ASA processes to occur during these later phases of career, suggesting that homogeneity of traits may increase during sub-specialization within these professions.
Another discrepancy between organizational and professional cultures is the lack of a central founding individual ­ a key element in theories of organizational socialization, and according to Schneider et al., a key element in defining the modal personality of an organization (Schneider et al., 1998). The lack of a particular individual to fulfill the role of a leader in these professions may mean that a clear modal personality does not develop, and that professions may be more heterogeneous than individual organizations. On the other hand, the stringent selection criteria imposed on aspirant members of these professions may result in increased homogeneity. Certainly there are public stereotypes for all three of these groups. While stereotypes may at times have basis in truth, they are not evidence per se of homogeneity.
31

Schneider's model relies on the theory that people are attracted to an organization, and furthermore, what they are really attracted to are the attributes of that organization as laid down and developed by the founder and his/her successors. When dealing with professions, there is no organization to be attracted to, no founder, no organizational culture ­ none of the so-called "structural attributes" of an organization. Instead, people will have different reasons for joining ­ attraction to the work, parental pressure, altruistic motives, desire for social status, or even as an expression of excitement-seeking tendencies (perhaps in the case of fighter pilots or astronauts). This suggests that the element of attraction may be a far greater driving force for individuals entering certain professions (or vocations) than for many individuals joining an organization.
Also, although Schneider's ASA theory postulates organization-specific homogeneity of personality traits, it does not attempt to answer the question of what specific traits define a particular organization. With specific professions, it is possible to make such predictions. Hypothetical predictions regarding the nature of specific traits in these professions will be proposed in the following chapter.
In summary, it would seem reasonable to expect that a clearer understanding of the typical personality characteristics of the three groups in question ­ pilots, astronauts, and physicians ­ would help in any attempt to understand the behavior of members of those groups. Furthermore, interventions aimed at changing that behavior will likely be more effective if the personality contributions to professional cultures are known and can be accounted for when designing specific interventions. Also, if parties are intent upon trying to generalize lessons and interventions from one field to another, then understanding fundamental differences in the respective populations is critical for predicting success and designing required modifications for training. Failure to focus on individuals will impair a true understanding of behavior of the greater group.
32

This point is made by Schneider (Schneider et al., 1998), as the issue pertains to organizations ­ but if homogeneity of personality is found to be characteristic of those professions whose boundaries extend beyond the doors of any one organization and contribute to practices across the country and around the globe, then such admonitions are appropriate here as well.
33

Chapter Two Theory development and hypotheses
Background Though not detailed in the previous chapter, a desire to understand the
impact of personality on professional culture grew out of some degree of frustration in working with data sets that did not demonstrate normal distributions of personality traits. In attempting to study personality and performance in NASA astronauts, the stellar levels of achievement motivation in these individuals made generally accepted analytic techniques invalid. When normally we would have divided a population into low and high achievement categories and looked to pair those groups with clusters of other traits, such separation (into high and low achievement subgroups) was not possible. Later, in a study of Antarctic expeditioners, it became apparent that those individuals did not exhibit the same uniformity of achievement-specific traits. This immediately seemed problematic, since many research groups, including our own, were using Antarctic stations as an environmental analogue to habitation on the International Space Station. It soon became apparent in comparing these two populations that significant differences existed on at least this one dimension (achievement motivation), and possibly other dimensions as well. With the knowledge that astronauts were top-of-their-class, valedictorian, scuba diving, airplane flying, profoundly accomplished individuals, with astounding levels of individual achievement and that Antarctic personnel were a highly mixed population of engineers, mechanics, electricians, cooks, physicians, scientists, military personnel and meteorologists, it became apparent that we probably had significant personality differences on multiple measures. Although recent studies have shown high degrees of similarity among Antarctic research personnel from different nations (Musson, Sandal, Harper, & Helmreich, 2002), no one had looked at
34

systematic differences between astronauts and Antarctic personnel. This raised a red flag about generalizing psychological findings from one domain to the other.
After some reflection, it became apparent that many researchers, including ourselves, were assuming that population differences were of little significance when substituting research findings in one domain for that of another. A good example was in looking at validation studies of CRM in aviation, and using those findings to justify the applicability and transferability of such findings to surgical operating rooms and emergency departments. For that matter, CRM was being employed in the training of astronauts ­ largely because CRM was being accepted as an effective countermeasure to error in aviation, and flying in space was similar in many respects to flying elsewhere. A glaring difference, however, is that all pilots are pilots, whereas astronauts are just as likely to be geologists, electrical engineers, or botanists. More red flags seemed to be raised.
After making such observations, it seemed to be that all the research into personality and performance that is environmentally specific should include consideration of profession-specific differences in normative traits. For example, if conscientiousness predicts frustration and poor coping in isolated Antarctic stations, then this is likely to be a greater problem in the highly conscientious, typical astronaut exposed to similar environments. Or, the resistance to CRM training observed in pilots who scored low on expressivity (Chidester et al., 1991) would likely be less of a problem among physicians, if physicians are found to score higher on expressivity, and so on. However, in reviewing literature on socialization into organizations and on the organizational socialization of professional groups, it became apparent that organizational psychologists like Schneider had already found that shared personality characteristics are a fundamental characteristic of organizational cultures. It seems reasonable to consider that similar processes were occurring in the groups we were studying, even though they did not belong to an organization per se (with the exception of
35

the astronauts). It had become clear, however, that certain characteristics of these groups were really the result of shared common personality traits as much as they were learned or socialized phenomenon.
In drawing from both organizational and personality psychologists, it is possible to define a theory of personality homogeneity for professions. This theory and its corresponding hypotheses are presented below.
A theory of attraction, achievement, selection and specialization in professional culture
The theory can be summarized as follows: Through a process involving initial vocational attraction, pre-requisite achievement, academic achievement, and selection, professional groups are characterized by a distinct profile of personality traits in comparison with other groups and the general population. Because of the competitive selection process that is typical of professions, achievement-related traits are a key characteristic common to all those professional groups. As a general hypothesis:
· Hypothesis 1: Professional groups can be differentiated from normative populations by characteristic patterns of personality traits shared among the members of those groups.
This theory can be further stated as a series of distinct postulates and testable hypotheses:
1) A similar personality profile will characterize members of all professional groups due to the achievement oriented process of selection common to all of these fields. Furthermore, this profile should be characterized by higher than normal levels of conscientiousness, instrumentality, work orientation and achievement striving - traits shown
36

consistently to predict academic and other achievements. In other words, this can be described as a modal personality that is characteristic of the majority of members of professional groups.
· Hypothesis 2.1: The majority of members of those professions will share higher than average levels of personality traits associated with achievement (or conversely lower levels on traits associated with diminished achievement) in comparison with normal populations.
· Hypothesis 2.2: These traits are hypothesized to include conscientiousness, instrumentality, work orientation, and achievement striving.
2) A certain degree of dissimilarity in personality should exist between professional work groups due to differences in initial vocational attraction. In other words, there should be a modal personality defined not only by achievement related characteristics, but also by vocational attraction. This characteristic personality profile within a given profession will necessarily be a product of the variability in motivation to enter the profession in question. For example, excitement seeking may motivate someone to be a fighter pilot, whereas altruism may motivate other individuals to enter medicine. Therefore, consistent with the literature of vocational attraction,
· Hypothesis 3 (The vocation-specific attraction hypothesis): Individual professions will demonstrate personality trait profiles consistent with an initial vocational attraction to the given profession.
3) Entry into certain fields requires experiential qualifications, and the attainment of such qualifications may be in part personality dependent. Medical schools may seek evidence of volunteer activity, whereas military
37

pilots may be selected on combat related skills. Commercial pilots, by contrast, may be selected more on perceived calmness and emotional stability as presented in an employment interview or as communicated by employment references. Astronauts are most certainly selected on a number of criteria unrelated to academic achievement, such as gregariousness, interview selfpresentation and community involvement. Many of these criteria may also be influenced by personality traits other than achievement related ones, and therefore may contribute a degree of uniformity to members of the profession. These traits may relate to neither the achievement related accomplishments required for selection (such as academic grades) nor to the vocational attraction mentioned above, and therefore represent a potential second source of profession-specific trait homogeneity.
· Hypothesis 4 (The vocation trait-congruent hypothesis): Members of professions will share similar levels of traits consistent with the attainment of experience specific to that profession unrelated to traits typically labeled as achievement related.
4) A final component of this proposed theory of professional culture addresses career differentiation after entry into a profession. Given that attrition rates are negligible for many professions, particularly aviation and medicine, there is little opportunity for group homogeneity to increase due to the departure of dissimilar individuals. What does tend to occur, however, is further specialization into subgroups of practice and employment. In medicine, doctors choose specialties based on numerous criteria, including lifestyle, call schedule, subject interest and degrees of stability, risk, or excitement. In military aviation, some pilots choose the excitement of fighter aircraft, while others choose the high flight time and global travel of large transport aircraft. It is postulated that the same influences that contribute to
38

defining personality similarity in professional groups in general act at this stage of differentiation to produce further degrees of homogeneity. The final hypothesis suggested by this theory is as follows:
· Hypothesis 5 (The professional specialization hypothesis): Within professional groups, sub-specialization leads to further differentiation of personality due to the continued process of attraction and selection.
Each of these hypotheses will be tested to varying extents in this dissertation. A complete and thorough evaluation of this theory of professional personality differentiation is beyond the ability of this series of studies. It is hoped, however, that as an initial attempt at validation this dissertation will lay the foundation for further and continued evaluation of the ideas presented herein.
The modal personality of a profession is a key element in understanding the collective and individual values, attitudes, and behavior of members of that profession. Acculturative and socialization processes that occur within a profession (or occupational subculture) necessarily occur within the milieu profession specific trait profiles. It is possible to suggest that organizational processes, including Attraction-Selection-Attrition and organizational socialization also occur necessarily in the presence of this pre-existing personality homogeneity.
39

Chapter Three Methods
The theory and hypotheses presented in the previous chapter were derived from observations made while conducting research studies into personality and performance in a number of different professional domains. Presented below are a series of studies designed to test the hypotheses presented in the previous chapter.
The instruments All four of the studies presented in this chapter compare personality data
collected using two personality assessment batteries: the Helmreich Personal Characteristics Inventory (PCI) and a modified version of the NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI). These tests were described briefly earlier, but a more detailed discussion of these instruments is presented below. Following the discussion of the batteries, the four studies will be presented in detail, including which hypotheses or sub-hypotheses are addressed in each study. A description of the instruments is presented first since they are common to all four studies. Purpose, participants and procedures are presented separately thereafter for each study.
Personal Characteristics Inventory The Personal Characteristics Inventory (PCI) is a multi-axial personality
trait assessment battery comprised of scales developed by Helmreich and Spence at The University of Texas at Austin. It is a paper-and-pencil self-report questionnaire designed primarily for research into personality traits and behavior
40

in complex socio-technical work settings. The version of the battery used in this dissertation consisted of 225 questions, with each item answered on a five-point Likert scale, and required approximately 40 minutes to complete. The core of the PCI consists of 11 scales that assess various aspects of the broad traits of Instrumentality (achievement motivation) and Expressivity (social orientation). These scales have been taken from three pre-existing assessment instruments ­ the Extended Personal Attributes Questionnaire (EPAQ) (Helmreich, Spence, & Wilhelm, 1981), the Work and Family Orientation Questionnaire (WOFO) (Helmreich, 1978), and the Jenkins Activity Survey (JAS) (Pred et al., 1986; Jenkins, Zyzanski, & Rosenman, 1971). The scales and their definitions are listed in Table 1.2. Research has shown that the scales of the PCI are reliable and consistent across national and cultural boundaries (Ursin et al., 1991).
NEO Five Factor Inventory The NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) is a self report battery
designed to assess the "Big Five" traits of neuroticism (N), extraversion (E), openness to new experience (O), agreeableness (A), and conscientiousness (C) (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Measurement of the Big Five is possible using a number of instruments, of which the most standard is the revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R), an extensive 240-item self report personality battery (Costa et al., 1992). The NEO-FFI is a short-form of the NEO PI-R and is comprised of 60 items, each of which is answered on a five-point scale ranging from Strongly Agree to Strongly Disagree. The psychometric properties of the NEO-FFI are well studied (for a review see Costa and McCrae, NEO PI-R Professional Manual, 1992). Considerable research has validated both the Five Factor Model and the NEO-FFI across national and cultural boundaries (McCrae et al., 1997; McCrae, Costa, Del Pilar, Rolland, & Parker, 1998).
41

The studies that follow use an experimental version of the NEO-FFI, where 8-item scales were adapted from the original 12-item scales of the NEOFFI. These scales were created (from the original FFI) in 1989 when an opportunity to assess personality and performance in astronauts was presented. Strict time limits imposed on the testing protocol necessitated truncating the 12 item scales, and reversing the direction of the Likert response scale so as to permit integration with existing batteries. The first study detailed below includes a validation study to confirm the psychometric comparability of these modified 8-item scales to the original 12 item scales.
Study 1 ­ Personality and career intent in undergraduate students This study involved the administration of the PCI, the full 12-item NEO-
FFI and the modified 8-item NEO-FFI to undergraduate students. Purpose: The purpose of this study was fourfold. First, this provided an
opportunity to study the psychometric properties of the modified 8-item NEO scales to be used in the assessments of other populations. Properties to be investigated included both the statistical reliability of the scales and their correlations with their parent scales in the NEO-FFI. A second purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between the scales of the PCI and the Big Five. Although both instruments have been used to assess personality and predict performance in previous studies, the relationship between the two instruments is not well documented. Thirdly, the collection of the data in this study provided normative data with which to conduct comparative analyses in studies of the professional workgroup populations in studies 2, 3 and 4. Finally, this study provided an opportunity to look for evidence of homogeneity in students stating an intention to enter a given profession prior to actually entering that field (in this case, students stating intent to enter medicine, or who were already enrolled in
42

engineering). This final purpose would provide a partial validation of the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3), since these students represented those individuals who were attracted to a profession, but not yet selected or acculturated.
Participants: This study involved the administration of questionnaires to 344 undergraduate research volunteers (173 female, 171 male) at The University of Texas at Austin. Participants received one hour of experimental credit for their participation in this study. Research participation is a requirement for the introductory undergraduate course in psychology in which they were enrolled, although non-experimental options are provided for those who chose not to participate in this program. Participants were informed of the voluntary nature of the study, of their rights to withdraw from the study at any point should they choose to do so, and of the fact that they could choose not to answer any questions posed to them without penalty. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at The University of Texas at Austin. Participants were given a copy of the experiment information page that stated their rights as subjects and included contact information for the Principal Investigator (PI) should they have any questions.
Procedure: Students enrolled in this study via either email or online registration at The University of Texas. Participants were tested en masse in groups ranging from 3 to approximately 100 over a two year period. Testing sessions were held at the start, at the midway, and at the end of the semester to obtain a more normative distribution of Students3. Each participant was asked to complete a demographic information page that included, among other
3 It is possible to theorize that students differ in fundamental ways as a function of when they choose to complete their experimental credits. For example, eager and organized students may elect to complete their experimental credits at the start of the term, while those wary of the system or those who tend to procrastinate may be more likely to enroll at the last possible opportunity at the end of the term. This bias is generally not addressed in studies conducted using undergraduate subjects, but is a potential source of systematic bias in such studies.
43

information, age, gender, race, area of concentration, and intended career. Participants were then asked to complete the PCI, the modified 8-item version of the NEO, and the actual NEO-FFI.
Study 2 ­ Personality assessments of astronaut applicants This second study consisted of an analysis of personality data collected
from final stage astronaut applicants. These data were collected between 1990 and 1995. These data have been archived since first being collected, and have not been previously presented.4
Purpose: There are several distinct goals in this investigation. First, do individuals who make it to the final round in astronaut selection exhibit higher levels of achievement motivation than the general population? This would be a test of the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypothesis 2.1, 2.2). Furthermore, do final stage applicants demonstrate uniformity of personality traits not directly related to achievement? This simultaneously tests two of the hypotheses - the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3) and the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4). A final purpose to this study is to address the following: Do unsuccessful aspirants exhibit similar profiles to those who are eventually selected to become astronauts? Specifically, if those applicants who make it to final stage selection have similar profiles to those who are eventually selected, then this would suggest that the combination of vocational attraction and the necessary levels of achievement motivation produce homogeneity even before actual selection into the astronaut corps. This comparison simultaneously tests the two following hypothesis: the vocation-
4At the time of writing of this dissertation, these data are simultaneously being analyzed and prepared for submission to a peer reviewed journal by the author (lead), along with two other authors: Dr. Gro Sandal, at the University of Bergen, Norway, and Dr. Robert Helmreich at The University of Texas at Austin.
44

specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3), and the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4).
Participants: As stated, this study examines personality data collected from final stage astronaut applicants. Typically, NASA invites applications for the astronaut program every two years. This generally results in between 2000 and 4000 applications being submitted from around the country each time the opportunity to apply is announced. For each wave of applications, approximately 110 individuals are invited to the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston for further evaluation, and from those about 20 will be selected as astronauts.
Between 1990 and 1995, three successive selections were conducted by NASA. In 1990, 106 applicants were brought to JSC for evaluation (from a pool of 1945 qualified applicants); in 1992, 87 were brought to JSC (from a pool of 2054 qualified applicants); in 1994, 122 were invited to JSC (from a pool of 2962 qualified applicants). All of the 315 applicants who were invited to JSC for final selection evaluation during this period were offered the opportunity to participate in a study of astronaut and applicant personality and performance assessment. Of those asked, all 315 volunteered to participate in that study, though only 259 were able to complete the personality batteries due to competing activities during their visit to JSC. This represents a participation rate of 84.8%. There were no systematic or voluntary participant dropouts recorded by the investigators during the testing sessions. Of the 259 applicants who participated, a total of 63 (12 female, 51 male) were eventually selected to become astronauts.
All of the participants were assured that the information provided would not be provided to NASA at any time and that the data would not be used in either the selection decision or in future flight assignments. Furthermore, participants were assured that these data would be housed offsite at the Principal Investigator's research facility (Professor Robert Helmreich at The University of Texas at Austin) and that only the Principal Investigator and his designees would
45

have access to these data. All subjects were informed of the above, and each signed a written consent agreeing to participate in the study.
Procedure: Participants were asked to complete either the PCI alone (for the 1990 selection class) or the PCI along with the modified 8-item NEO-FFI scales (in subsequent selection classes) using paper and pencil versions of these batteries.5 Of the 259 applicants who participated, 114 completed the standard PCI alone and 145 completed both the PCI and the modified 8-item NEO-FFI. These data have been archived at The University of Texas at Austin since being collected. These data have been de-identified and individual cases are only identified by code number.
Study 3 ­ Astronauts, pilots and physicians This third study looks at evidence of homogeneity and heterogeneity
between professional groups. Specifically, it looks at personality trait data collected from commercial airline pilots, active astronauts, and medical residents in anesthesiology and surgery. Comparisons are made between each of these groups and with the normative student data from study one.
Purpose: This study addresses several key issues and tests several of the hypothesis presented in Chapter Two. The first question is whether or not these three groups share a degree of homogeneity on achievement related traits ­ specifically instrumentality, achievement motivation, work, mastery and conscientiousness. This will be a test of the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypothesis 2.1, 2.2). Another key question is whether these three groups show profession-specific homogeneity. In other words, even if these groups all exhibit high levels of achievement, do they also differ significantly from each other? If
5 The addition of the 8-item NEO-FFI scales occurred after the study was begun, so only the latter portion of the 1992 and all of the 1994 selection groups were assessed on the Big Five.
46

so, this would support the idea that while professions are homogeneous and different from the normal population, they also exhibit significant differences from each other. This will be a test of the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4). Another important question is whether or not we see distinct homogenous sub groups within professions. Mission Specialist Astronauts and Pilot Astronauts, for example, form two distinct sub groups within the astronaut corps. If these groups are different, then this would be strong evidence that, while attraction may play a key role, the different requirements for these two different roles attract slightly different kinds of individuals. This would support the supposition that non academic prerequisites for different professions (or specialties within a profession) may favor selection of one modal personality over another. This will be a test of the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4). Among the medical residents, differences between the anesthesia and surgical residents will be a test of the professional specialization hypothesis (Hypothesis 5), since both groups started out as non-specialized physicians.
Participants: Personality trait assessment data from several groups are included in this study.
The undergraduate students who provide the normative data for this comparison have already been described in study one.
The airline pilot data will be drawn from two archived sources. The first consists of 120 check pilots6 (6 female, 114 male) from a major US airline who completed the personality assessment batteries as part of a study of pilot personality and performance in the mid-1990s. These data have been deidentified and archived at The University of Texas at Austin. The second set of data comes from a different U.S. national airline, and consists of 69 pilots (all
6 Check pilots are active line pilots who, in addition to line flying duties, are also employed by the airline to periodically audit other pilots to ensure required standards of competency within an airline.
47

male) who completed the personality assessment battery, also as part of a study of personality and performance. These pilots represent a group that was nominated by both management and union representatives at that carrier as representing exemplary captains. Both sets of personality data have not been reported previously.
The astronaut personality data set used in this study is the same data set previously described in a study of astronaut personality and performance (Rose et al., 1994). In 1989, as part of a study into astronaut performance, all active NASA astronauts were invited to complete a personality assessment battery at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. Of the 84 active astronauts in the NASA astronaut corps at the time of the study, 65 agreed to participate in the study (77%). The voluntary participation rate was actually higher than the figure of 77% suggests, since a number of astronauts who did not participate were either on assignment in other locations or in the midst of training for an upcoming flight. Of the 65 who did participate, 13 were female Mission Specialist Astronauts, 34 were male Mission Specialist Astronauts, and 37 were male Pilot Astronauts. Participation was completely voluntary, and the same assurance about confidentiality and the restriction of the data to the Principal Investigator (Dr. Robert Helmreich) and his designees was made at the time of data collection. Participants signed a formal consent that described the voluntary nature of their involvement and the securities granted to these data. Only de-identified data are used in the present study.
The physicians who contributed data to this study came from three groups. The first group was comprised of 20 resident and 24 consultant surgeons from the University of Basel in Switzerland. The second group consisted of 17 resident and 26 consultant anesthesiologists from that same university, and the third group consisted of 27 resident and 27 consultant anesthesiologists from the nearby University of Freiberg in southern Germany. These data were collected as part of
48

a study of physician behavior in collaboration between The University of Texas (Dr. Robert Helmreich, Principal Investigator) and the University of Basel in Switzerland. Participation in this study was voluntary, and no identifying demographic data were collected from any of the medical participants.
Procedure: Details of the normative student testing are provided with the description of study one. The airline check pilots completed the PCI and the modified 8-item version of the NEO-FFI. The second group of pilots completed a version of the PCI that did not include the competitiveness scale and a reduced version of the 8-item modified NEO-FFI that assessed only openness to new experience, agreeableness and conscientiousness (O, A and C). Representatives of the airline pilot's union at that airline, in consultation with their legal counsel, mandated the removal of items from the competitiveness, neuroticism and extraversion scales due to fears that the data from those measures could have negative repercussions for individual pilots if ever given to management (despite reassurances of data confidentiality). Physicians from all three groups completed the full PCI battery and the full 5 scales of the 8-item modified NEO-FFI.
Study 4 ­ Antarctic personnel and active astronauts This final study is a comparison of Antarctic personnel and active duty
NASA astronauts. As discussed previously, Antarctic research stations are frequently cited as an analogue for the confinement and isolation of space stations and future lunar and planetary habitats (Suedfeld & Weiss, 2000).
Purpose: The purpose of this study is to examine these two populations ­ Antarctic expeditioners and NASA astronauts ­ to see to what degree they are similar in terms of personality trait profiles. There are several questions to address, such as whether or not these individuals share traits distinct from the normal population. If they do, then this supports the notion that similar
49

environments (in this case, extreme and remote ones with some degree of danger) attract similar types of individuals. If so, this offers direct support for the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3). In this analysis, other factors influencing homogeneity ­ such as the achievement required for academic excellence, and ancillary prerequisites (like involvement in certain activities, such as scuba diving and public service that are factors when selecting astronauts) have been removed from the equation. In such cases, homogeneity of traits would only be due to the attraction to extreme, adventurous, and expeditionary environments. However, it is still a key question as to whether these two different groups differ on achievement related traits. Since astronauts are much more highly selected on the basis of past academic and employment related achievement, one would expect them to possess much higher levels of achievement related personality traits. If they do, then this would be another validation of the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypothesis 2.1, 2.2), and thus would define a significant difference between these two populations. This would have ramifications for attempts to generalize trait related psychological findings from one environment to the other.
Participants: Participants in this study include active duty NASA astronauts, undergraduate students, and Antarctic research station personnel.
The astronaut data used in this study consist of 65 active astronauts assessed in 1989. This is the same dataset described in study 3, above.
The undergraduate students are those presented in Study 1, and serve as a normative dataset for these analyses.
The Antarctic personnel who participated in this study were members of the Australian Antarctic program and were assessed as part of a multi-center collaborative study into personality and performance at Antarctic over-winter research stations. This study was funded by the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI) and was conducted over the 2001 and 2002 Antarctic
50

winters (JoAnna Wood, Baylor College of Medicine, Principal investigator). A total of 107 expeditioners participated in this study ­ 59 in 2001 (10 female, 49 male) and 48 in 2002 (5 female, 43 male). This study was approved in advance by the Institutional Review Board at The University of Texas at Austin and by the Ethics Review Committee at the Australian Antarctic Division in Australia. Enrolment in this study was voluntary, and all participants were informed of the voluntary nature of this study, and of their right to withdraw at any time. Although identifying data were collected by the Principal Investigator, participating researchers at University of Texas dealt only with non-identified data. All participants signed a formal consent agreeing to take part in this study.
Procedure: The procedure for the collection of PCI and modified 8-item NEO-FFI data for the active duty astronauts has been described previously. For the Australian Antarctic personnel, all participants completed the standard PCI and the modified NEO-FFI. Tests were administered at the Antarctic training facility at Bronte Park in central Tasmania by the author (in 2000) or another investigator from The University of Texas at Austin (Michelle Harper in 2001).
Analytic strategy and statistical approach The same analytical approach will be used for each of the four studies
described above. Analyses of variance will be performed on scale scores for both the PCI and NEO-FFI with either group membership or gender as the independent variable. The General Linear Model (GLM) subroutine of SPSS (version 11.5) will be used to conduct these analyses. Post hoc tests will be used to determine significant differences when more than two groups are compared. The level of p<0.05 will be set as the minimum for statistical significance for each of the four studies. While numerous comparisons are made in each study, the limitation of participant numbers imposed by real-world testing conditions along with the
51

exploratory nature of these analyses suggests that some latitude in the interpretation of significance is warranted. Actual p values will be reported to assist the reader in determining which findings are most robust. In addition to F statistics and p values, the partial eta squared statistic (p2) will also be reported. While the F statistic and its corresponding significance level provide information of statistical significance, the partial eta squared statistic gives an idea of the practical significance of that difference. The value of the partial eta squared statistic may be interpreted as the proportion of the variance in the dependent variable (scale score) accounted for by the independent variable, which in these analyses is represented by either gender or professional group.
For examining group differences, separate analyses will be conducted for male and female participants. This approach will be followed for three reasons. First, previous research has clearly established that genders differ on normative values for most of the scales used in this study. Analyzing males and females separately reduces variance accounted for solely by gender. Second, the interaction between traits and profession may differ between the sexes. Third, gender differences in career choice and opportunity has resulted in significantly different numbers of male and female subjects in each of the professional groups studied in this dissertation. Many of the groups studied do not have adequate female members to allow a comprehensive analysis of gender-profession interactions. Analyses of variance will be performed on scale scores using gender as the independent variable when adequate numbers of each gender are available to examine the pattern of gender differences within each of those groups.
52

Chapter Four
Results and Analyses
Study 1 ­ Personality and career intent in undergraduate students This study involved the analysis of data collected from 344 undergraduate
students (173 female, 171 male), including self-reported career aspirations and personality traits as assessed by the PCI, modified (8-item) NEO-FFI and full (12item) NEO-FFI. Results are presented in 4 parts: reliability and validity of the modified (8-item) NEO-FFI, scale inter-correlations between the PCI and the NEO-FFI, gender differences on the scales of the PCI and NEO-FFI, and personality trait differences and gender differences among students of differing career aspirations.
Psychometric analysis of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI The first part of the analysis for this study examines the psychometric
properties of the PCI and the NEO-FFI. Scale reliability and construct validity of the modified NEO-FFI: As a
measure of internal reliability, Cronbach's alphas for the five scales of the 8-item modified NEO-FFI scales are presented in Table 4.1. Alphas for the five scales range from 0.604 to 0.800.7 For comparative purposes, the Cronbach's alphas are presented for the parent 12-item scales as well (derived from this same data set). As a measure of construct validity, Pearson product moment correlations between the experimental 8-item scales of the modified NEO-FFI and the well researched and validated 12-item NEO-FFI scales are also presented.
7 Cronbach's alpha is a measure of scale reliability (or consistency), and is calculated as a function of both average inter-item correlation and of the number of items in a scale. An alpha of 0.7 has been suggested to be an acceptable limit (Nunnaly & Bernstein, 1994), though lower thresholds are often found in research literature.
53

Modified NEO-FFI (8-item scale)

NEO-FFI
(12 item scales)

Scale

Cronbach's Alpha*

Cronbach's Alpha

Neuroticism

0.782

0.854

Extraversion

0.703

0.800

Openness

0.635

0.768

Agreeableness

0.604

0.772

Conscientiousness

0.800

0.834

*Based on 344 undergraduate respondents. Based on 332 undergraduate respondents.

Pearson product moment
correlations between 8 and 12
item scales
0.845 0.812 0.845 0.814 0.896

Table 4.1. Internal consistencies and scale inter-correlations for the 8-item modified scales of the NEO-FFI and the parent 12 item scales.

Scale inter-correlations: Scale inter-correlations between the 8-item NEOFFI scales are presented in Appendix C. For comparison, the inter-correlations for the 12-item NEO-FFI scales and correlations between the 8-item and 12-item scales are also presented in Appendix C. Inter-correlations between the scales of the PCI are presented in Appendix D. Correlations between the scales of the PCI and the scales of the NEO-FFI are presented below in Table 4.2. These correlations are based upon data obtained from the 332 subjects who completed both the full PCI and the 12-item version of the NEO-FFI.
An examination of the correlations between the PCI and the NEO-FFI sheds new light on the scales of the PCI. Instrumentality can now be defined as a combination of emotional stability (low neuroticism), extraversion and conscientiousness. Expressivity is seen to be very similar to agreeableness, whereas negative instrumentality and competitiveness correlate negatively with agreeableness, which may alternatively be described as hostility. Mastery, work orientation and achievement strivings all correlate highly with conscientiousness, which suggests they reflect slightly varying aspects of that trait. Impatience/irritability appears to be a combination of both neuroticism and
54

hostility. Both negative communion and verbal aggressiveness correlate highly with neuroticism, but negative communion correlates moderately with agreeableness as well.

Scales of the NEO-FFI (full 12-item version)

PCI Scale

NEURO EXTRA OPEN AGREE CONSC

Instrumentality

-0.563** 0.378** 0.064 -0.116* 0.321**

Expressivity

0.046

0.245** 0.107

0.469** 0.164**

Bipolar Instrumentality

-0.453** 0.008

0.129* -0.270** 0.027

Negative Instrumentality

0.100 -0.049

-0.011 -0.613** -0.121**

Verbal Aggressiveness

0.381** -0.034

-0.164** -0.219** -0.099

Negative Communion

0.342** -0.093

-0.089

0.203** -0.047

Mastery

-0.264** 0.281** 0.271** -0.115* 0.398**

Work Orientation

-0.128* 0.257** 0.077

0.291** 0.461**

Competitiveness

-0.043

0.182** -0.153** -0.321** 0.040

Impatience/Irritability

0.305** -0.141** -0.165** -0.406** -0.281**

Achievement Strivings

-0.103

0.233** -0.046 -0.066

0.578**

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

Table 4.2. Scale correlations between the PCI and the NEO-FFI.

Gender differences on the scales of the PCI and NEO-FFI. Both the PCI and the NEO-FFI have known gender differences on certain scales (Spence & Helmreich, 1978; Spence et al., 1979; Costa et al., 1992). Normative values for each scale in the PCI and the NEO-FFI (both 8-item and 12-item versions) are presented in Tables 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5. Results of analyses of variance for gender differences on each scale are also listed along with the partial eta squared (p2) statistic. Analyses of variance calculations were performed using the General Linear Model (GLM) subroutine of SPSS version 11.5 (SPSS Inc., 2001).

55

Gender comparisons for the PCI ­ Study 1

Male*

Female*

PCI Scale

Mean S.D. Mean S.D. F

Sig

Instrumentality

21.4 4.79 20.4 4.55 3.983

Expressivity

23.0 4.01 24.7 4.09 14.089

Bipolar Instrumentality

16.3 3.94 13.6 4.62 34.017

Negative Instrumentality 13.3 4.50 11.3 4.55 17.372

Verbal Aggressiveness

5.4 2.88 6.4 2.91 11.007

Negative Communion

6.4 2.18 7.2 2.09 11.510

Mastery

18.9 4.76 18.5 4.83 .598

Work Orientation

19.0 3.74 20.3 3.22 13.261

Competitiveness

14.5 4.02 13.4 3.82 5.511

Impatience/Irritability

11.0 3.46 10.5 3.74 2.237

Achievement Strivings

13.8 4.43 14.3 3.82 1.260

*Based on 344 undergraduate respondents (171 male, 173 female).

For all comparisons, df=1, df (error)=170 for males, 172 for females.

.047 .000 .000 .000 .001 .001 .440 .000 .019 .136 .262

p2
.012 .040 .091 .048 .031 .033 .002 .037 .016 .007 .004

Table 4.3. Analyses of variance (ANOVA) for gender differences for the PCI.

Gender comparisons for the 8-item NEO-FFI ­ Study 1

Male*

Female*

NEO-FFI (modified) Neuroticism (8)

Mean S.D. Mean S.D. F 14.2 5.78 15.1 5.89 2.090

Sig p2
.149 .006

Extraversion (8)

21.0 4.57 22.8 4.69 13.774 .000 .039

Openness (8)

19.6 4.80 18.0 4.90 8.694 .003 .025

Agreeableness (8) Conscientiousness (8)

20.2 4.16 22.4 4.07 22.788 .000 .063 19.3 5.65 21.7 5.04 16.800 .000 .047

*Based on 344 undergraduate respondents (171 male, 173 female). For all comparisons, df=1, df (error)=170 for males, 172 for females.

Table 4.4. Analyses of variance (ANOVA) for gender differences for the 8-item scales of the modified NEO-FFI.

56

Gender comparisons for the 12-item NEO-FFI ­ Study 1

Male*

Female*

NEO-FFI
Neuroticism (12) Extraversion (12) Openness (12) Agreeableness (12) Conscientiousness (12)

Mean S.D. Mean S.D.

19.8 8.56 29.7 7.03 29.9 7.28 29.1 6.50 27.4 7.49

20.3 8.32 33.1 6.21 28.0 7.33 33.5 6.26 31.0 6.54

F
.303 21.551 4.830 39.256 22.211

Sig
.583 .000 .029 .000 .000

p2
.001 .062 .015 .107 .064

*Based on 332 undergraduate respondents (165 male, 167 female). For all comparisons, df=1, df (error)=170 for males, 172 for females.

Table 4.5. Analyses of variance (ANOVA) for gender differences for the 12-item scales of the NEO-FFI.

For the PCI, males scored higher on instrumentality (marginally), bipolar instrumentality, negative instrumentality, work orientation, and competitiveness, while females scored higher on expressivity, verbal aggression, and negative communion ­ consistent with previous research using this instrument (Spence et al., 1978; Helmreich et al., 1981; Spence, Helmreich, & Holahan, 1979). Differences on the achievement strivings and impatience/irritability scales between males and females were not significant. For both versions of the NEOFFI, males scored higher on openness to new experience (minimally), whereas females scored higher on extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. These findings are consistent with past studies (Costa et al., 1992). There were no differences on neuroticism in this assessment, which is not consistent with previous studies in which males typically scored somewhat lower than females (Costa et al., 1992).

57

Trait differences among students of differing career aspirations This study also looked at trait differences among students aspiring to
different careers. Students were asked to state their intended career or employment path following graduation. No specific prompts were provided, though almost half (48%) indicated one of the following: Business, Education, Engineering, Finance, Law, Medicine, or Nursing. Engineering, Business, and Finance were male dominated, whereas Nursing and Education were more frequently chosen by female students. Medicine and Law were chosen by approximately equal numbers of males and females. Career choices represented by less than 15 individuals were classified as "Other." Numbers of male and female participants indicating preferences for these various careers are shown below in Table 4.6.

Indicated Career Preference (Groups with a total of 15 or greater)
Business/management Education Engineering Finance Law Medicine Nursing Other - less than 15 Total

Male Female Total Percent

17 9 6 25 17 2 10 5 11 12 15 19 0 17 95 84 171 173

26 7.6 31 9.0 19 5.5 15 4.4 23 6.7 34 9.9 17 4.9 179 52.0 344 100.0

Table 4.6. Career preferences by gender for the 344 students in the study.

Again, using the GLM subroutine of SPSS, analyses of variance were performed on PCI and NEO-FFI scale scores using indicated career as the

58

independent variable. Males and females were analyzed separately for the reasons stated in the previous chapter.
Males ­ Analyses of variance: Analyses were conducted on all career groups with ten or more male students. These included Business/Management (N=17), Engineering (N=17), Finance (N=10), Law (N=11), and Medicine (N=15). For scores on the PCI, significant main effects were shown for instrumentality (F(5, 160)=2.870, p=0.016, p2=0.082), negative instrumentality (F(5, 160)=3.125, p=0.010, p2=0.089) and competitiveness (F(5, 160)=2.82, p=0.018, p2=0.081).
For scores on the NEO-FFI, significant main effects were found for extraversion (F(5, 151)=3.359, p=0.0076, p2=0.100), and agreeableness (F(5, 160)=2.82, p=0.041, p2=0.073).
Males ­ Post hoc analyses: Comparisons using Tukey's HSD test indicated that Finance students scored higher instrumentality than Engineers (p=0.018), and that Engineers scored lower than both Finance students and those who fell under Other (p=0.029) for career preference. Students who planned to pursue a Law career scored significantly higher on negative instrumentality than either those who indicated Medicine (p=0.009) or Engineering (p=0.018). Post hoc tests also indicated that Finance students scored significantly higher on competitiveness than did Engineering students (p=0.022). Differences between career groups on the remaining scales of the PCI were not significant.
Post hoc comparisons on scores for extraversion showed that students choosing Medicine scored significantly higher than Engineers (p=0.003). For the trait of agreeableness, students who planned to pursue a Law career scored significantly lower than either those who indicated Medicine (p=0.013) or those who were classified as Other (p=0.044). Differences on the remaining scales of the NEO-FFI were not significant.
59

Males ­ Summary: These findings suggest that among males, Finance students were characterized by high levels of instrumentality and competitiveness, Law school aspirants scored lowest on agreeableness, and those wishing a career in medicine were the most introverted. Engineering students were characterized as being somewhat non-competitive, but in general, were not particularly distinct on any one trait. It is important to note that these students do not necessarily represent a random sample of undergraduates, but rather reflect those individuals who have enrolled in a first year course in psychology.
Females ­ Analyses of variance: Analyses were conducted on all career groups with 10 or more female students. This included Education (N=25), Law (N=12), Medicine (N=19) and Nursing (N=17). For scores on the PCI, significant main effects were shown for instrumentality (F(5, 165)=3.257, p=0.008, p2=0.090), expressivity (F(5, 165)=3.460, p=0.005, p2=0.095) and bipolar instrumentality (F(5, 165)=5.425, p=0.001, p2=0.141).
Females ­ Post hoc analyses: Post hoc comparisons were performed using Tukey's HSD test. Business students scored significantly higher on instrumentality than Nursing students (p=0.035). Students who intended to pursue a career in Education scored significantly higher on expressivity than those who were classified under Other (p=0.005). Both Business students and those who indicated an intent to go into Medicine scored higher on bipolar instrumentality than those choosing Education (p=0.012 and p=0.005, respectively). Differences on the remaining scales of the PCI were not significant. There were no significant differences on any of the 5 scales of the NEO-FFI for female students.
Females ­ Summary: These analyses show that female Business students tended to have higher achievement motivation than other students in this sample, and that those desiring a career in education were typically more expressive than other female students.
60

Gender differences within aspirant groups: Differences in scale scores were examined within each of the aspirant groups that had at least 10 female and 10 male students. These groups were Business/Management (17 male, 10 female), Law (11 male, 12 female) and Medicine (15 male, 19 female).
Among students who indicated that Business or Management was their intended career, no differences were found between males and females on any of the scales of the PCI. On the modified 8-item NEO-FFI, females scored higher than males on extraversion (F(1, 25)=6.102, p=0.021, p2=0.0196).
For students who indicated that they wished to pursue a career in Law, males scored higher in negative instrumentality than females (F(1, 21)=15.297, p=0.001, p2=0.421) while females scored higher than males on agreeableness (F(1, 21)=12.509, p=0.002, p2=0.373).
For students who stated an intent to enter Medicine, females scored higher than males on both work orientation (F(1, 32)=4.291, p=0.046, p2=0.118) and openness to new experience (F(1, 32)=6.190, p=0.018, p2=0.162).
These findings are not dissimilar to those of the overall student population. Larger sample sizes would be needed to see if aspirant groups were significantly different from the general population.
Summary of results for Study 1 Psychometric analysis of the modified NEO-FFI scales shows that all five
8-item scales (neuroticism, extraversion, openness to new experience, agreeableness and conscientiousness) correlate highly to their parent 12-item scales of the NEO-FFI. Scale reliabilities are acceptable, though agreeableness and openness to new experience have reliabilities below 0.70. While this is not ideal, the alphas for these two scales are above 0.60 and will be considered acceptable for research purposes in the studies that follow. It should be noted that while the Pearson product moment correlations between the 8-item and 12-item
61

versions of the NEO-FFI are impressive, the correlation between the 8-item scales and the underlying constructs may be somewhat lower. This is, of course, due to correlation of the 8-items scales to both the construct and error components of the 12-item parent scales.
In combination, these findings suggest that the modified 8-item NEO-FFI scales represent a reasonable measure of the Big Five, though perhaps not an ideal one. This is the first formal validation for these scales.
The correlations between the scales of the PCI and those of the full NEOFFI shed new light on previous research conducted with both instruments. Of particular interest is the positive correlation between the achievement-related scales of the PCI and conscientiousness and the negative correlations of those PCI scales with neuroticism. This suggests that traits such as instrumentality, work orientation, mastery and achievement strivings are complex constructs that reflect both emotional stability and achievement motivation. In addition, the high positive correlation between expressivity and agreeableness, along with the negative correlation between agreeableness and both competitiveness and negative instrumentality suggest that agreeableness is the key trait distinguishing between the right stuff and wrong stuff described in Chapter One of this dissertation.
Analysis of testing results for both the PCI and NEO-FFI confirmed previously documented gender differences in normal populations and also provides a set of normative data for the studies which follow. Interestingly, the failure of neuroticism to show a difference between genders is at odds with previous literature. It is difficult to speculate on the reason for this finding in the present study.
Further analyses suggested of scale scores showed that students indicating different intended career paths showed demonstrable differences in personality that were generally consistent with common stereotypes, such as instrumentality
62

and competitiveness in those wishing a career in finance, negative instrumentality in (male) law aspirants, and high expressivity in those wishing to become teachers.
63

Study 2 ­ Personality assessments of astronaut applicants
This study compares personality assessment scores in final stage NASA astronaut applicants to those of a normative population. In addition, this study also looks at whether these personality data predict final stage selection into the astronaut corps. The normative population for this comparison is the undergraduate student dataset presented in the previous study. Results are presented in four parts: demographic information, comparisons of astronaut applicant data and the normative data set, comparisons of those applicants who were chosen to become astronauts and those who were not, and finally, gender comparisons within the applicant population.
Demographics: Personality trait data were collected from 259 astronaut applicants over a 6-year period. Table 4.7 presents the breakdown of applicants by year as well as by selected vs. unselected status. Numbers of student participants are also included in Table 4.7.

Astronaut Applicants

Year Female

Male

Total

Selected

1990

4 18 22

1992 3 14 17

1995 5 19 24

Total

12 51 63

Unselected 1990

10 70 80

1992 6 60 66

1995 17 33 50

Total

33 162 195

Total

46 213 259

Students (normative comparison group)

173 171 344

Table 4.7. Demographic breakdown of astronaut applicants and student participants.

64

Comparison of astronaut applicants to a normative population Analyses of variance (ANOVA) were conducted comparing astronaut
applicants and undergraduate students using the General Linear Model GLM subroutine of SPSS (SPSS Inc., 2001). As in Study 1, males and females were analyzed separately.
Males ­ Analyses of variance: Analyses of variance indicate that these are very different populations. Male astronaut applicants were found to be significantly different on 10 of the 11 scales of the PCI and 4 of the 5 scales of the modified NEO-FFI. Only expressivity and openness to new experience did not differ between students and astronaut applicants. F statistics and p2 values are shown in Table 4.8.

Study 2 ­ Astronaut Applicants and University Students (Male)

PCI Scale
Instrumentality Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Mastery Work Orientation Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings

F*
158.029 0.924 96.441 59.258 53.908 45.049 86.130
153.730 24.405 45.009 114.191

Sig.
0.000 0.337 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000

p2
0.294 0.002 0.202 0.135 0.124 0.106 0.185 0.288 0.060 0.106 0.231

NEO-FFI (modified) Neuroticism Extraversion Openness Agreeableness Conscientiousness

255.669 37.521 1.191 151.679 182.047

0.000 0.000 0.276 0.000 0.000

0.474 0.117 0.004 0.348 0.391

*For all analyses, df=1, df(error)=380 (PCI), df(error)=284 (NEO-FFI)

Table 4.8. Analyses of variance for male participants.

65

Table 4.9 lists traits found to be significantly higher and lower in the male astronaut applicant population as compared to normative (student) scores.

Characteristics of Male Astronaut Applicants* (N=211)

Higher than normative No significant difference

Instrumentality Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery

Expressivity Openness

Work Orientation Achievement Strivings Extraversion Agreeableness Conscientiousness

* Compared to undergraduate students

Lower than normative Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Neuroticism

Table 4.9. Characteristics of male astronaut applicants.

In general, male astronaut applicants were characterized by high scores on achievement related traits, agreeableness and conscientiousness, and by low levels of interpersonal aggression and neuroticism.
Females ­ Analyses of variance: Similar to male subjects, analyses of variance indicate that in terms of personality characteristics, female astronaut applicants appear to be very different from typical female university students. As with males, astronaut applicants were found to be significantly different on 10 of the 11 scales of the PCI. Again, scores on expressivity did not differ between applicants and students. Unlike male subjects, females differed on all five of the NEO-FFI scales. F statistics and p2 values for all scales are shown in Table 4.10.

66

Study 2 ­ Astronaut Applicants and University

Students (Female)

PCI F* Sig. p2

Instrumentality

72.964 0.000 0.253

Expressivity

1.850 0.175 0.008

Bipolar Instrumentality

66.383 0.000 0.235

Negative Instrumentality

17.326 0.000 0.074

Verbal Aggressiveness

37.310 0.000 0.147

Negative Communion

34.984 0.000 0.139

Mastery Work Orientation Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings

34.484 32.495 26.453 12.979 64.876

0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000

0.138 0.131 0.109 0.057 0.231

NEO-FFI Neuroticism Extraversion Openness

79.894 5.598 13.890

0.000 0.019 0.000

0.286 0.027 0.065

Agreeableness Conscientiousness

29.635 0.000 0.130 38.286 0.000 0.161

*For all analyses, df=1, df(error)=216 (PCI), df(error)=199 (NEO-FFI)

Table 4.10. Analyses of variance for female participants.

Table 4.11 lists traits found to be significantly higher and lower in the female astronaut applicant population as compared to normative (student) scores.

67

Characteristics of Female Astronaut Applicants* (N=46)

Higher than normative No significant difference

Instrumentality Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation Achievement Strivings Extraversion Openness Agreeableness Conscientiousness

Expressivity

* Compared to undergraduate students

Lower than normative
Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Neuroticism

Table 4.11. Characteristics of female astronaut applicants.

In general, female astronaut applicants were characterized by high levels of achievement related traits, agreeableness, extraversion and conscientiousness, and by low levels of interpersonal aggressiveness, and neuroticism. This pattern is similar to that observed with male applicants. The elevated scores on openness to new experience among female applicants were not seen among their male counterparts.

Analysis of the astronaut applicant population This second series of analyses examines differences within the astronaut
applicant data. First, a comparison of selected and unselected applicants is conducted. This is followed by an examination of gender differences within the applicant population
Comparisons of successful and unsuccessful applicants: Analyses of variance were conducted on all scales comparing those applicants selected to become astronauts (N=63, 51 male, 12 female) and those who were not selected

68

(N=195, 162 male, 33 female). Again, males and females were analyzed separately.
No differences were found on any of the 11 scales of the PCI or on any the 5 scales of the modified NEO-FFI when comparing successful and unsuccessful final stage applicants. This was found to be true for both male and female applicants.
Gender comparisons among applicants: Male and female students were compared in study 1. A similar analysis of gender differences on the traits of the PCI (N=257, 211 male, 46 female) and NEO-FFI (N=144, 115 male, 29 female) was conducted on astronaut applicants. Significant differences were found on 4 scales of the PCI but on none of the scales of the NEO-FFI. Female applicants were found to be higher on expressivity (F(1,255)=4.029, p=0.046, p2=0.016) and achievement strivings (F(1,255)=6.667, p=0.010, p2=0.025), whereas male applicants were found to be higher on negative instrumentality (F(1,255)=3.935, p=0.048, p2=0.015) and competitiveness (F(1,255)=20.538, p=0.001, p2=0.075). While the gender differences noted above are consistent with those identified in students from Study 1 and in previous studies of normative populations, there is a notable lack of difference on scales where one would expect to see a gender difference. In particular, females in normative populations tend to score higher on verbal aggressiveness, negative communion and work orientation. This does not appear to be the case with female astronaut applicants.
Summary of results for Study 2 Both male and female astronaut applicants were significantly different
than the normative student population on almost all traits assessed by the PCI and NEO-FFI. Applicants were characterized by high scores on traits related to achievement motivation, extraversion and agreeableness as well as low levels of negative interpersonal orientation and neuroticism. Both male and female
69

applicants did not differ from students on expressivity. Gender differences on specific traits were present, but to a lesser extent than in the student population.
Personality trait testing did not predict which applicants were successful in being selected to become astronauts, suggesting that personality did not play a major role in the final stages of the astronaut selection process.
Finally, it is important to note that applicant scores in this study may be elevated on socially desirable traits and depressed on those perceived as undesirable. Since applicants were testing during a period of selection, they may have been motivated to present a particularly positive self image, despite reassurances that these data would only be used for research and not for selection purposes. A second source of potential confound in these data may have come from what has been termed the "honeymoon effect." The honeymoon effect describes a positive response set that occurs when administering tests to individuals who are feeling particularly positive about their present situation in life (Helmreich, Sawin, & Carsrud, 1986). First hand accounts suggest this may have been a factor during the applicant evaluation process at the Johnson Space Center when these data were collected (P. Santy, personal communication, September 29, 2003).
70

Study 3 ­ Astronauts, pilots and physicians
This third study examined personality differences among currently employed members of three professional populations. In addition to the normative data provided by undergraduates in Study 1, this analysis included 152 airline pilots from 2 major national US carriers, 66 active astronauts from the NASA astronaut corps, which included 38 mission specialists and 28 pilot astronauts, and three groups of physicians totaling 134 in number. The three physician groups were composed of mixed residents and consultants from two different European institutions ­ anesthesiologists from the University of Freiberg in Germany, anesthesiologists from the Basel Kantonsspital Hospital in Basel, Switzerland and surgeons from the Basel Kantonsspital Hospital. Table 4.12 provides a breakdown of participants by profession, professional sub group and gender.

Group

Sub group

Female Male Total

Student

n/a

173 171 344

Airline A

0 67 67

Airline Pilot

Airline B

5 80 85

Total Airline

5 147 152

MS 11 27 38

Astronaut

Pilot

0 28 28

Total Astronaut

11 55 66

Basel Surgeons

4 36 40

Physician

Basel Anesthesia

7 35 42

Freiberg Anesth.

19 33 52

Total Physician

30 104 134

Total Subjects

219 501 696

Table 4.12. Demographic breakdown of participant groups.

71

As in Study 1 and Study 2, group differences were assessed separately for males and females, followed by an analysis of gender differences in groups with adequate male and female representation.
Comparisons of major professional groups Analyses of variance were conducted on scale scores of the PCI and
modified NEO-FFI with professional group as the independent variable. As per the previous two studies, separate analyses were conducted for males and females.
Males ­ Analyses of Variance: Scale scores for male participants on the PCI for each major grouping are shown below in Figures 4.1 and 4.2. Scores for the modified NEO-FFI are shown below in Figure 4.3. All scales have been converted to 100-point scales to aid in comparison.

Male PCI (EPAQ) Study 3

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Instrum. Express. Bipolar Neg Instr. Verbal Negative

Instr.

Aggres. Comm.

Pilot Astronaut Physician Student

Figure 4.1. Male scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3.

72

Male PCI (WOFO and JAS) Study 3

100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Mastery

Work

Comp. Imp/Irrit. Ach. Strv.

Pilot Astronaut Physician Student

Figure 4.2. Male scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3.

90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10
0 Neuro.

Male NEO-FFI Study 3

Extra.

Open.

Agree.

Consc.

Pilot Astronaut Physician Student

Figure 4.3. Male scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 3.

73

A summary of the analyses of variance for the scales of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI are shown in Table 4.13. Note that significant differences between the four occupational groups are present in almost all scales of the PCI (with the exceptions of expressivity and verbal aggressiveness) and for all five scales of the NEO-FFI.

Study 3 - Astronauts, Pilots, Physicians and Students (Males)

PCI Instrumentality Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Mastery Work Orientation Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings

F*
32.967 1.470 7.703 15.482 1.711 8.064 20.948 29.092 17.692 5.970 22.036

Sig.
0.000 0.222 0.000 0.000 0.164 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.001 0.000

p2
0.174 0.009 0.047 0.090 0.011 0.049 0.118 0.157 0.114 0.037 0.124

NEO-FFI (modified)

Neuroticism

65.437 0.000

Extraversion

10.139 0.000

Openness

10.675 0.000

Agreeableness

42.244 0.000

Conscientiousness

63.438 0.000

*For all analyses, df=3 and df(error)=469, except competitiveness, neuroticism and openness where df(error)=414

0.322 0.068 0.064 0.213 0.289

Table 4.13. Analyses of variance for males by occupational group for the scales of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI.

Homogeneity of variance for the groups in this study was assessed using Levene's Test of Equality of Error Variances. Of the 11 scales of the PCI, 6 were identified as having significantly unequal variances in these data, as were 4 of the 5 scales of the modified NEO-FFI. The assumption of homogenous variance is a fundamental assumption of both ANOVA and GLM. To compensate for this

74

potential source of inflated statistical significance, post hoc comparisons between groups were conducted using Dunnett's T3 test ­ a conservative test appropriate for both non-homogenous variance and for small sample comparisons.
Table 4.14 shows the characteristics of male astronauts, pilots and physicians in comparison to normative (student) scores.

Characteristics of male astronauts, pilots, and physicians*

Group Astronaut (N=51)
Pilot (N=147)
Physician (N=104)
Shared ­ Astronauts, Pilots and Physicians

Higher than normative
Instrumentality (VH) Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation (VH) Achievement Strivings (VH) Agreeableness Conscientiousness (VH)
Instrumentality Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation (VH) Achievement Strivings Agreeableness Conscientiousness (VH)
Mastery Work Orientation Achievement Strivings Conscientiousness
Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation Achievement Strivings Conscientiousness

No significant difference Expressivity Verbal Aggressiveness Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Openness Extraversion
Expressivity Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Extraversion
Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Impatience/Irritability Agreeableness Openness Expressivity Verbal Aggressiveness Impatience/Irritability Agreeableness

Lower than normative Negative Instrumentality Negative Communion Neuroticism (VL)
Negative Instrumentality Impatience/Irritability Competitiveness Neuroticism Openness
Negative Instrumentality Negative Communion Competitiveness (VL) Neuroticism Extraversion
Negative Instrumentality Neuroticism

*Compared to undergraduate students, (VH)=Very High and (VL)=Very Low compared to the other professional groups

Table 4.14. Relative characteristics of male astronauts, pilots and physicians.

75

Males ­ post hoc analyses: Using Dunnett's T3 test of significant differences, post hoc comparisons were made between the three occupational and normative student groups.
On instrumentality, astronauts scored significantly higher than pilots (p=0.019), physicians (p<0.001) and students (p<0.001). Pilots scored higher than both physicians (p<0.001) and students (p<0.001) on this trait, but students and physicians did not differ significantly. None of the four groups differed on expressivity. Astronauts scored higher on bipolar instrumentality than did students (p=0.001) and physicians (p<0.001). Pilots also scored significantly higher than physicians (p=0.019) on this trait. On negative instrumentality, astronauts, pilots and physicians did not differ, though all three scored lower than students (p=0.004, p<0.001, p<0.001 respectively). The four groups did not differ on verbal aggressiveness. Physicians scored lowest on negative communion, and along with astronaut respondents, they scored significantly lower on this trait than did students (p<0.001, p=0.001).
For mastery, astronauts, pilots, and physicians were similar, scoring significantly higher than students (all p<0.001). On work orientation, students scored significantly lower than astronauts, pilots (both p<0.001) and physicians (p=0.003). Astronauts and pilots were similar on this scale and both scored somewhat higher than physicians (both p<0.001). Physicians scored significantly lower than all three groups on competitiveness (astronauts p=0.010, pilots p=0.018, and students p<0.001), while students scored significantly higher than both physicians and pilots (p=0.001). Pilots from Airline A did not complete the competitiveness scale, and these data reflect only those pilots from Airline B.
Pilots scored lower than astronauts (p=0.28) and students (p=0.001) on impatience and irritability. Physicians were intermediate on this measure and not significantly different from any other group. Finally, astronauts scored higher than all other groups on achievement strivings (all p=0.001 or less), and students
76

scored significantly lower than all three groups (p<0.001 for pilots, p=0.012 for physicians).
Post hoc analyses on all five scales of the modified NEO-FFI showed significant main effects for group membership (see Table 4.14, above). For neuroticism, male students scored significantly higher than all three occupational groups (p<0.001 for all groups). Astronauts scored lowest on neuroticism, but only significantly when compared to physicians (p=.003). On extraversion, physicians scored lower than astronauts, pilots and students (all p=0.001 or less). The remaining three groups did not differ on this trait. Pilots from Airline A did not complete either the neuroticism or extraversion scales, so these data reflect only those pilots from Airline B. On openness to new experience, pilots scored significantly lower than astronauts (p=0.010), physicians (p=0.028) and students (p<0.001). Astronauts, physicians and pilots did not differ on this trait. Astronauts and pilots were similar on agreeableness and scored higher than students and physicians (all p<0.001). Students and physicians did not differ on agreeableness. Finally, astronauts and pilots scored highest on conscientiousness, scoring significantly higher than physicians and students (all p<0.001). Physicians, however, scored significantly higher than students on this trait (p<0.001).
Males ­ Summary: Male astronauts scored noticeably higher on achievement traits, including instrumentality, bipolar instrumentality and work orientation. They were also characterized by low neuroticism and high extraversion. Pilots and astronauts together were characterized by higher agreeableness than other groups and higher achievement related traits including conscientiousness. Physicians had lower levels of negative communion and competitiveness as well as lower levels of extraversion. As a group, astronauts, pilots and physicians together shared above normal levels of mastery, work orientation, achievement strivings and conscientiousness, and below normal
77

levels of negative instrumentality, verbal aggressiveness, competitiveness and neuroticism.
Females ­ Analyses of variance: Analysis of female participants is complicated in this study by the problem of low N, particularly among female airline pilots (of which there are only 5). It is still possible, however, to compare female astronauts (N=11) and physicians (N=30) to normative female data. For these analyses, the airline pilot group was excluded from the data. Scale scores for female participants on the PCI for each major grouping are shown below in Figures 4.4 and 4.5. Scores for the modified NEO-FFI are shown below in Figure 4.6. Again, all scales have been converted to 100-point scales for ease of comparison.

Female PCI (EPAQ) Study 3

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Instrum. Express. Bipolar Neg Instr. Verbal Negative

Instr.

Aggres. Comm.

Astronaut Physician Student

Figure 4.4 Female scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3.

78

Female PCI (WOFO and JAS) Study 3

120 100
80 60 40 20
0 Mastery

Work

Comp. Imp/Irrit. Ach. Strv.

Astronaut Physician Student

Figure 4.5 Female scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 3.

90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10
0 Neuro.

Female NEO-FFI Study 3

Extra.

Open.

Agree. Consc.

Astronaut Physician Student

Figure 4.6 Female scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 3.

79

Table 4.15 shows the analyses of variance performed on the PCI and modified NEO-FFI for female participants.

Astronauts, Physicians and Students (Females) Study 3

PCI Instrumentality Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Mastery Work Orientation Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings

F*
6.966 0.468 6.106 1.667 2.306 11.283 7.825 5.335 17.714 0.396 8.507

Sig.
0.001 0.627 0.003 0.191 0.102 0.000 0.001 0.006 0.000 0.674 0.000

p2
0.063 0.005 0.056 0.016 0.022 0.098 0.070 0.049 0.146 0.004 0.076

NEO-FFI

Neuroticism

9.175

Extraversion

10.205

Openness

4.983

Agreeableness

1.934

Conscientiousness

5.611

*For all analyses, df=2, df (error)=207

0.000 0.000 0.008 0.147 0.004

0.081 0.090 0.046 0.018 0.051

Table 4.15. Analyses of variance for females by occupational group for the scales of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI.

As with the analyses of male participant data, it can be seen that the majority of the scales show a significant main effect for group membership. Only expressivity, negative instrumentality, verbal aggressiveness, impatience/irritability, and agreeableness do not show significant effects.
Females ­ post hoc analyses: Post hoc analyses were performed on all scales with significant F statistics. Levene's test for homogeneity of variance did not identify the same problem of non-homogeneity in these data as it did for male participants. Only agreeableness showed a significant degree of non-
80

Group
Astronaut (N=10)

Characteristics of female astronauts, pilots, and physicians*

Higher than normative
Instrumentality Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation Achievement Strivings Openness Conscientiousness

No significant difference
Expressivity Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Extraversion Agreeableness

Lower than normative Negative Communion Neuroticism

Physician (N=29)
Shared ­ both Astronauts and Physicians
*Compared to undergraduate students

Instrumentality Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Mastery Work Orientation Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings Openness Agreeableness Conscientiousness
Expressivity Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Impatience/Irritability Agreeableness

Competitiveness Neuroticism Extraversion
Neuroticism

Table 4.16. Relative characteristics of female astronauts and physicians.

homogeneous variance. Regardless, post hoc comparisons were conducted using Dunnett's T3 test for both reasons of consistency and because the test is conservative and well suited for the low N in this study.
Table 4.16 shows the characteristics of female astronauts, pilots and physicians in comparison to normative (student) scores.

81

Female astronauts differed from both female students and female physicians, while students and physicians differed little on most traits. In fact, the only difference between students and physicians were found with competitiveness (students higher, p<0.001), neuroticism (students higher, p=0.013), and extraversion (students higher, p<0.001). Astronauts scored higher than both students and physicians on instrumentality (p=0.003, p=0.004 respectively), bipolar instrumentality (p=0.011, p=0.001), mastery (p=0.001, p=0.004), work orientation (p<0.001, p<0.001), achievement strivings (p=0.002, p=0.002), openness to new experience (p=0.028, p=0.014) and conscientiousness (p=0.002, p=0.005). Astronauts scored lower than students on negative communion (p=0.001). Students scored highest on competitiveness, but not significantly higher than astronauts. Physicians and astronauts were similar on neuroticism, and both scored lower than students on this measure (p=0.013 and p=0.001, respectively).
Females ­ Summary: Findings among female professional groups were similar to male professional groups. Female astronauts scored highest on achievement related traits, including instrumentality, bipolar instrumentality, work orientation, achievement strivings and conscientiousness. They also scored highly on agreeableness and openness to new experience. Physicians were again characterized by low extraversion. Physicians and astronauts together were found to share low levels of negative instrumentality, verbal aggressiveness, negative communion, competitiveness and neuroticism.
Comparisons of professional subgroups A second level of analysis looked at subgroup membership within the
three professional groups studied. Specifically, this meant looking for differences between (male) pilots from Airline A and Airline B, between mission specialists and pilot astronauts, and between the three groups of physicians in the sample.
82

These three professions were analyzed separately rather than included as a second order of analyses in the General Linear Model for the following reason: While each group represents subgroups within their parent sample, each subgrouping is fundamentally different in nature. Pilots choose employment at one airline or another and the selection of pilots for participation in this study was different for each group (volunteer check pilots vs. nominated "superior" pilots). In the case of astronauts, mission specialists and pilot astronauts have fundamentally different career paths even though their job appears superficially similar to one another. For physicians, residency and specialization represent conscious decisions made well into their medical careers. Finding a significant second order effect would be difficult to interpret, if not essentially meaningless. In a sense, these should be viewed as three separate studies.
Pilots in Airline A and Airline B: Pilots from Airline A and Airline B were compared on all scales of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI. Only male pilots were included in these analyses (Airline A, N=67; Airline B, N=80) since there were no female pilots in Airline A, and only 6 in Airline B. The only scale on either the PCI or the NEO-FFI to differ significantly between these two airlines was bipolar instrumentality (F(1, 145)=7.073, p=0.009, p2=0.047), with the check pilots (Airline B) scoring higher. No other differences were apparent between these two groups.
Mission specialist and pilot astronauts: Mission specialist astronauts and pilot astronauts were compared on all scales of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI. Females were also excluded from this analysis since there were no female pilot astronauts in the astronaut corps at the time of data collection. Among male astronauts (26 mission specialists, 25 pilot astronauts), there were no significant differences on any of the scales of the PCI or the modified NEO-FFI.
Physicians: A comparison of female physicians was also hindered by a low number of participants. While there were 17 female anesthesiologists in one
83

group, there were only 7 in the other and only 4 female surgeons. Despite these low numbers, an analysis of female physicians was performed, but significant differences were not found.
For male physicians, participant numbers were adequate to allow an exploratory comparison of group effects (35 anesthesiologists from one hospital, 33 anesthesiologists from another and 36 surgeons from the first hospital). Levene's test confirmed homogeneous variance in these data, and post hoc analyses were performed using Tukey's HSD test. Significant effects for subgroup membership were found for achievement strivings (F(2, 101)=6.334, p=0.003, p2=0.111), agreeableness (F(2, 101)=3.713, p=0.028, p2=0.068) , and conscientiousness (F(2, 101)=4.289, p=0.016, p2=0.078).
Post hoc comparisons showed that the Basel surgeons were significantly higher on achievement striving than Freiburg anesthesiologists (p=0.002). Also, Basel anesthesiologists scored higher than Freiburg anesthesiologists on agreeableness (p=0.021) and conscientiousness (p=0.018).
Comparisons within subgroup by gender: Two subgroups, mission specialists and anesthesiologists, had sufficient numbers of both males and females to allow comparisons between the genders.
For mission specialist astronauts (N=11 female, N=26 male), the females scored higher on expressivity (F(1,35)=5.831, p=0.021. p2=0.143) and openness to new experience (F(1,35)=4.4445, p=0.042, p2=113). The lack of difference on the remaining scales is notable, and suggests that male and female astronauts share similar trait scores regardless of gender.
Among the anesthesiologists in the sample, females scored higher than males on expressivity (F(1, 50)=7.893, p=0.001, p2=0.136) , neuroticism (F(1, 50)=7.325, p=0.009, p2=0.128) and agreeableness (F(1, 50)=8.712, p=0.005, p2=0.148) . Males scored higher on instrumentality (F(1, 50)=7.396, p=0.009, p2=0.129) , bipolar instrumentality (F(1, 50)=5.446, p=0.024, p2=0.098) , and
84

mastery (F(1, 50)=6.505, p=0.014, p2=0.115). These findings are consistent with known gender differences on the PCI and NEO-FFI. In essence, gender differences between male and female anesthesiologists in this study mirrored those of the general population.
Summary of results for Study 3 Significant main effects were found for profession on almost all scales of
the PCI and NEO-FFI for both genders. Analysis of female professionals was limited by subject numbers. While male astronauts and male pilots appeared to be most similar, all three male groups (astronauts, pilots, physicians) along with female astronauts shared high levels of achievement related traits including instrumentality, achievement strivings and conscientiousness. All professional groups were characterized by low levels of neuroticism. Female anesthesiologists differed least from the normative population scores on the PCI and NEO-FFI.
Among subgroups within each profession, results of analyses were mixed. Airline A and Airline B pilots did not differ significantly. Within the astronaut corps, mission specialists and pilot astronauts also did not differ. Among physicians, surgeons scored higher on achievement striving than one group of anesthesiologists, while the two groups of anesthesiologists differed on conscientiousness and agreeableness.
Gender comparisons were problematic due to low numbers of females in several of the groups in the study. Male and female astronauts differed little, while male and female anesthesiologists show more typical gender differences on the PCI and NEO-FFI.
85

Study 4 ­ Antarctic personnel and active astronauts
The fourth study in this series examines personality data collected from Australian Antarctic personnel, and compares these data to both a normative population and to data obtained from active NASA astronauts. The normative data for this comparison are provided by the undergraduate student data set presented in Study 1. The NASA astronaut dataset is the same set presented in Study 3. The Antarctic personnel data consists of 15 females and 96 male participants collected over a period of two years. Table 4.17 provides a breakdown of subjects by gender and group.

Female Male Total

University Students
173 171 344

Antarctic Personnel
15 96 111

Active Astronauts
11 55 66

Table 4.17. Subject numbers by gender and group.

As in the previous studies, analyses of variance are performed using the GLM subroutine of SPSS to determine main effects, and post hoc tests are applied for specific comparisons. Scales are compared separately for males and females.
Males ­ Analyses of variance: Scale scores for male participants on the PCI for each major occupational grouping are shown in Figures 4.7 and 4.8. Scores for the modified NEO-FFI are shown in Figure 4.9. Scale scores have been converted to 100-point scales for ease of comparison.

86

Male PCI (EPAQ) Study 4

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Instrum. Express. Bipolar Negative Verbal Negative

Instr.

Instr. Aggres. Comm.

Antarctic Astronaut Student

Figure 4.7 Male scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4.

Male PCI (WOFO and JAS) Study 4

100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Mastery

Work

Comp. Imp./Irrit. Ach. Str.

Antarctic Astronaut Student

Figure 4.8 Male scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4.

87

100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Neuro.

Male NEO-FFI Study 4

Extra.

Open.

Agree.

Consc.

Antarctic Astronaut Student

Figure 4.9 Male scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 4.

.

88

Table 4.18 shows the results of the analyses of variance for the scales of the PCI and the modified NEO-FFI. It may be noted that most scales of the PCI differ significantly between these three populations, with the exception of expressivity and verbal aggressiveness. For the modified NEO-FFI, significant differences are found with neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness

Astronauts, Antarctic Personnel and Students (Male) Study 4

PCI Instrumentality Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Negative Communion Mastery Work Orientation Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings

F*
26.660 1.833 7.318 17.167 2.139 7.651 15.056 18.935 30.357 12.890 24.335

Sig.
0.000 0.162 0.001 0.000 0.120 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000

p2
0.151 0.012 0.047 0.103 0.014 0.049 0.091 0.112 0.169 0.079 0.140

NEO-FFI (modified) Neuroticism Extraversion Openness Agreeableness Conscientiousness
* For all analyses, df=2, df(error)=299

59.318 2.329 0.576 28.018 49.543

0.000 0.099 0.563 0.000 0.000

0.284 0.015 0.004 0.158 0.249

Table 4.18. Analyses of variance for males for the PCI and modified NEO-FFI.

Homogeneity of variance for the groups in this study was assessed using Levene's Test of Equality of Error Variances. As was the case with Study 3, many of the above scales were identified as having significantly unequal variances. Post hoc comparisons between groups were conducted using Dunnett's T3 test ­ again, because of its suitability for both data of unequal variance and for

89

comparisons of groups with low numbers of subjects. Table 4.19 shows characteristics of male astronauts and Antarctic personnel compared to normative student characteristics.

Characteristics of male astronauts and Antarctic personnel*

Group
Astronauts (N=51)

Higher than normative
Instrumentality (VH) Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation (VH) Achievement Strivings Agreeableness Conscientiousness

No significant difference
Expressivity Verbal Aggressiveness Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Extraversion Openness

Lower than normative Negative Instrumentality Negative Communion Neuroticism (VL)

Antarctic Personnel (N=80)

Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation Agreeableness Conscientiousness

Expressivity Bipolar Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Achievement Strivings Extraversion Openness

Negative Instrumentality Negative Communion Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Neuroticism

Both Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation Agreeableness Conscientiousness

Expressivity Verbal Aggressiveness Extraversion Openness

Negative Instrumentality
Negative Communion Neuroticism

*Compared to undergraduate students; (VH)=Very High and (VL)=Very Low - based on comparisons between the Antarctic and astronaut groups.

Table 4.19. Characteristics of male astronauts and Antarctic personnel.

Males ­ Post hoc analyses: Post hoc comparisons for instrumentality indicate that all three groups are significantly different from each other, with astronauts scoring highest (with a significance of p<0.001 compared to the other two groups) and students scoring lowest (p=0.009 compared to the Antarctic personnel). None of the three groups varied significantly on expressivity. Astronauts scored higher than students (p<0.001) on bipolar instrumentality, but Antarctic personnel did not differ significantly from either astronauts or students.

90

Students scored higher than astronauts and Antarctic personnel on negative instrumentality (p=0.002, p<0.001, respectively), as well as negative communion (p<0.001, p=0.003), but astronauts and Antarctic personnel did not differ on either of these traits. The three groups did not vary significantly on verbal aggressiveness.
Astronauts scored higher than both Antarctic personnel (p=0.046) and students (p<0.001) on work orientation, and Antarctic personnel also scored higher than students (p<0.001) on this trait. Antarctic personnel scored lower than both of the other groups on competitiveness (p<0.001), while students and astronauts did not differ on this trait. Similarly, Antarctic personnel scored lower than either astronauts or students on impatience and irritability (p<0.001 for both), but astronauts and students did not differ. Finally, on achievement strivings, astronauts scored higher than both Antarctic personnel and students (p<0.001 for both), but students and Antarctic personnel did not differ.
For the modified NEO-FFI, three scales differed significantly among these three groups. Both astronauts and Antarctic personnel scored much lower than students on neuroticism (both p<0.001), and astronauts scored even lower than the Antarctic personnel (p=0.004). Astronauts and Antarctic personnel did not differ on agreeableness, but both scored significantly higher than students (both p<0.001). Similarly, on conscientiousness, astronauts and Antarctic personnel did not differ, but both scored significantly higher than students (both p<0.001).
Males ­ Summary: Male astronauts and Antarctic personnel represent populations that are distinct from the normal population. They share similar scores on traits such as expressivity, negative instrumentality, competitiveness, impatience and agreeableness. They are both characterized by low neuroticism and high conscientiousness, but the astronauts were lower on neuroticism than Antarctic personnel. Astronauts and Antarctic personnel differ significantly on a number of achievement related traits, including instrumentality, work orientation,
91

competitiveness, and achievement striving as well as impatience/irritability, and neuroticism.
Females ­ Analyses of variance: Scale scores for female participants on the PCI for each major grouping are shown below in Figures 4.10 and 4.11. Scores for the modified NEO-FFI are shown below in Figure 4.12. Scales scores have been converted to 100-point scales for ease of comparison.

Female PCI (EPAQ) Study 4
90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10
0 Instrum. Express. Bipolar Negative Verbal Negative Instr. Instr. Aggres. Comm.

Antarctic Astronaut Student

Figure 4.10 Female scores on the first 6 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4.

92

Female PCI (WOFO and JAS) Study 4

120

100 80 60 40 20

0 Mastery

Work

Comp. Imp./Irrit. Ach. Str.

Antarctic Astronaut Student

Figure 4.11 Female scores on the last 5 scales of the PCI ­ Study 4.

100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Neuro.

Female NEO-FFI Study 4

Extra.

Open.

Agree.

Consc.

Antarctic Astronaut Student

Figure 4.12 Female scores on the modified NEO-FFI ­ Study 4.

93

Table 4.20 shows the results of the analyses of variance for the scales of the PCI and the modified NEO-FFI. Again it is apparent that most scales of the PCI differ significantly among these three populations, with the exception of expressivity and negative instrumentality and impatience irritability. For the modified NEO-FFI, significant differences are found in all scales with the exception of extraversion. Levene's test also indicated non-homogeneous variance among these data, and Dunnett's T3 test again was indicated for post hoc comparisons.

Astronauts, Antarctic Personnel and Students (Female) Study 4

PCI

F* Sig.

p2

Instrumentality

6.926 0.001 0.067

Expressivity

0.193 0.825 0.002

Bipolar Instrumentality

9.352 0.000 0.088

Negative Instrumentality

2.608 0.076 0.026

Verbal Aggressiveness

4.258 0.016 0.042

Negative Communion

10.239 0.000 0.096

Mastery

8.010 0.000 0.077

Work Orientation

4.697 0.010 0.046

Competitiveness

22.701 0.000 0.190

Impatience/Irritability

0.987 0.375 0.010

Achievement Strivings

8.961 0.000 0.085

NEO-FFI (modified)

Neuroticism

11.058

Extraversion

1.478

Openness

8.280

Agreeableness

3.669

Conscientiousness

5.783

* For all analyses, df=2, df(error)=193.

0.000 0.231 0.000 0.027 0.004

0.103 0.015 0.079 0.037 0.057

Table 4.20 Analyses of variance for females by group for the scales of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI.

94

Table 4.21 shows characteristics of female astronauts and Antarctic personnel as compared to normative student characteristics.

Characteristics of female astronauts and Antarctic personnel*

Group
Astronauts (N=10)

Higher than normative
Instrumentality Bipolar Instrumentality Mastery Work Orientation Achievement Strivings Openness Conscientiousness

No significant difference
Expressivity Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Competitiveness Impatience/Irritability Extraversion Agreeableness

Lower than normative Negative Communion Neuroticism

Antarctic Personnel (N=15)
Both

Bipolar Instrumentality Openness Agreeableness
Bipolar Instrumentality Openness

Instrumentality Expressivity Negative Communion Mastery Work Orientation Impatience/Irritability Achievement Strivings Extraversion Conscientiousness
Expressivity Impatience/Irritability Extraversion

Negative Instrumentality Verbal Aggressiveness Competitiveness Neuroticism
Neuroticism

*Compared to undergraduate students; (VH)=Very High and (VL)=Very Low - based on comparisons between the Antarctic and astronaut groups.

Table 4.21. Characteristics of female astronauts and Antarctic personnel.

Females ­ Post hoc analyses: Post hoc comparisons of female participants showed astronauts to be significantly higher on instrumentality than students (p=0.003), with Antarctic personnel scoring in between and not significantly different from either of the other two groups. The three groups did not vary significantly on expressivity. Astronauts and Antarctic personnel did not differ on bipolar instrumentality, but both were significantly higher than students (p=0.011, p=0.017 respectively). Antarctic personnel scored lower on negative

95

instrumentality and verbal aggressiveness than did students (p=0.015 and p=0.043 respectively), but astronauts did not differ significantly from either group on either trait. Astronauts did not score differently than Antarctic personnel on negative communion, but did score lower than students (p=0.001). Astronauts scored higher on mastery, work and achievement strivings than either students (p=0.001, p<0.001, p=0,002) or Antarctic personnel (p=0.036, p=0.009, p=0.002) while students and Antarctic personnel did not differ on any of these three traits. Finally, Antarctic personnel scored lower on competitiveness than did students (p<0.001), but astronauts did not differ from either of the other two groups.
For the modified NEO-FFI, post hoc testing showed female astronauts and Antarctic personnel to be similar on neuroticism and to be significantly lower than students (p=0.001 for both). Similarly, astronauts and Antarctic personnel did not differ on openness to new experience, but both scored significantly higher than students (p=0.028 and p=0.006, respectively). On agreeableness, Antarctic personnel scored higher than students (p=0.020), but astronauts did not differ significantly from either students or Antarctic personnel. Finally, astronauts scored higher on conscientiousness than did students (p=0.002), but Antarctic personnel did not differ significantly from either astronauts or students on this trait.
Females ­ Summary: Comparisons between female astronauts and female Antarctic personnel were limited by low numbers of participants in both groups. Regardless, astronauts were found to score significantly higher on achievement related traits, including instrumentality, mastery, work orientation, achievement striving, competitiveness and conscientiousness.
Gender comparisons: Gender comparisons for students were performed in Study 1 and for astronauts in Study 3. Analyses of variance were conducted on scale scores for the Antarctic personnel with gender as a factor. Females scored higher than males on expressivity (F(1, 93)=3.961, p=0.050, p2=0.041) and
96

openness to new experience (F(1, 93)=6.779, p=0.011, p2=0.068), while males scored higher than females on competitiveness (F(1, 93)=11.629, p=0.001, p2=0.111). These differences are consistent with previous research into gender differences, but again, these analyses are limited by the low numbers of female subjects in both the Antarctic and astronaut groups.
Summary of results for Study 4 Astronauts and Antarctic personnel were found to share certain common
characteristics, yet also differed significantly on others. Analyses of data from female participants were impaired by low numbers in both the astronaut and Antarctic groups. Generally, individuals in these two environments shared low levels of neuroticism and low scores in negative interpersonal traits such as negative communion and negative instrumentality. These two populations seem significantly different, however, with astronauts scoring noticeably higher on instrumentality, achievement striving and conscientiousness.
Comparisons between male and female scores on the PCI and NEO-FFI were limited by low numbers of female subjects, but differences appeared to be similar to those found in normative populations.
97

Chapter Five Validation of Theory and Hypothesis
This chapter reviews the hypotheses presented in Chapter Two, and outlines how the results of the studies presented in Chapter Four validate those hypotheses.
Chapter Two presented a theory of attraction, achievement, selection and specialization in professional culture. This theory is restated below:
Through a process involving initial vocational attraction, pre-requisite achievement, academic achievement, and selection, professional groups are characterized by a distinct profile of personality traits in comparison with other groups and the general population. Because of the competitive selection process that is typical of professions, achievement-related traits are a key characteristic common to all those professional groups.
The theory may be restated as a general hypothesis:
· Hypothesis 1: Professional groups can be differentiated from normative populations by characteristic patterns of personality traits shared among the members of those groups.
In addition, the theory also suggests a number of sub-hypotheses. These sub-hypotheses and their derivations are also detailed in Chapter Two. They are reproduced below for convenience.
· Hypothesis 2.1: The majority of members of those professions will share higher than average levels of personality traits associated with achievement (or conversely lower levels on traits associated with diminished achievement) in comparison with normal populations.
98

· Hypothesis 2.2: These traits are hypothesized to include conscientiousness, instrumentality, work orientation, and achievement striving.
· Hypothesis 3 (The vocation-specific attraction hypothesis): Individual professions will demonstrate personality trait profiles consistent with an initial vocational attraction to the given profession.
· Hypothesis 4 (The vocation trait-congruent hypothesis): Members of professions will share similar levels of traits consistent with the attainment of experience specific to that profession unrelated to traits typically labeled as achievement related.
· Hypothesis 5 (The professional specialization hypothesis): Within professional groups, sub-specialization leads to further differentiation of personality due to the continued process of attraction and selection.
Each of the four studies presented in Chapter Three will be reviewed below. Results of analyses presented in Chapter Four will be interpreted in the context of the hypotheses that were tested in each study.
Study 1 ­ Personality and career intent in undergraduate students This study involved the administration of the PCI, the NEO-FFI and the
modified 8-item NEO scales to undergraduate students. In addition to investigating the psychometric properties of the PCI and modified NEO-FFI batteries, this study afforded the opportunity to investigate personality differences in young adults who aspired to different careers after graduation. The findings confirmed the existence of significant trait differences among students wishing to enter careers in business, engineering, education, finance, law and medicine. The
99

majority of these students had not yet experienced any degree of selection in comparison to students who stated "other" or "none" as their intended career. This finding is a validation of the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3), along with a partial validation of the primary profession personality profile hypothesis (Hypothesis 1).
Study 2 ­ Personality assessments of astronaut applicants This second study consisted of an analysis of personality data collected
from final stage astronaut applicants. Comparisons were made between these data and the normative data from Study 1, as well as between successful and unsuccessful applicants within the applicant dataset. Previous research has shown that university student scores on the scales of the PCI are not significantly different from those of older adults (Spence et al., 1978), suggesting the use of student data for comparative purposes is appropriate.
Several key issues were addressed in this study. The first was whether individuals who make it to the final round in astronaut selection exhibit higher levels of achievement motivation than the general population. This finding was strongly supported by the data. Almost every scale on both the PCI and modified NEO-FFI showed significant variation from the normative scale means, particularly with scales assessing achievement related traits. This finding is interpreted as a validation of the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypotheses 2.1 and 2.2).
Another key question was whether these applicants showed personality traits that were not directly related to achievement. This was indeed the case with traits such as low neuroticism and high agreeableness, both of which showed significant differences between students and astronaut applicants. This finding supports two hypotheses ­ the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3) and the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4).
100

A final issue addressed by this study was whether unsuccessful applicants and successful applicants shared similar profiles. Indeed they did, and no differences on any of the scales were found between these two groups. This suggests that the personality profiles of astronauts are set prior to final selection, and that these profiles are homogeneous due to a combination of attraction and achievement related characteristics. This finding supports both the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypotheses 2.1 and 2.2) as well as the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3). This finding also lends support to the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4), which states that successful entry into a profession may be enhanced by personality traits that are congruent with non academic requirements. In astronauts, demonstrated experience in public speaking, public service and activities such as piloting an aircraft (even among non-pilot astronauts) are strongly encouraged among applicants. Traits such as low neuroticism may play a key role in attaining a private pilot's license, and higher levels of extraversion and agreeableness may be consistent with past success in public speaking and community involvement.
Study 3 ­ Astronauts, pilots and physicians The third study looked at personality similarities and differences between
astronauts, pilots and physicians. Analyses confirmed that each of these groups was different from the normative population, and to a lesser degree, different from each other. This finding is a validation of the overall hypothesis of this dissertation ­ that there exists a similar profile of personality traits among members of professions (Hypothesis 1).
Professional trait profiles: Another key issue was whether astronauts, pilots and physicians shared high scores on achievement related traits. This indeed was the case, with male and female astronauts, male airline pilots, and male physicians all exhibiting this pattern. Together, these findings provide
101

further support for the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypothesis 2.1, 2.2). Only one group, female anesthesiologists, failed to meet this criterion. It is important to note that while female anesthesiologists did have higher scores on average than normative means on achievement related scales (instrumentality, bipolar instrumentality, mastery and conscientiousness), none of these differences achieved statistical significance. This may have been due to low numbers of subjects (N=30) in this analysis.
Profession-specific trait profile: Another important question addressed in these analyses was whether these three groups showed profession-specific trait profiles. In other words, even if astronauts, pilots and physicians all exhibit high levels of achievement, do they also differ significantly from each other on these or other traits? The results support this finding, and significant differences were found between all three groups. This is a test of both the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3) and the vocation trait-congruent hypothesis (Hypothesis 4). This study does not allow for the differentiation between these two hypotheses, since both processes would account for the observed differences.
Sub-specialization similarity: A final hypothesis addressed by this study was that of personality similarity among sub-specializations within professions. A comparison of Airline A and Airline B revealed differences on one trait ­ bipolar instrumentality, and suggests that the check pilots from Airline B were slightly higher on career motivation than the "superior" pilots at Airline A. This finding is difficult to interpret since the two sets of pilots were from different organizations and were selected for the study under different criteria.
Among astronauts, the absence of significant differences on any trait is most interesting. These two groups come from very different backgrounds. Pilot astronauts are generally career air force pilots, while mission specialists are career scientists and physicians. The profound similarity of these two astronaut groups is very strong evidence for the roles of attraction and selection in defining a modal
102

personality in this population. This finding supports the overall hypothesis of similarity of personality in high performance populations (Hypothesis 1), as well as the remaining sub hypotheses (2.1, 2.2, 3, and 4). Since astronauts can also be considered a subspecialty of both pilots and physicians, this finding also supports the professional specialization hypothesis (Hypothesis 5).
Finally, the three groups of physicians were compared. Surgeons were found to be significantly higher on achievement striving than anesthesiologists at a different institution, but they did not differ from anesthesiologists at the same institution. This finding provides partial support for the specialization hypothesis (Hypothesis 5), but organizational influences cannot be ruled out. Differences between anesthesiologists from different institutions on two scales suggest the possibility of organizational factors accounting for the observed differences. These findings warrant further investigation into specialty differences within medicine.
Study 4 ­ Antarctic personnel and active astronauts This final study is a comparison of Antarctic personnel and active duty
NASA astronauts. It is important to note that both of these populations were subject to screening procedures during the selection for their respective employment. Formal selection processes are not at odds with the theories on profession homogeneity presented in this dissertation. In fact, such formal selection is yet another contributing factor to the development of personality similarity within these groups.
This study was intended as an examination of Antarctica as an analogue to spaceflight for the conduct of psychological research studies, but it also provides the opportunity to test two aspects of the theory of professional trait profile similarity presented in this dissertation.
103

The first of these aspects is the degree to which similar environments attract similar individuals. Both Antarctica and outer space represent inhospitable environments, varying degrees of confinement and isolation, and some degree of danger. The finding that Antarctic personnel and astronauts were similar with low neuroticism and lower than average scores on the two negative traits of negative communion and negative instrumentality supports the vocation-specific attraction hypothesis (Hypothesis 3). It is possible to theorize that low neuroticism is congruent with living under conditions of potential danger. It is also reasonable to suggest that low interpersonal negativity is consistent with an attraction to living under conditions of close confinement with other individuals.
The second aspect of the theory addressed by this study is the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypotheses 2.1 and 2.2). It was shown in Study 3 that astronauts had much higher scores on achievement-related traits compared to a normal population, as predicted by the theory. Since Antarctic personnel are screened for psychopathology, but are not selected on achievement to the same degree as astronauts, it was hypothesized that Antarctic personnel would not score as highly as astronauts on achievement related traits. The results of the analysis show that while the Antarctic personnel are above normative means on several of the achievement-related traits, they also score lower than the astronauts on almost all of these traits. Male and female astronauts scored higher than their Antarctic counterparts on instrumentality, work orientation, achievement strivings, and conscientiousness (females only). The finding that astronauts scored higher than Antarctic personnel on the achievement-related traits is consistent with support for the achievement trait profile hypotheses (Hypothesis 2.1, 2.2). It is interesting to note that the Antarctic population showed more variability on many of these traits, suggesting a more heterogeneous population. This is consistent with the fact that the personnel volunteering for Antarctic duty are highly varied, as are the roles they will fulfill at their stations. This finding is also consistent with the
104

overall hypotheses of this dissertation ­ that members of competitive entry professions will be significantly different from both the general population as well as from work groups where past academic achievement is not a consideration for selection.
105

Chapter Six
Discussion
The principal finding from the studies presented in this dissertation is that the cultures of professional workgroups are defined to a significant extent by the personality characteristics of the members of those professions. There are two major sequelae from this finding.
1. The specific trait profile that is characteristic of a given professional group (the "modal personality") has ramifications for any attempt to understand, manage, or influence the members of that group.
2. Population differences in typical trait profiles must be a consideration in any attempt to transfer research findings of a psychological nature from one profession to another.
While it is possible to speculate on the many possible implications of the findings presented in this dissertation, this discussion will focus the two issues presented above: (1) understanding professional culture, and (2) generalizing research between professional domains. Suggestions for future research will also be presented.
1. Implications for understanding professional culture The term "professional culture," which seems both intuitively appropriate
and semantically straight forward, is actually seldom used in either the research literature or the lay press. While the terms "pilot culture" and "medical culture"
106

may be more common, the lack of a common term to describe the culture of professional workgroups seems to illustrate a fundamental shortcoming in the study of workplace cultures. The more commonly found term, "occupational subcultures," used to describe organized workgroups represented within a larger organization reflects a decidedly organizational perspective. The term suggests that these workgroups are primarily entities to be managed within the overall structure of an organization. As has been the case in both aviation and medicine, these professions actually exist as relatively diffuse communities. While these communities attempt to self govern, self regulate, and at times attempt to effect improvements in the ways the members practice their trade, they are as much a collection of individuals as they are an organization in the true sense of the word. A case in point would be recent movements within the medical profession to change system wide attitudes towards error reporting, fatigue and acceptance of fallibility in an attempt to reduce medical error and improve patient outcomes accordingly. While many view reform of physician culture to be of paramount importance to efforts to improve medical care, no one has offered a clear plan on how this should be achieved. Those who have attempted to organize physicians frequently describe the process as "trying to herd cats."
For those interested in studying the behavior of astronauts, pilots or physicians, it would seem that the findings presented in this dissertation are of paramount interest. As Schneider has described personality as the fundamental unit of organizational culture, so too it seems appropriate to consider personality as the fundamental unit of professional cultures. The cultures of physicians, pilots and other professional groups are often described as resulting from such processes as acculturation and role modeling. In addition, the adoption of symbols, practices, attitudes and beliefs are generally put forth as key elements in the development of these cultures (for a review, see Trice, 1993).
107

Among physicians, the gradual process of socialization that occurs through years of training, the influence of more senior physicians as role models, the adoption of the white coat and stethoscope are all seen as key elements in defining the culture of physicians.
Certainly among astronauts, entry into the astronaut corps is accompanied by an awareness of the history that has come before ­ the Mercury Seven, the Apollo moon landings, the triumphs of the shuttle era. Astronauts are afforded hero status by conference of the title "astronaut." Entry into this elite group of individuals is accompanied by an awareness of this history and status, and new astronauts can expect to take their place in historical events yet to come.
For Air Force pilots, indoctrination is a gradual process that begins with basic military training, followed by several levels of flight training and eventual incorporation into a squadron. At each stage, young pilots are initiated, introduced to tradition, learn the history and wear the uniform of the organization and profession to which they belong. For civilian pilots, the process is certainly less formal. However, the attainment of successive flight qualifications, an awareness of general aviation history and culture, and the adoption of both official and unofficial uniforms to some extent mirror the processes that occur in military aviation. Commercial airlines often seem to adopt military customs, including rank and uniform, and a career spent as a pilot at a major airline includes continuous exposure to various acculturative processes that contribute to the development of both organizational and professional cultures.
The findings presented in this dissertation suggest that it is important to realize that these acculturative processes described above take place upon the preexisting condition that these groups share certain personality characteristics, and that furthermore, individual professions are characterized by a relative homogeneity of character traits among their members. It is interesting to note that even in the statistical analyses conducted for the studies presented in this
108

dissertation, the introduction of the personality datasets from these groups presented statistical problems with their lack of heterogeneity. In a sense, this was more a further validation of the theory presented than it was a statistical anomaly to be overcome.
External influences, such as fear of litigation, worries of being seen as fallible in the eyes of patients, and a learned culture of silence are seen as critical issues in current attempt to reform medical culture and reduce human error in medicine. As an organization, NASA has struggled with attempts to reform its culture in recent years. While many cite aviation as having enjoyed success over the last 20 years in its efforts to change the way aircrew operate, airline safety officers will often say that this is an ongoing process and that resistance among certain individuals is still a problem. Attempts to reform cultures in these instances may benefit from consideration of the personality component of those cultures.
In the same manner that the various fields of psychology struggled for years with the problem of individual vs. situational explanations of behavior, attempts to understand the behavior of organizations and professions appear to have suffered the same difficulties. Just as most personality and social psychologists now agree that individual and environmental influences both contribute to human behavior, so to will those who study organizational and professional behavior need to accept that both environment and personality shape behavior in those settings. Implicit in this view is that the selection of individuals with the most desirable characteristics is a potential key strategy to reforming a profession over time. Few professions employ such practices for a number of reasons, not the least of which is the fear of defending such practices in the event of lawsuits. Such defense requires solid data from rigorous and well designed research ­ much of which is still lacking.
109

Understanding the role played by personality homogeneity in professional groups will help shape theories of professional behavior, and subsequently will influence how these groups are managed (or self managed), and how the behavior of these professions can, or cannot, be changed over time.
2. Implications for generalizing between professions The second issue raised by the findings of this dissertation is the problem
of generalization of psychological phenomenon between professions. Two specific instances where this may have significant impact are the transfer of human factors training from one industry to another and the use of analogue settings to conduct psychological research for spaceflight.
As discussed in Chapter One, human factors training in aviation has been recognized as an effective strategy in reducing error and improving safety in commercial flight operations. Under the title of Crew Resource Management, or CRM, formal training has been designed to assist aircrew in maximizing the human resources available to most effectively and safely fly their aircraft. CRM has been so effective that it has been adapted to multiple environments, and there now exist formal courses in Bridge Resource Management (BRM), Anesthesia Crisis Resource Management (ACRM), and numerous other programs for crews on oil rigs, in nuclear power plants, and in railway operations. Helmreich and Merritt have presented data that suggest that even within the aviation industry, the transfer of specific CRM training materials from airline to airline, and in particular from U.S. airlines to foreign carriers, is fraught with complications (Helmreich et al., 1998; Merritt, 2000). Differences in organizational practices, airline fleets, organizational culture and particularly national culture all have an influence on human behavior, even among highly trained and qualified pilots. Furthermore, it has been argued that the transfer of CRM to industries such as medicine requires a thorough evaluation of domain-specific requirements and of
110

the nature of specific errors that occur in that field. The findings presented in this dissertation suggest that consideration of fundamental personality differences of the members of professions is also required in order to ensure the successful design of such programs in a new profession or work group.
Beyond the design of human factors training programs are questions of implementation and acceptance. Research has shown that personality is a predictor of the receptivity of individuals to human factors training programs. Specifically, pilots characterized by high instrumentality, high expressivity, and low interpersonal negativity were found to view CRM training in a more positive light, and also showed more positive changes in attitude following such training (Gregorich et al., 1989; Chidester et al., 1991). Furthermore, research also suggests that personality predicts performance along the same dimensions that such training is designed to address (Chidester et al., 1991). In other words, certain pilots may need specific skills training to compensate for aspects of personality, whereas other pilots show superior performance even in the absence of such training. Voicing intent, sharing thought processes, and eliciting crewmember input are key objectives of CRM training, but may also be more characteristic of highly expressive and agreeable individuals.
All of these findings in aviation suggest that effective CRM-like training in medicine or other fields would benefit strongly from an analysis of the personality component of professional culture along with domain and task considerations. Failure to do so may replicate the long, arduous and gradual design of effective CRM that was the experience of aviation.
Another example where generalizing from one domain to another may be problematic is in the practice of using analogue environments to conduct behavioral research for the space program. Confinement studies, bed rest studies, and Antarctic research stations are currently popular settings in which to conduct research aimed at understanding psychological factors relevant for long duration
111

human spaceflight. Antarctica, and in particular over-winter station duty, is cited as an ideal analogue to spaceflight due to its isolation, environmental hostility, and relatively confined living conditions (Palinkas, 1987; Harrison et al., 1991; Suedfeld et al., 2000; Palinkas et al., 2000b). While the physical characteristics of Antarctica certainly share some similarities with spaceflight, and by inference, the psychological stressors associated with those conditions; the results of Study 4 suggest that the populations who work in these two settings are fundamentally different in key respects. This is an important finding.
Much of the current psychological research in Antarctica involves the role played by personality (Steel et al., 1997; Palinkas et al., 2000a; Sandal, Vaernes, & Ursin, 1996; Sandal, 2000; Musson et al., 2002). It is even arguable that psychological research in Antarctic that does not consider the role of personality is deficient in that omission. The problem is that if these two populations are significantly different in terms of personality, how does one compare and apply the findings from one environment to the other? Of particular concern are findings such as that of Palinkas et al. (2000) that suggest atypical correlations between personality and performance in this environment. Specifically, these researchers found that low conscientiousness predicted superior coping and performance among over-winter personnel, a finding peculiar to this environment, it seems.
The significant differences between astronauts and Antarctic personnel on achievement-related traits suggest that findings from the Antarctic involving these traits may be very difficult to generalize to astronaut crews, and it may be wise to exercise some caution in applying research findings from that environment to space operations. At the very least, future research must take into account the fundamental differences in personality between these two populations.
112

Recommendations for future research There is a sense that the findings in this dissertation may represent only
the tip of the iceberg. The Big Five (neuroticism, extraversion, openness to new experience, agreeableness and conscientiousness), while universal in both their appeal and applicability, are very general trait descriptors. The scales of the PCI are much more specific, but as such, are restricted to those specific aspects of personality assessed by that battery. Future research into profession-specific differences would be advised to consider the aspects of personality most applicable to the population under analysis and of the intended goal of the research. This may include assessments of empathy, narcissism, individualism, collectivism, honesty, and other traits that may characterize or otherwise be relevant to some of these populations. Special effort should be made to include assessments on traits that have been shown to relate to performance in one or more employment or social settings. More extensive (and lengthy) batteries, such as the NEO-PI and the California Psychological Inventory (CPI) will assess additional traits that may well reveal further differences between professional groups and the normative population.
In addition to expanded assessment batteries, larger numbers of subjects and a greater variety of participant groups would further validate the theories and hypotheses presented in these initial studies. In particular, personality differences among various medical specialties would prove most helpful in understanding the behavior of members of those groups. While desirable, access to these communities for such research is often exceedingly difficult. Regardless, every attempt should be made to address personality factors in an attempt to understand the behavior of these populations.
Diminished variance in the populations presented in this dissertation poses methodological problems for investigations of personality and performance. If a given trait exhibits a restricted range of scores within a population, the power of
113

that trait to predict various outcomes may be reduced. For example, among astronauts, all participants exhibited impressively high scores on achievement related traits. While this may be a beneficial attribute in the population, that hypothesis is not directly testable since there are no low-motivation individuals with whom to make comparisons. Indeed, as discussed previously, low levels of conscientiousness were predictive of superior coping in Antarctic over-winter stations. Similarly, low achievement motivation may be protective in the monotonous and isolated environment of interplanetary travel. Such assumptions may be difficult to test in astronaut populations where low levels of conscientiousness are not found. A further problem is posed for researchers by the inappropriate or unjustified application of personality criteria as selection strategies for spaceflight. Such practices may needlessly restrict variability on traits that may unexpectedly be found to be predictive in such environments. This may be particularly significant when, as in the case of case long-duration spaceflight, operational parameters have changed significantly from past operational practices where such selection criteria may have been more appropriate to the mission at hand.
Research involving human factors training programs, particularly in novel environments, would be well advised to include assessments of personality in both the design and implementation of such training. While such inclusion may not seem particularly crucial in the early stages of such programs, the relevance of such data may become apparent should those training programs fail to achieve their desired impact. Personality data may help explain, as it did in aviation, why some individuals may appear more resistant than others. An understanding of the role played by personality will help modify both the design and the implementation of these interventions as well as guide the selection of the most appropriate individuals for both initial employment and subsequent training.
114

Finally, an understanding of the differences in personality between professional groups would seem critical in any attempt to generalize or transfer findings between employment and environmental domains. The case illustrated in this dissertation is that of Antarctic stations as an analogue for spaceflight, but there are other examples that can be cited. Numerous other analogues to spaceflight have been described (Stuster, 1984; Helmreich, Wilhelm, & Foushee, 1988; Nicholas & Foushee, 1990; Helmreich, 2000b), and medicine is currently drawing lessons from aviation, as discussed earlier. It is important that fundamental differences in personality be addressed when generalizing findings from such research.
This dissertation has sampled the three professions of astronauts, pilots and physicians, along with Antarctic personnel, and undergraduate students. Those three professions have been shown to be systematically different from the normative population, but also to some extent different from each other. Other professions, such as law, nursing, engineering, academia, politics and others are likely to show similar degrees of personality homogeneity for similar reasons. Much as the fields of personality and social psychology have accepted the importance of environmental, social and individual influences on human behavior, so too will those who study the behavior of professional populations need to consider environmental, organizational and individual factors in their attempts to understand the behavior of those workgroups. Differences in personality between pilots, astronauts, physicians, lawyers, engineers and others must be taken into account if the cultures of those professions are to be fully understood. Attempts to effect change in those populations will likely be more successful if a clear picture of all behavioral influences can be drawn.
115

Appendix A
NASA Astronaut Application ­ From JSC Form 498
1. LAST NAME FIRST AND MIDDLE NAMES 2. SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 3. MAILING ADDRESS 4. DATE OF BIRTH 5. PLACE OF BIRTH 6. PHONE NUMBERS (include area code) (Daytime)(Evening) 7. MAY WE CONTACT YOUR CURRENT SUPERVISOR? Yes No Contact me first 8. WORK EXPERIENCE
Describe your paid and non-paid work experience in the blocks below. You may attach a resume or CV or additional sheets of paper if more space is needed.
1. Job Title (if Federal or Military, include series and grade, or rank) 2. From: (mm/yy)/ To: Present/ Salary/Hours per week:
Employer's name and address/Supervisor's name and phone number: Describe your duties and accomplishments. 9. EDUCATION (Mark the highest level completed) HS/GED/ Associate/ Bachelor/ Master/ Doctoral 10. COLLEGES OR UNIVERSITIES ATTENDED (Provide a copy of your final transcript for degrees received, do not send copies of diplomas) Name, City, and State/ Dates Attended/ Total Credits Earned/ Major(s)/ Type/Date Degree 11. TRAINING COURSES (list title and year completed, do not send copies of certificates) 12. HONORS AND AWARDS (publications, memberships, public speaking, performance awards, etc.--do not send copies of documents or certificates) 13. OTHER SKILLS AND ACTIVITIES (SCUBA, sports, music, languages, computer software/hardware tools, machinery, volunteer work, etc.) 14. CITIZENSHIP Are you a United States citizen? YES/NO--Give country of your citizenship 15. MILITARY SERVICE: Have you ever served in the military service? If yes, give dates and branch of service. Attach a copy of your D214.YES/NO 16. PROFESSIONAL/TECHNICAL REFERENCES: List 3 individuals who are not related to you and are not listed as a supervisor in block 8.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION ­ From JSC Form 490 1. I wish to be considered for:
a. Mission Specialist Candidate Position. b. Pilot Candidate Position. c. Both Mission Specialist and Pilot Candidate Positions. 2. Grade Point Average (4.0 scale): Degree 1 Degree 2 Degree 3 Degree 4 3. Graduate Record Examination (GRE) Score, Aptitude Test: (Optional - Please complete if you have taken the GRE and have the scores readily available.) a. Verbal b. Quantitative
116

4. For Mission Specialist Astronaut Candidates: a. Flight experience (hours): Include any experience, except passenger (i.e., pilot, co-pilot, crew member, test subject, etc.) b. Combat experience (number of missions): c. Types of aircraft:
SUMMARY OF AERONAUTICAL EXPERIENCE - From JSC Form 603 A. SUMMARY OF FLYING EXPERIENCE: 1. TOTAL EXPERIENCE a. TOTAL FLYING HOURS TOTAL FIRST PILOT HOURS b. TOTAL FIRST PILOT HOURS, JET AIRCRAFT 2. PAST EXPERIENCE a. TOTAL HOURS LAST 12 MONTHS b. COMBAT EXPERIENCE AS A PILOT (NO. OF MISSIONS) 3. FIRST PILOT HOURS IN JET AIRCRAFT FOR EACH OF LAST THREE YEARS: B. FLYING EXPERIENCE: (Types of planes flown and hours in each) 1. MAKE AND MODEL/ DATE LAST FLOWN/ FIRST PILOT HOURS/ COPILOT HOURS/ OTHER CREW- MEMBER HOURS 2. JET AIRCRAFT (list all above for each) 3. OTHER AIRCRAFT (Turboprop., Recip., etc) (List all above for each) C. FLIGHT TRAINING: List flight training (e.g., undergraduate pilot training, test pilot training, test pilot school, etc.), date completed, and class standing. 1. TRAINING DESCRIPTION/ DATE COMPLETED/ CLASS STANDING D. FLIGHT TEST EXPERIENCE: Briefly describe test experience, including your role, type of project, dates, types of aircraft tested, and number of flying hours.
117

Appendix B Demographic information form used in Study 1.

Demographic information

In order to help us understand differences in how people respond to the questions that follow, we would appreciate it if you could tell us a little about yourself. Please feel free not to answer any of the following if you are not comfortable doing so.

Age: ______

Gender: ____male

____ female

Race: _______________

Area of Major concentration at UT: ________________

How many years have you been attending college (full time) __________

GPA _______________ (University GPA only)

Country of birth: _____________

Nationality: _____________

What type of career do you see yourself pursuing when you finish college? __________________________________________________________ __________________________________________________________

How certain are you of this career choice? (circle one)

A
Very Certain

B
Fairly Certain

C
Slightly Certain

D
Not very Certain

E
Not at all Certain

118

Appendix C Scale inter-correlations for the 8 and 12 item NEO-FFI

8-Item Modified NEO-FFI Scales

NEURO

EXTRA

OPEN

AGREE

NEURO

1

-0.148** -0.157** -0.157**

EXTRA

-0.148**

1

0.049

0.216**

OPEN

-0.157**

0.049

1

0.046

AGREE

-0.157**

0.216**

0.046

1

CONSC

-0.157**

0.207** -0.085

0.209**

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

CONSC
-0.157** 0.207** -0.085 0.209** 1

Table C.1. Scale inter-correlations for the 8-item scales adapted for use with the PCI. Statistics based upon data from 344 undergraduate students.

12 item NEO-FFI Scales

NEURO

EXTRA

OPEN

AGREE

NEURO

1

-0.346** -0.120*

-0.230**

EXTRA

-0.346**

1

0.081

0.339**

OPEN

-0.120*

0.081

1

0.048

AGREE -0.230**

0.339**

0.048

1

CONSC -0.269**

0.287**

-0.074

0.224**

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

CONS
-0.269** 0.287** -0.074 0.224** 1

Table C.2. Scale inter-correlations for the 12-item scales of the NEO-FFI. Statistics based upon data from 332 undergraduate students who completed the
NEO-FFI.

119

8-Item NEO-FFI Scales

12 Item NEO-FFI Scales
NEURO (12) EXTRA (12) OPEN (12) AGREE (12)

NEURO (8)

0.845**

-0.261** -0.116*

-0.144**

EXTRA (8)

-0.200**

0.812**

0.034

0.184**

OPEN (8)

-0.134*

0.054

0.845**

0.014

AGREE (8)

-0.206**

0.288**

0.053

0.814**

CONSC (8)

-0.261**

0.312** -0.105

0.179**

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

CONSC (12)
-0.168** 0.211** -0.050 0.218** 0.896**

Table C.3. Scale inter-correlations for the modified 8-item scales and the 12-item parent scales of the NEO-FFI. Statistics based upon data from 332
undergraduate students who completed both versions of the NEO-FFI.

120

Appendix D

Scale inter-correlations of the PCI

SCALE

MF

Instrumentality (M)

1 -0.021

Expressivity (F)

-0.021 1

Bipolar Instrumentality (MF)

0.484** -0.420**

Negative Instrumentality (NegM)

0.202** -0.412**

Verbal Aggressiveness (NegFVA) -0.208** -0.078

Negative Communion (NegFVC)

-0.451** 0.184**

Mastery (MAST)

0.488** -0.032

Work Orientation (WORK)

0.209** 0.273**

Competitiveness (COMP)

0.356** -0.193**

Impatience/ Irritability (II)

-0.023 -0.191**

Achievement Strivings (AS)

0.396** 0.091

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

MF 0.484** -0.420** 1 0.225** -0.301** -0.467** 0.271** -0.061 0.141** -0.031 0.044

NegM 0.202** -0.412** 0.225** 1 0.376** -0.193** 0.158** -0.182** 0.459** 0.424** 0.099

NegFVA -0.208** -0.078 -0.301** 0.376** 1 0.197** -0.092 -0.117* 0.151** 0.325** 0.004

NegFC -0.451** 0.184** -0.467** -0.193** 0.197** 1 -0.231** 0.025 -0.172** 0.030 -0.072

Table D.1. Scale inter-correlations for the scales of the PCI with the EPAQ (the first 6 scales of the PCI). Statistics based upon data from 344 undergraduate students.

SCALE

MAST WORK

Instrumentality (M)

0.488** 0.209**

Expressivity (F)

-0.032 0.273**

Bipolar Instrumentality (MF)

0.271** -0.061

Negative Instrumentality (NegM)

0.158** -0.182**

Verbal Aggressiveness (NegFVA)

-0.092 -0.117*

Negative Communion (NegFVC)

-0.231** 0.025

Mastery (MAST)

1 0.439**

Work Orientation (WORK)

0.439** 1

Competitiveness (COMP)

0.263** 0.026

Impatience/ Irritability (II)

-0.072 -0.195**

Achievement Strivings (AS)

0.491** 0.426**

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

COMP 0.356** -0.193** 0.141** 0.459** 0.151** -0.172** 0.263** 0.026 1 0.289** 0.281**

II -0.023 -0.191** -0.031 0.424** 0.325** 0.030 -0.072 -0.195** 0.289** 1 -0.008

AS 0.396** 0.091 0.044 0.099 0.004 -0.072 0.491** 0.426** 0.281** -0.008 1

Table D.2. Scale inter-correlations for the scales of the PCI with the WOFO and the JAS (the remaining 5 scales of the PCI). Statistics based upon data from 344
undergraduate students.

121

References
Allport, G. W. (1927). Concepts of Trait and Personality. Psychological Bulletin, 24, 284-293.
Allport, G. W., & Allport, F. H. (1921). Personality Traits: Their Classification and Measurement. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 16, 6-40.
Association of American Medical Colleges (2002). Minority Students in Medical Education: Facts and Figures XII. www.aamc.org [On-line].
Barzansky, B., & Etzel, S. I. (2003). Educational programs in US medical school, 2002-2003. Journal of the American Medical Association, 290, 11901196.
Biersner, R. J., & Hogan, R. (1984). Personality Correlates of Adjustment in Isolated Work Groups. Journal of Research in Personality, 18, 491-496.
Bishop, J. (1999). AF training helps Collins command space shuttle. www.dcmilitary.com [On-line]. Air Force Print News July 16, 1999 Available: http://www.dcmilitary.com/airforce/beam/archives/jul16/bm_g71699.html
Boeing Commercial Airplane Group (1997). Statistical Summary of Commercial Jet Aircraft Accidents, Worldwide Operations, 1959-1996. Seattle, WA: Boeing Corporation.
Bosk, C. (1981). Forgive and Remember. Chicago, OH: University of Chicago Press.
Bowers, K. S. (1973). Situationalism in psychology: An analysis and critique. Psychological Review, 80, 307-336.
Burrough, B. (1998). Dragonfly: NASA and the Crisis aboard Mir. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
Caligiuri, P. M. (2000). The big five personality characteristics as predictors of expatriate's desire to terminate the assignment and supervisor-rated performance. Personnel Psychology, 53, 67-88.
Carretta, T. R. (2000). US Air Force pilot selection and training methods. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 71, 956.
122

Caspi, A. (1998). Personality development across the life course. In W. Damon (Ser. Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of Child Psychology, Vol. 3: Social, Emotional, and Personality Development. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 311-388.
Cattell, R. (1946). The Description and Measurement of Personality. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Cattell, R. (1950). Personality, a Systematic, Theoretical, and Factual Study. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Chidester, T. R., & Foushee, H. C. (1991). Leader personality and crew effectiveness: a few mission simulation experiment. In R. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 5th International Aviation Psychology Symposium Vol. II. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University.
Chidester, T. R., Helmreich, R. L., Gregorich, S. E., & Geis, C. E. (1991). Pilot personality and crew coordination: Implications for training and selection. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 1, 25-44.
Columbia Accident Investigation Board (2003). Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report. (Vol. 1) Washington, DC: Columbia Accident Investigation Board.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). NEO PI-R Professional Manual. Odessa FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1995). Solid ground on the wetlands of personality - a reply to Block. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 216-220.
Costa, P. T., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). Gender differences in personality traits across cultures: Robust and surprising findings. Journal of Social and Personality Psychology, 81, 322-331.
Croskerry, P. (2003). The importance of cognitive errors in diagnosis and strategies to minimize them. Academic Medicine, 78, 775-780.
DeVito, A. J. (1985). Review of Myers Briggs Type Indicator. In J. V. Mitchell (Ed.), Ninth Mental Measurements Yearbook (pp. 1030-1032). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Dismukes, K., Barshi, I., & Loukopoulos, L. D. (2001). Cockpit interruptions and distractions- a line observations study. In R. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of
123

the 11th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University.
Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The Scientific Study of Personality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. (1968). Manuel for the Eysenck Personality Inventory. San Diego, CA: Educational and Industrial Testing Services.
Ferguson, E., James, D., O'Hehir, F., & Sanders, A. (2003). Pilot Study of the roles of personality, references, and personal statements in relation to performance over the five years of medical degree. British Medical Journal, 326, 429-432.
Ferguson, E., Sanders, A., & James, D. (2000). Predictive validity of personal statements and the role of the five-factor model of personality in relation to medical training. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 73, 321-344.
Field, D., & Millsap, R.E. (1991). Personality in advanced old age: Continuity or change? Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 46: 299-308.
Flin, R., & O'Conner, P. (2001). Applying crew resource management on offshore oil platforms. In E. Salas, C. A. Bowers, & E. Edens (Eds.), Improving Teamwork in Organizations: Applications of Resource Management Training (pp. 217-233). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fruyt, F. D., & Mervielde, I. (1999). Raisec Types and Big Five Traits as Predictors of Employment Status and Nature of Employment. Personnel Psychology, 52, 701-727.
Furnham, A. (2001). Vocational Preference and P-O Fit: Reflections on Holland's Theory of Vocational Choice. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 50, 5-29.
Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and individual differences: The search for universals in personality lexicons. Review of Personality and Social Psychology, 141-165.
Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., & Margaret, E. (2002). A room with a cue: Personality judgments based on offices and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 379-398.
124

Gough, H. (1984). California Psychological Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: CPP Inc.
Gregorich, S., Helmreich, R. L., Wilhelm, J. A., & Chidester, T. (1989). Personality based clusters as predictors of aviator attitudes and performance. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology Vol. II (pp. 686-691). Columbus, OH: Ohio State University.
Guion, R. M., & Gottier, R. F. (1965). Validity of personality measures in personnel selection. Personnel Psychology, 18, 135-164.
Gunderson, E. K. (1974). Psychological studies in Antarctica. In E. K. Gunderson (Ed.), Human Adaptability to Antarctic Conditions (pp. 115-131). Washington, D.C.: American Geophysical Union.
Harrison, A. A., Clearwater, Y. A., & McKay, C. P. (1991). From Antarctica to Outer Space; Life in Isolation and Confinement. (1st ed.) New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Helmreich, R. L. (1975). Applied social psychology: The unfulfilled promise. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1, 548-561.
Helmreich, R. L. (1978). The Work and Family Orientation Questionnaire: An objective instrument to assess components of achievement motivation and attitudes towards family and career. JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology, 8, MS 1677.
Helmreich, R. L. (1987). Living in contained environments: Research implications from undersea habitats. In H. Ursano (Ed.), Individual and group behavior in toxic and contained environments: Proceedings of the conference. Washington, DC: Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.
Helmreich, R. L. (1993). Fifteen years of the CRM wars: A report from the trenches. In Proceedings of the Australian Aviation Psychology Symposium (pp. 73-87). Sydney, Australia: The Australian Aviation Psychology Association.
Helmreich, R. L. (2000a). On error management: Lessons from aviation. British Medical Journal, 320, 781-785.
125

Helmreich, R. L. (2000b). Culture and error in space: implications from analog environments. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 71, A133A139.
Helmreich, R. L., & Foushee, H. C. (1993). Why Crew Resource Management? Empirical and theoretical bases of human factors training in aviation. In E.L. Weiner, B. Kanki, & R. L. Helmreich (Eds.), Cockpit Resource Management (pp. 3-45). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Helmreich, R. L., & Merritt, A. C. (1998). Culture at Work in Aviation and Medicine. (1 ed.) London: Ashgate.
Helmreich, R. L., & Musson, D. M. (2000). The University of Texas Threat and Error Model: Components and examples [On-line]. British Medical Journal, 320, 781.
Helmreich, R. L., Klinect, J. R., & Wilhelm, J. (1999). Models of threat, error and CRM in flight operations. In In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology Vol. II (pp. 677-682). Columbus, OH: Ohio State University.
Helmreich, R. L., Merritt, A. C., & Wilhelm, J. (1999). The evolution of Crew Resource Management training in commercial aviation. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 9, 19-32.
Helmreich, R. L., Sawin, L. L., & Carsrud, A. L. (1986). The honeymoon effect in job performance: temporal increases in the predictive power of achievement motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 185-188.
Helmreich, R. L., Spence, J. T., & Wilhelm, J. A. (1981). A psychometric analysis of the Personal Attributes Questionnaire. Sex Roles, 7, 10971108.
Helmreich, R. L., Wilhelm, J., & Foushee, H. C. (1988). Astronaut and aquanaut performance and adjustment behavioral issues in analogous environments. In Proceedings of the 18th Intersociety Conference on Environmental Systems July 11-13, 1988, San Francisco, CA.
Helson, R., Kwan, V.S.Y., John, O.P., & Jones, C. (2002). The growing evidence of personality change in adulthood: Findings from research with personality inventories. Journal of Research in Personality, 36: 287-306.
126

Hicks, L. (1985). Dichotomies and typologies: summary and application. Journal of Psychological Type, 10, 11-13.
Hines, W. E. (1998). Teams and Technology: Flight Crew Performance in Standard and Automated Aircraft. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hogan, J. & Holland, B. (2003). Using Theory to Evaluate Personality and Job Performance Relations: A Socioanalytic Perspective. Journal of Applied Personality, 88, 100-112
Hogan, R., Hogan, J., & Roberts, B. W. (1996). Personality measurement and employment decisions: Questions and answers. American Psychologist, 51, 469-477.
Institutes of Medicine (2000). To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Jackson, D. N. (1997). Jackson Personality Research Form. Port Huron, MI: Sigma Assessment Systems.
Jenkins, C. D., Zyzanski, S. J., & Rosenman, R. H. (1971). Progress toward validation of a computer-scored test for the Type A coronary prone behaviour pattern. Psychological Medicine, 33, 193-202.
John, O. P., & Srivastata, S. (1999). The big five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research (2 ed., pp. 102138). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Jordan, M., Herriot, P., & Chalmers, C. (1991). Testing Schneider's ASA theory. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 50, 47-53.
Judge, T. A., & Cable, D. M. (1997). Applicant personality, organizational culture, and organization attraction. Personnel Psychology, 50, 359-394.
Judge, T. A., Higgins, C. A., Thoresen, C. J., & Barrick, M. R. (1999). The big five personality traits, general mental ability, and career success across the life span. Personnel Psychology, 52, 621-652.
Leape, L. L. (1994). Error in medicine. Journal of the American Medical Association, 272, 1851-1857.
127

Lievens, F., Coetsier, P., De Fruyt, F., & De Maeseneer, J. (2002). Medical students' personality characteristics and academic performance: a fivefactor model perspective. Medical Education, 36, 1050-1056.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the five-factor model of personality across instruments and observers. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 52, 81-90.
McCrae, R.R., & Costa, P.T. (1990). Personality in Adulthood. New York: Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1997). Personality trait structure as a human universal. American Psychologist, 52, 509-516.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1999). A Five Factor Theory of Personality. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research (pp. 139-153). New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Del Pilar, G. H., Rolland, J.-P., & Parker, W. D. (1998). Cross-cultural assessment of the five-factor model: The Revised NEO Personality Inventory. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29, 171-188.
Merritt, A. C. (2000). Culture in the cockpit: Do Hofstede's dimensions replicate? Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31, 283-301.
Meurn, R. J. (1995). Bridge Resource Management can prevent human errors. Proceedings of the Marine Safety Council, 52, 41-46.
Mischel, W. (1969). Continuity and change in personality. American Psychologist, 24, 1012-1018.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1999). Integrating dispositions and processing dynamics with a unified theory of personality: The cognitive-affective personality system. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality theory and research (pp. 197-218). New York: Guilford Press.
Mount, M. R., & Barrick, M. K. (1991). The big five personality dimensions and job performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1-26.
Murray, H. (1938). Explorations in Personality. New York: University Press.
128

Musson, D., Sandal, G., Harper, M., & Helmreich, R. (2002). Personality testing in Antarctic expeditioners; cross cultural comparisons and evidence for generalizability (Rep. No. IAC-02-G.4.08). Paper presented at the 53rd International Astronautical Congress 2002, 10-19 Oct 2002, Houston, TX.
Myers, I. B., McCauley, M., Quenk, N. L., & Hammer, A. L. (1998). Manual: A Guide to the Development and Use of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. (3rd ed.) Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
NASA (2003). The Astronaut Fact Book NP-2003-07-008JSC. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Nicholas, J. M., & Foushee, H. C. (1990). Organization, selection, and training of crews for extended spaceflight: findings from analogs and implications. Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, 27, 451-456.
NOVA (2000). NOVA Online: To the moon. http://www.pbs.org/ [On-line]. Accessed 29 September 2003. Available: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/tothemoon/ap11sans.html
Nunnaly, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric Theory. (3rd ed.) New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Orasanu, J., & Martin, L. (1998). Errors in Aviation Decision Making: A factor in accidents and incidents. Paper presented at the HESSD 98: 2nd Workshop on Human Error, Safety, and System Development, April 1-2, 1998, Seattle, WA.
Palinkas, L. A. (1987). Antarctica as a Model for the Human Exploration of Mars (Rep. No. 87-16). San Diego, CA: Naval Health Research Center.
Palinkas, L. A., Gunderson, E. K., Holland, A. W., Miller, C., & Johnson, J. C. (2000a). Predictors of behavior and performance in extreme environments: the Antarctic space analogue program. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 71, 619-625.
Palinkas, L. A., Gunderson, E. K., Johnson, J. C., & Holland, A. W. (2000b). Behavior and performance on long-duration spaceflights: evidence from analogue environments. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 71, A29-A36.
129

Paunonen, S. V. (2003). Big Five Factors of Personality and Replicated Predictions of Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84, 411-424.
Paunonen, S. V, & Jackson, D. N. (2000). What is beyond the Big Five? Plenty! Journal of Personality, 68, 821-835.
Pred, R. S., Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. (1986). The development of new scales for the Jenkins Activity Survey Measure of the Type A construct. Social and Behavioral Science Documents, 16, MS 2769.
Rasmussen, J. (2000). Coping with human errors through system design: Implications for ecological interface design. International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 31, Nov-534.
Reason, J. T. (1990). Human Error. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Press.
Reason, J. T. (1997). Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Co.
Reilly, R. R., & Chao, G. T. (1982). Validity and Fairness of Some Alternative Employee Selection Procedures. Personnel Psychology, 35, 1-63.
Roberts, B.W., & Delvecchio, W.F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality traits from childhood to old age: A quantitative review of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 126: 3-25.
Rose, R. M., Fogg, L. F., Helmreich, R. L., & McFadden, T. J. (1994). Psychological predictors of astronaut effectiveness. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 65, 910-915.
Runciman, W. B., Merry, A. F., & Tito, F. (2003). Error, blame and the law in healthcare: an antipodean perspective. Annals of Internal Medicine, 138, 974-998.
Salgado, J. F. (1997). The five factor model of personality and job performance in the European Community. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 30-43.
Sandal, G. M. (2000). Coping in Antarctica: is it possible to generalize results across settings? Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 71, A37A43.
130

Sandal, G. M., Endresen, I. M., Vaernes, R., & Ursin, H. (1999). Personality and coping strategies during submarine missions. Military Psychology, 11, 381-404.
Sandal, G. M., Vaernes, R., & Ursin, H. (1995). Interpersonal relations during simulated space missions. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 66, 617-624.
Sandal, G. M., Vaernes, R., & Ursin, H. (1996). Crew compatibility and interaction. Advances in Space Biology and Medicine, 5, 213-231.
Santy, P. A. (1994). Choosing the Right Stuff: the Psychological Selection of Astronauts and Cosmonauts. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Saucier, G. & Goldberg, L.R. (1998). What is beyond the Big Five? Personality, 66, 495-524.
Schermerhorn, J. R., Hunt, J. G., & Osborn, R. N. (1982). Organizational behavior. New York, NY: Wiley.
Schneider, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel Psychology, 40, 437453.
Schneider, B., Goldstein, H. W., & Smith, D. B. (1995). The ASA framework: An update. Personnel Psychology, 48, 747-773.
Schneider, B., Smith, D. B., Taylor, S., & Fleenor, J. (1998). Personality and Organizations: A Test of the Homogeneity of Personality Hypothesis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 462-470.
Shem, S. (1978). The House of God. New York, NY: Bantam Dell.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1978). Masculinity & Femininity: Their Psychological Dimensions, Correlates, and Antecedents. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1979). Negative and positive components of psychological masculinity and femininity and their relationships to selfreports of neurotic and acting out behaviors. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1673-1682.
131

Spence, J. T., Helmreich, R. L., & Holahan, C. K. (1979). Negative and positive components of psychological masculinity and femininity and their relationships to self-reports of neurotic and acting out behaviors. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1673-1682.
Spence, J. T., Helmreich, R. L., & Stapp, J. (1974). The Personal Attitudes Questionnaire: A measure of sex-role stereotypes and masculinityfemininity. JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology, 4, MS 617.
SPSS Inc. (2001). SPSS for Windows (Version 11.0.1) [Computer software]. Chicago, IL: SPSS Inc.
Srivastata, S., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2003). Development of personality in early and middle adulthood: Set like plaster or persistent change? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1041-1053.
Steel, G. D., Suedfeld, P., Peri, A., & Palinkas, L. A. (1997). People in high latitudes: the "Big Five" personality characteristics of the circumpolar sojourner. Environment and Behavior, 29, 324-347.
Stricker, L. J., & Ross, J. (1964a). An assessment of some structural properties of the Jungian personality typology. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 68, 62-71.
Stricker, L. J., & Ross, J. (1964b). Some correlates of a Jungian personality inventory. Psychological Reports, 14, 623-643.
Stuster, J. W. (1984). Space Station Habitability Recommendations Based on a Systematic Comparative Analysis of Analogous Conditions. Santa Barbara, California: Anacapa Sciences, Inc.
Stuster, J. W. (2000). Bold endeavors: behavioral lessons from polar and space exploration. Gravitation and Space Biology Bulletin, 13, 49-57.
Suedfeld, P., & Weiss, K. (2000). Antarctica: Natural laboratory and space analogue for psychological research. Environment and Behavior, 32, 7-17.
Tett, R. P., Jackson, D. N., & Rothstein (1991). Personality measures as a predictor of job performance: a meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology, 44, 703-742.
132

Trice, H. M. (1993). Occupational Subcultures in the Workplace. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.
Trice, H. M., & Beyer, J. M. (1993). The Cultures of Work Organizations. Upper Saddle Rive, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ursin, H., Olf, M., Sandal, G., Warncke, M., Maki, P., Pettersen, R. (1991). Final Definition of ESA test battery. In K. M. Goeters & C. Fassbender (Eds.), Definition of Psychological Testing of Astronaut Candidates for Columbus Missions for European Space Agency (pp. 288-316). Hamburg, Germany: German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR).
Vaughan, D. (1996). The Challenger Launch Decision. Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
133

Vita
David Michael Musson was born in Merritt, British Columbia in Canada on September 9, 1963, the son of Joan Catherine and Martin Musson. He graduated from High School at St. Charles College in Sudbury, Ontario in 1982. In 1988, he received the degree of Doctor of Medicine from the University of Western Ontario, and after completing a general medical internship, joined the Canadian Air Force were he received training as a flight surgeon. During his 5 years with the Air Force he served as a medical officer and a flight surgeon at the Canadian Forces Bases in Baden, Germany and in Toronto, Canada, and briefly as a medical officer with the United Nations mission in the Golan Heights. After leaving the Air Force in 1995, he practiced general medicine and counseling in Toronto, Ontario until 1998. In that year he came to Austin to pursue studies in applied personality and social psychology under the supervision of Dr. Robert Helmreich at the University of Texas at Austin.
Permanent address: Human Factors Research Project Department of Psychology A8000 The University of Texas at Austin 1 University Station Austin TX, 78712
This dissertation was typed by the author.
134

